




                       VISAYAN-ENGLISH DICTIONARY

                     (KAPULÚNGAN BINISAYÁ-ININGLÍS)








                               Copyright

                         By J. KAUFMANN, M.H.M.
                          All rights reserved

                             FIRST EDITION








                       VISAYAN-ENGLISH DICTIONARY

                     (KAPULÚNGAN BINISAYÁ-ININGLÍS)

          Containing more than eighteen thousand words of the
           Hiligáynon and Hiniráya dialects as spoken in and
          around Iloilo, besides many Spanish words, which on
          account of being frequently used by the Visayans may
          be said to have become part of the Visayan language.



                                   By
                      The REV. J. KAUFMANN, M.H.M.
                 Parish Priest of Igbarás, Iloilo, P.I.



                          PERMISSU SUPERIORUM

                               Printed by
                              LA EDITORIAL
                              Iloilo, P.I.







PREFACE


This Dictionary, by far the most complete Visayan-English Dictionary
that has yet appeared, is offered to the English speaking residents
of Iloilo and the surrounding districts, who wish to have a book at
hand, where they can find the meaning of Visayan terms, which they
hear and read.

It is offered also to the ever increasing number of Visayans, who
are learning to speak and write English. These will find in this
work not merely a definition of the meaning of each Visayan term,
a definition, which in their case might be superfluous, but English
equivalents in abundance. It has been thought better, in translating
the Visayan sentences, not to depart too far from the literal meaning;
nevertheless English words and phrases have been introduced, which
will be most useful to a student of English.

Owing to modern facilities of intercommunication the Hiligáynon
and Hiniráya dialects are becoming more and more mingled, and the
line of demarcation between the districts, where one or the other is
spoken, is growing less and less distinct. In their laudable desire
to enrich their mother-tongue, many Visayan writers are drawing on
the store of Hiniráya words, and avoiding the use of foreign terms,
when a Visayan term will serve just as well. They recognize that,
whilst it is of immense advantage to know a foreign language, still
the cultivation of one's own language should not be neglected. The
reader will note that in this Dictionary Hiniráya takes an honourable
place beside Hiligáynon.


The Author.






ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


Acknowledgment is due, and is here gratefully accorded to all who
have helped in the making of this Dictionary.

The author wishes to thank especially the Rev. T. O'Brien,
M.H.M. Parish Priest of Oton, Mr. Gabino Espe, Miss Natividad Ezpeleta,
Miss Rosario Ezpeleta, and all the Teachers of the Igbarás Parochial
School.

In a first edition of a work of this kind omissions and errors are
inevitable. These imperfections can be amended to a great extent in a
second edition by the help of benevolent critics, who will be doing
a great service, if they write to the Author, offering suggestions
and supplying missing words.

J.K.





ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS DICTIONARY


(H) When a word is followed by (H), it means that the word is
Hiligáynon, i.e. that it belongs to the dialect spoken almost
exclusively in and around Iloilo; e.g. "lábà", (H) means that "lábà"
is a Hiligáynon word.

(B) When a word is followed by (B), it means that the word is
Hiniráya or Binukídnon, i.e. that it belongs to the dialect spoken
almost exclusively in districts away from Iloilo; e.g. "kaburúdngan"
(B) means that "kaburúdngan" is a Hiniráya word.

When a word is followed by neither (H) nor (B) it is common to both
dialects.


    cf.     Confer, followed by synonyms, antonyms, derivatives,
            kindred or related terms.
    contr.  Contraction, contracted.
    Caus.   Causative.
    Dim.    Diminutive.
    Freq.   Frequentative.
    e.g.    Exempli gratia (Latin), for example, for instance.
    i.e.    Id est (Latin), that is.
    etc.    Et cetera (Latin), and the rest.
    id.     Idem (Latin), the same.
    N.B.    Nota bene (Latin), note well.
    Sp.     Spanish.





THE HYPHEN


The hyphen is used in this Dictionary:

1.) to show that the syllables of a word are abnormally divided;
e.g. in "sál-ay" the "l" belongs to the first syllable, and must be
given its full value, a slight pause being made before pronouncing
the second syllable. Otherwise "sál-ay", which means "to support upon
one's arm", might be taken for "sálay", which means "to roast". In
like manner faulty pronunciation of "pát-aw"--"to skip, omit" might
cause it to be taken for "pátaw"--"solid ingredients in broth".

2.) in reduplicated words, e.g. "amát-amát". This hyphen is
printed in this Dictionary to make the word easier to read at a
glance. "Uyák-úyak" is easier to read than "uyákúyak". In practice
this hyphen may be omitted.

3.) in English phrases to avoid printing the same word or words over
and over again, e.g. In one's --hand, --grasp, --possession. Printed
in full this would read: In one's hand, in one's grasp, in one's
possession. In like manner with the hyphen looking forward: to hurt--,
wound--, grate upon--, jar upon--, the feelings, would be in full: to
hurt the feelings, to wound the feelings, to grate upon the feelings,
to jar upon the feelings.




ACCENTUATION


The reader will notice that only one sign appears on the top of Visayan
words in this Dictionary, namely the sharp or acute accent. This accent
is employed for only one purpose, viz. to point out the syllable that
must be stressed in pronouncing a word. In speaking Visayan it is very
important to stress the right syllable in a word. Words spelt the same
may mean totally different things if the stress is changed. For example
"ápas" with the stress on the first syllable means "to follow", whilst
"apás" with the stress on the second syllable means "to cut short".

The Author of this work attaches so much importance to the proper
stressing of syllables in Visayan words, that he has accentuated
not only the words in the vocabulary, but also all the words in the
Visayan sentences, which illustrate the use of terms.





THE CUT SHORT VOWEL


The Visayan language has a peculiar abrupt or cut short vowel, the
pronunciation of which can be learned only by hearing.

When a vowel is to be pronounced in this way, it is italicized thus:
_a_, _e_, _i_, _o_, _u_ throughout this Dictionary.

It is very important in speaking Visayan to observe this sound,
as may be seen from the following example, "ántà", with final "a"
cut short means "to tame", whilst "ánta" with the final "a" given
its ordinary value means "to smell of burning". Many similar examples
might be given.




THE LETTERS "O" AND "U" IN HINIRÁYA TERMS


The letters O and U in Hiniráya terms are often pronounced with a
peculiar sound of their own which can be learned only by hearing. It
has been suggested that "oe" should be written wherever that peculiar
sound occurs, e.g. "boekóen" for "bokón (B)", but the author has
declined to adopt that suggestion, because there is too little
uniformity of pronunciation in the various localities where the
Hiniráya dialect is spoken.



NOTE

In writing Visayan three accents are used, viz. the acute ', the grave
` and the circumflex ^. The rule is, that the acute accent points out
the stressed syllable in a word, the grave accent indicates that a
vowel is to be pronounced with a short sound, whilst the circumflex
accent is a combination of the acute and grave showing that a short
vowel is stressed, or, in other words, the circumflex accent is used
when the stress and the cut short vowel coincide.

The Author has no desire to criticize this system of accentuation,
or to advocate any change. Why, then, does he not use the system
in this dictionary? Because writers in Visayan do not observe the
rule strictly. There is no uniformity in their way of marking the
accents. Consequently a momentary doubt may arise as to the meaning
of an accent. A Visayan needs very few accents to enable him to
understand what is written in his language. A discrepancy in the use
of an accent matters little to him. It is otherwise with a learner
of Visayan, especially when he is consulting a dictionary. He wants
to see at once not only the meaning but also the pronunciation of a
word. It is for this reason that _for the purposes of the dictionary
only_ no other accent is employed except the acute. For the cut short
sound of a vowel a totally different sign is used, viz. the vowel is
printed in italics. The two signs are on a different level, and so
do not interfere with each other when they occur in the same syllable.





CONCLUDING REMARK


The language as spoken and written in and around Iloilo is not
only rich in Visayan roots, but extremely elastic and well-nigh
inexhaustible in derivatives and compound words. The many prefixes,
suffixes, inserted syllables, diminutive forms, etc. allow great
scope for innumerable combinations with various shades of meaning. It
is neither possible nor necessary to give a complete list of such
words. For those advanced in the study of Visayan, and even for
beginners with a good grammatical foundation, it will be easy with
the help of this Dictionary to make out the meaning of many terms they
may hear or read, although such terms are not explicitly mentioned in
the Dictionary, e.g. alalasón (l, -on, álas); bolobakyasón (-olo-,
-on, bákyas); manginmabolobúg-at (mangin-, ma-, -olo-, búg-at);
dalanghósan (l, -an, dánghos); paggilinúal (pag-, ilin-, gúal);
hinalukáy hinadkanáy, hinagkanáy (-in-, -ay, halúk, hádkan, hágkan);
hinungâtúngà (hi-, tungâ); hulumánon (l,-on, humán); makatilín-ad
(maka-, tín-ad); kaisdáan (ka-, -an, ísdà); mauluálwag (ma-, -ulu-,
álwag); malunánglunángon (ma-,-on, lúnang); (ma) limbólimbóhon
(ma-,-on, límbo); minaninayáy (in-,-ay, manínay); pamilínbílin (pan-,
bílin); paminungháybúnghay (pan-, búnghay); pamulóngpúlong (pan-,
púlong); panakâsakâ (pan-, sákà); pagsilináut (pag-,-ilin-, sáut);
salakdágon (l, -on, sákdag); talákpan (l, -an, takóp); talal-úsan
(l,-an, tál-us); walahigón (l, -on, wáhig); wilískan (l, -an, wisík),
etc. etc.

O.A.M.D.G.





TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE


Kaufmann's Visayan-English Dictionary is probably one of the best
dictionaries ever produced for Hiligaynon. At the same time, this
work, printed around 1934, is extremely rare, and almost impossible
to obtain. This electronic reprint resolves that issue. To further
increase its accessibility, a searchable interface has been made
available on-line at http://www.bohol.ph/kved.php.

Since it was printed in 1934, it certainly shows its age: some of the
words mentioned are no longer used and numerous new words have been
added to the language (However, those new words mainly are English
words that replace Spanish terms, and thus do not introduce problems
for students who already know English.) One of this dictionary's
strengths is that it gives sample sentences for almost every words,
which is a great aid to learners.

This edition of Kaufmann's Visayan-English Dictionary is a complete
transcription of the original text, without any addition and with
the following editorial changes:

-   The tildes on _n_ and _g_ have been removed. The original
    dictionary was inconsistent in their usage, and they do not
    occur in the normal orthography of Hiligaynon.
-   The use of italic vowels to indicate a following glottal
    stop (cut-short vowel) has been replaced by the system
    conventionally used in the Philippines. That is, the acute
    accent (') is used to indicate stress, the grave accent (`) 
    to indicate a following glottal stop, and the circumflex (^) 
    when both occur together.
-   The entries in the supplement have been sorted into the
    main dictionary.
-   The corrections given in the errata have been applied.
-   Further obvious typographic errors have been corrected.








                       VISAYAN-ENGLISH DICTIONARY

                     (KAPULÚNGAN BINISAYÁ-ININGLÍS)


A

_a,_ The letter A in Visayan is pronounced as in Spanish, except when
it has a cut short, abrupt sound, which can be learned only by hearing,
e.g. bátà--child.

_a,_ Ah, Oh, Well, Why. A, amó gid inâ. Ah, that is it, certainly. A,
ikáw galî ang nagabút. Oh, it is you, that have come. A, bayái
(pabayái) lang ang mga bátà dirâ. Well, leave the children there
alone. A, pagkaláut sang ákon kapaláran! Oh, how unfortunate I am! A,
indì ka magsapák sinâ. Why, don't take any notice of it. (cf. ah).

_-a,_ A suffix of verbs that have a passive in -on. This suffix occurs
in the following tenses:
1.) The passive impersonal imperative. Buháta iní. Do this. (búhat,
buháton). Higugmaá kag tahúra (--úda) ang ímo ginikánan. Love and
respect your parents, (higúgma, higugmaón; táhud, tahúron, tahúdon).
2.) The passive negative past. Walâ níya pagbuháta iní. He did not
do this. Walâ ni la pagtumána ang íla katungdánan. They have not
fulfilled their duties, (túman, tumánon).
3.) The passive negative present. Sa karón walâ na níya pagaúmha iníng
bánglid. He now no longer tills this slope, (umá, úmhon). Tungúd sang
kadamuón sang íla mga páhò, walâ na níla pagaisípa, kóndì ginasokób
na lang sa pasungán. Owing to the great quantity of their mangoes
they no longer count them, but measure them by the bushel. (ísip,
isípon). Ngáa man nga walâ mo pagapatindogá ang halígi? Why are you
not setting up the post? (pa, tíndog, tindogón).

_á-a,_ An exclamation of sorrow, anguish or the like. A-a, kon amó
inâ ang pangabúhî, maáyo na lang nga mamatáy akó! Ah, if life is such,
it would be better for me to die! A-a, ano na man iní! Maanó na lang
akó! Alas, what does this mean! What shall I do now!

_a-â,_ Pooh! Whew! Foh! Faugh! Now then! Fie! An expression employed
to prevent others from touching things they should not. A-â inâ! Don't
touch that. Keep off. Pooh, it's filthy! Now then, keep away from that.

_abá,_ Ah! Oh! Alas! Abá, ang íya sinâ nga katahúm! Oh, the beauty
of it! Abá, kanógon gid inâ! Alas, what a pity! (cf. abáw).

_abâ,_ (B) Oh! Ah! Really? Truly? Is it so, indeed? Abâ, matúod
iní? Ah, is it really true? Can it be so? Nabáton ko ang isá ka
makalilípay nga balítà--Abâ? I have received some joyful news.--Have
you, really? (cf. abá, abáw).

_abá,_ (B) The back, shoulder-blades, scapula; the breast of a bird,
especially of a fowl; to carry on the back, put on the back. Ibutáng
mo iníng bayóong sa abá sang karabáw. Put this bag on the buffalo's
back. Toktoká ang abá sang manók. Chop up the breast of the
chicken. Ginpaabá akó níya sa pagtabók sa subâ. He carried me on his
back across the river. Paábhan mo siá. Get hold of his back. Grasp
him behind by the shoulders. (cf. likód, talúdtud; dúghan, pétso;
tíbong, patíbong).

_abá-a, abáa,_ Ah! Oh! Alas! Indeed! (cf. abá, abâ, abáw).

_áb-ab,_ To eat or bite off a piece: to undermine and carry off, wash
away (of water). Ab-abá lang ang tinápay kag ang mabilin nga inab-abán
ihátag mo sa ímo mánghud. Just bite off a piece of bread, and give the
remainder to your younger brother (sister). May katalágman nga ab-abón
sang subâ ang pángpang. There is danger that the river will undermine
and carry off its banks. Indì mo pag-ipaáb-ab ang kárne sa idô. Do
not let the dog snap at the meat. (cf. áp-ap, kábkab, kádkad, ríbrib).

_abád,_ (Sp. abad) Abbot, superior of an abbey.

_abadésa,_ (Sp. abadesa) Abbess, superioress of an abbey.

_abadíya,_ (Sp. abadia) Abbey, (cf. konbénto; baláy nga ginapúy-an
sang mga práyle nga benediktíno ukón sang mga mádre nga benediktínas).

_abága,_ The shoulder; to shoulder, carry on the shoulder. Dálha
lang iní sa abága mo or abagáha lang ini. Carry this on your
shoulder. Malápad ang íya abága or malápad siá sing abága. He has
broad shoulders, (cf. pangabága).

_abagánhan,_ One with strong or broad shoulders, broad-shouldered,
(cf. abága).

_ábak,_ To follow in quick succession. Nagaábak gid lang ang ulán. The
rain pours down at short intervals, one shower or squall following
another in quick succession, (cf. abákabák which is more in use).

_abaká,_ (Sp. abaca) The hemp-plant; hemp-fibre; hempen, made of
hemp. Panápton nga abaká, kalát nga abaká, etc. Hemp-cloth, hemp-rope,
etc. (cf. lánot).

_abák-abák,_ Dim. and Freq. of ábak, To follow in succession one thing
close upon another, chase each other, come one behind the other. Abáw,
nagaalabák-abák gid lámang ang mga nagasalákà. Why, visitors are coming
up one behind the other (in great numbers). Nagaabák-abák gid karón
ang íla mga kalisúd. At present their difficulties are following one
upon another or their troubles overtake one another, (cf. abútabút).

_abakahán,_ One who has plenty of--, is rich in--, hemp; containing
hemp-plants, suitable for a hemp-plantation. Bakólod nga abakahán. A
hill covered with hemp-plants or suitable for growing hemp. Bankílan
siá, kay abakahán kaáyo. He is wealthy or influential, because he
owns large hemp-plantations.

_abákan,_ A small fish of a reddish colour.

_ában_, To finish, take away or off (a loom or the like). Abána ang
ákon háblon sa madalî nga saráng mahímò. Get my cloth off the loom as
soon as possible. Ginában sang subâ ang ámon dútà. The river has washed
away our land. Abánon mo na ang íya nga balayoón, kay nagtú-gon siá
nga, kon maában na, ipadalá sa íya sa waláy lídan. Finish the cloth
for making dresses, for she ordered it to be sent to her at once,
when it was ready. Abáni akó sing duhá ka patádyong. Get me off the
loom two native skirts, i.e. cloth sufficient for two such skirts
called patádyong. Dílì makaában ang subâ siníng umá, kay may pángpang
nga dínglì. The river cannot carry (wash) away this farm-land, for its
bank is of hard sandstone. Naában na ang tátlo ka búlan sa napúlò nga
inogbulúthò níya sa koléhyo. Three months have gone by already of the
ten he has to study at college. Ginában níya ang dakô níya nga mánggad
sa mga kalingáwlingáwan kag waláy pulús nga mga kahinguyángan. He spent
his great wealth on diversions and useless extravagance. (cf. hingápus,
hingapús, kúhà, búhin, áb-ab, etc.).

_ábang,_ To take within range or sweep (of fire, etc.). Sang pagkasúnug
sang baláy ni Fuláno naábang man ang ámon baláy. When N.N.'s house
burned down, our house also was involved. Kon may súnug nga malapít
sa plása, may katalágman nga abángon man sang kaláyo ang simbáhan. If
a fire breaks out near the public square, there is danger that the
church may also come within its destructive range. (cf. ánas, úmid).

_abáng,_ (B) Greediness, avarice, cupidity, covetousness; to be
greedy or desirous of getting a larger share than others. Indì
ka magpangabáng. Don't be greedy. (cf. pangunyádì, hákug, kágud,
panginyáwat).

_abáng-ábang,_ A tree well known for its beautiful leaves and large
pods. These latter contain a great number of winged seeds that look
like butterflies (alibángbang).

_abáng-ábang,_ (B) To help, assist, aid, succour, lend a helping
hand. Abáng-abángi siá. Help him. Render him assistance. Lend him
your aid. (cf. tábang, tabángtábang).

_abaníko,_ (Sp. abanico) Fan; to fan. Abanikóhi akó, mamá, kay
magín-ot. Fan me mother, for it is sultry. Kuyabí akó sang ímo
abaníko. Fan me with your fan. Paabanikóhi ang mga bisíta, kay
mabóhot kaáyo. Provide the visitors with fans, for it is very
close. (cf. kuyáb, kuluyáb, kuruyáb, páypay).

_abáno,_ (Sp. habano) A cigar, especially one made by machinery, and
sold by tobacconists (in contradistinction to the piokós--a home-made
cigar, rolled by hand for private use). Bákli akó sing duhá ka abáno
nga taglimá ka sentimós. Buy me two cigars of five centavos each. Indì
akó makaúyon sang abáno kay matáb-ang; ginapasolabí ko gid ang piokós,
kay labíng maísug. I do not like cigars sold by tobacconists, for
they are too mild; I much prefer home-made cigars, because they are
very strong, (cf. tabákò, tabakô, piokós).

_abansáda,_ (Sp. avanzada) Exposed, open (to the wind), (cf. ábong,
bansáda).

_abáo,_ An expression of joy, surprise, astonishment, admiration,
sorrow, grief and pain. Oh! Ah! Alas! Hurrah! Abáo, katahúm
siní nga daw lángit! Ah, how beautiful! How like heaven! Abáo nga
pagkamakaloló-oy sang ákon karón nga kahimtángan! Oh the wretchedness
of my present condition! May dakô nga súnug kahápon sa Ilóngílong
kag madámò nga mga baláy nga dalágkò ang nagabó.--Abáo! There was a
great fire yesterday in Iloilo and many large buildings were burned
to ashes.--Oh, really! Ah, this is a terrible news! (cf. abá).

_ábas,_ (Sp. haba) A kind of beans.

_ábat,_ To follow, go after (frequently with the meaning implied
of summoning or calling back). Abáta siá. Follow him (and tell him
to come back). Summon him. Ipaábat ko siá sa kay Hosé. I shall send
Joseph after him. Iábat mo ang bátà sa íya ilóy. Take the child after
its mother. Paabáti si Andres sa kay Pédro or ipaábat si Andres sa
kay Pédro. Order Peter to go after or call Andrew. Nagpaábat siá sa
ákon sing kabáyo. He sent a horse after me. (cf. ápas, sunúd; tawág).

_abát-ábat,_ Dim. and Freq. of ábat. Also: to follow up, follow from
place to place. Ginabátábat sang mga polís ang makáwat túbtub nga
íla madakúp (nadakúp). The police followed the thief from place to
place till they caught him. Abát-abáton nínyo ang duhá ka pamatán-on
nga nagtabanáy túbtub nga ínyo makítà kag ibálik nínyo dirí silá nga
duhá. Follow the two young people that have eloped till you find them
and bring the two of them back here. (cf. sunúdsúnud).

_abát-abát,_ To follow closely without going beyond, be barely
sufficient; just enough without anything to spare, living from hand to
mouth. Ginaabátabát gid lang ang ámon pagkáon. We just manage to live
from hand to mouth. The food we can procure is hardly enough to keep
us alive. Ang ámon kinitáan abátabát gid lang sa ámon pangabúhì. Our
earnings are barely enough for our living.

_abáw,_ See abáo, abá.

_abáy,_ (B) To join, enter, associate with, take to, mingle. Nagabáy
na siá sa pagkapánday, pagkamangangawáy, etc. He has now taken
to carpentry, has cast in his lot with the soldiery, etc. Dî mo
pagiabáy ang ngálan sang Diós sa mga sugilánon nga kalibutánon. Do
not mingle the name of God in worldly conversation. Indì mo pagábyan
ang mga dîmatárung. Do not join with, associate with, wicked men. Abyí
siá. Join him. Become his companion or associate. Ipaabáy mo ang ímo
nga anák sa mga kaupdánan nga maáyo sing pamatásan. See that your
child associates with companions of good behaviour. (cf. ábian; ábyan).

_abáy-abáy,_ Dim. and Freq. of abáy. Also: to meddle, put one's nose
in, interfere. Indì ka magabáyabáy sinâ nga mga butáng. Don't meddle
in those things. Don't put your nose in such matters. (cf. pahilabót,
pasilabút, pakít-arakáng).

_abáyan,_ Liable to fall under a spell by which a benefit is changed
into its opposite evil. Indì mo pagsingganán ang bátà nga matámbok
siá, kay básì abáyan. Don't tell the child that it is fat, because it
might fall under an evil spell (and become lean or sick). N.B. This
is a superstition. It is likely that after "abáyan" "sang áswang"
is understood.

_ábdan,_ See abúd--to hem.

_abelyána,_ (Sp. avellana) Hazel-nut, hazel; light brown, of the
colour of a hazel-nut.

_ábhan,_ Paábhi, paábha, etc. from abá--to put on the back, etc.

_ábi,_ For instance, for example; to imagine, think, say. Hunâhunáon
ta, ábi, nga--. Let us imagine, for example, that--. Kon magmasakít
ikáw, ábi, ánhon mo? If you should get sick, say, what would you
do? Anó, ábi, ang mahanabô kon--? What do you think will happen,
if--? Also used ironically and sarcastically, especially in the phrase:
Abi mo? Do you really think so? implying that he who thinks so is
quite wrong, very imprudent, foolish, and the like.

_abí-ábi,_ Greetings, salutations, regards; to greet, salute, shake
hands with; to treat or receive hospitably. Ginapadalá ko sa ínyo
ang ákon abí-ábi. I send you my regards. Sa íla nga tanán ang ákon
pagabí-ábi kag pagtáhud. To all of them I tender my greetings and
respect. Abí-abíha siá. Salute him. Shake hands with him. Treat him
well or hospitably. (cf. aláw, tátap, támyaw, támiaw).

_ábian_, Friend, comrade; to be friends. Siá maáyo ko gid nga ábian. He
is my best friend. Nagaábian silá. They are friends. Magabiánay
kamó. Be friends.

_abiár_, (Sp. aviar) To provide for a journey, get things ready;
to invite, treat to refreshments, etc. Abiahá siá. Provide him
with provisions. Invite him. Sín-o ang nagabiár sa ímo? Who invited
you? (cf. pabálon; ágda, hágad, kángay, dápit).

_abibár_, (Sp. avivar) To urge, stimulate, animate, enliven, quicken,
rouse. Abibahá siá. Urge him to greater exertions. Rouse or stimulate
him. Abibahí ang íla trabáho. Put some liveliness--, animation--,
energy--, into their work.

_abierto_, (Sp. abierto) Open, accessible, affording free entrance
or passage. Abierto ang bintánà, alágyan, etc. The window is open,
the passage is free, etc. (cf. nabúksan from bukás--to open, etc.).

_abíl_, (Sp. hábil) Capable, especially with regard to
procreation. Mostly applied to domestic animals.

_abíl-abíl_, Dim. of abíl. Rather capable.

_abíl-abilón_, See abíl-abíl id. Often also used in connection with
men of loose morals: Lecher, fornicator, whoremonger; lewd, unchaste,
lecherous.

_abilay_, Shawl; to cover the shoulders, (cf. abláy, abrígo, kúnop).

_abilidád_, (Sp. habilidad) Ability, capacity, expertness, talent,
mastery, knowledge, dexterity. Walà siá sing abilidád sa amó nga
palangakóan. He has no capacity for such an office, (cf. kasángkul,
álam, kaábtik, takús, tinón-an).

_ábiog_, To move to and fro, to swing, to rock. See hábiog, hábyog, id.

_abiogán_, A swing. See habiogán, habyogán, halabiogán id.

_abír_, (Sp. haber) Property, assets. (cf. pagkabutáng, mánggad).

_abír_, (Sp. a ver) Let us see. Let us have a try. Hóo, abír,
kon makabúhat ka sinâ. Yes, let us see, whether you can do
that. (cf. tan-awón ta, ipakítà mo, tilawán ta, etc.).

_abisár,_ (Sp. avisar) To advise, send notice, notify,
inform. Nagabisár ka sa íya? Did you inform him? Magsálig ka sa
ákon, magaabisár gid akó sa íya. Trust me, I will certainly notify
him. N.B. Abisár seems to be in use only in the active voice; for
the passive abíso is commonly used.

_abíso,_ (Sp. aviso) Notice, information; to give notice, to send
word, to notify, to inform. Abíso! Notice! Attention! Abisóhi siá sang
kamatáyon ni Fuláno. Inform him that N.N. is dead. Paabisóhan mo siá
sang pagabút dirí sang íya amáy or ipaabíso mo sa íya nga nagabút dirí
ang íya amáy. Send him word (through somebody else) of the arrival
here of his father or that his father has arrived here. (cf. balítà,
pahibaló, pasáyod, paálam, paáman, paándam, pamáan, etc.).

_abitsuélas,_ (Sp. habichuela) French-beans, kidney-beans in general.

_áblang,_ (B) Width, breadth, to widen, broaden, to make wide or
wider. Sádto ánay makitíd ang dálan, karón nagáblang na. Formerly the
road was narrow, now it has widened. Gináblang níla ang plása. They
widened the public square. Ginpaáblang níla ang plása. They have
had the public square widened. Sogóa ang pánday nga ablangón níya
ang lamísa. Order the carpenter to make the table wider. Naablangán
akó siníng takúd. This shutter (door, etc.) is too broad for me,
or appears to me to be very broad or too broad. (cf. lápad).

_áblaw,_ (B) Affability, friendliness; sociability; to be or become
affable; friendly, sociable. Nagáblaw siá karón. He has become
affable or sociable now. Naablawán akó sa íya. He seems to me to be
very friendly. Ipakilála ko sa ímo si Fuláno, kay sa waláy duhádúha
pagaablawán ka gid sa íya. I will introduce N.N. to you, for without
doubt you will find him very sociable, agreeable, affable. (cf. búgno,
mabinugnóhon; kaáblaw, kaabláwan, mainabláwon, etc.).

_abláy,_ (B) Shawl, covering for the shoulders and back; to use or
wear a shawl. Tan-awá yanáng babáye nga nagaabláy. Look at that woman
wearing a shawl. Pagaablayón ko gid iníng bunáng. I will certainly work
this yarn up into a shawl. Iabláy lang iníng hábul, kay mátugnaw. Just
use this blanket as a shawl, for it is cold. Ablayí ang bátà, agúd
indì mapásmo sa matúgnaw nga hángin. Put a shawl around the child, lest
it should catch a cold in the chilly air. Paablayí silá. Provide them
with shawls. Put some shawls at their disposal, (cf. abrígo, kúnop).

_abô_, (B) An exclamation denoting aversion, horror, contempt, emphatic
denial or negation. Fie! Pshaw! Whew! Pooh! Abô, butíg inâ. Pshaw,
that's a lie! Abô, índî akó magpáti sinâ. Fie I don't believe
that. Abô, pagkamalulúod siníng idô nga patáy kag inúdlan! Pooh what
a horrible stench is coming from this dead and wormy dog. (cf. abá,
abáw).

_abó_, Ash, ashes; to treat with ash, apply ashes, use ashes;
to turn into or become ashes. Abohí ang púsud sang bátà. Treat the
baby's navel with ash. Nagabó ang ámon baláy sa kaláyo or ginabó sang
kaláyo ang ámon balay. The fire burned our house to ashes. Abohán mo
ang pínggan kag báso, agúd makúhà ang kadánlug. Clean the plate and
glass with ashes, so that the greasy dirt may be removed. Ang abó
nga ginpát-in sa áton mga ágtang sa ádlaw nga Miérkoles de Senísa
(Ceniza) amó ang abó sang mga pálua (ráamos) nga nabenditáhan sang
ádlaw nga Domingo de Rámos. The ashes with which our foreheads
are marked on Ash-Wednesday are the ashes of the palms blessed on
Palm-Sunday. Dílì mo pag-ipaabó sa íya iníng mga tulún-an, kay bisán
dumáan na may kapuslánan pa. Don't let him burn these books, for,
though they are old, they are still of use. (cf. ágbon).

_ábo_, A kind of small fish, growing to about six inches in length,
and supposed to be very lazy and sleepy; hence its name is often
used to describe lazy and sleepy folks that are slow at their work,
etc. Dáw ábo siá. He is like an àábo i.e. he is very lazy. Kaábo sa
ímo! How lazy you are! Dáw ábo ka gid. You are just like an ábo. Ábo
gid ang gwâ ta. The result of our undertaking is, was, or will be a
complete failure.

_abó-abo_, Dim. of abó. A small ábo or any other fish somewhat
resembling an ábo; a little lazy or indolent.

_abó-ábo_, Dim. of abó. Of an ash colour, ash-coloured, grey, ashy
pale. Ang buút ko kaúnon ang páho nga abó-ábo na. I like to eat
mangoes that are ash-coloured i.e. nearly ripe, Ang íya kálò kag
sapátos abó-ábo. His hat and boots are grey.

_abó-abóhon_, Ash-coloured, ashy pale, gray. (cf. abó-ábo).

_ábog_, See ábiog, hábiog, hábog id.

_abogádo_, (Sp. abogado) Lawyer, attorney-at-law. (cf. mananábang,
manugsákdag).

_abohán_, Fire-place, hearth; kitchen, (cf. dapóg, digamohán,
lulutoán).

_abohón_, Ashy, full of--, covered with--, ashes. Abáw, abohón gid ang
ólo mo. Oh, your head is covered with--, full of--, ashes. Ang manók
nga abohón amó ang nagítlog. The grey hen is the one that laid the egg.

_abokádo_, A kind of orange-tree. (cf. kahíl, naranhíta).

_abonár_, (Sp. abonar) To advance, loan, let have--, allow--,
on credit. Abonahí akó ánay sing napúlò ka pisos. Advance me ten
pesos. Iabonár lang ánay sa ákon iníng mga sapátos. Let me have these
boots on credit. Ipaabonár lang sa íya ang íya mga kilinahanglánon. Let
him have on credit whatever he needs, (cf. paútang, pahulám).

_ábong_, On the windward side, not under the lee, open or exposed to
the wind; to be or become exposed to the wind, etc. Ang ákon hulút
ábong sa amíhan. My room is open to the north wind. Ginaabóngan sang
habágat ang ámon kalán-an. Our refectory or dining-room is exposed
to the south wind. Sádto ánay nalípdan sang kawáyan ang ákon kwárto,
ápang karón, kay natapás na ang kawáyan, nagábong sa hángin. Formerly
my room was sheltered behind bamboos, but now that the bamboos are
cut down, it has become exposed to the wind, (cf. ámbi--open to the
rain; abansáda).

_abóngho_, Anger, exasperation; to be or get angry, exasperated,
excited. May abóngho or nagaabóngho si Fuláno. N. N. is angry.

_abóno_, (Sp. abono) Manure, fertilizer; to manure. Abonóhi
ang umá. Manure the field. Ipaabóno ko sa ímo ang ákon umá, kon
makasugtánay kitá sa nahanungúd sang isóhol ko sa ímo. I'll let you
manure my field, if we can come to an agreement as to how much I have
to pay you in wages, (cf. lambón).

_aborído_, (Sp. aburrido) Worried, vexed, uneasy, disturbed, upset;
to be--, become--, worried, etc. Tungúd siná gánì nagaborído akó. Just
on that account I got upset. Ginpaaborído akó sináng kasábà. That
lawsuit worries me. Nagpaaborído siá sa ákon. He vexed or worried
me. (cf. palibúg, palíntong sang ólo).

_abórto_, (Sp. abórto) Abortion, miscarriage; monster. (cf. hár-as).

_abóy_, Bent, curved, warped; to bend, to curve, to warp, kink. Ang
mga manuglagarì nagalagárì sang káhoy sonô sang íya abóy. The sawyers
are sawing the tree according to its curve. Nagaabóy ang kalát, ang
mga soléras, ang bánkò, etc. The rope is kinked, the floor beams are
warped, the bench is sagging in the middle, etc. Butangí ang bánkò
sing duhá pa ka tiíl sa tungâ, agúd nga indì magabóy. Add two legs to
the middle of the bench, so that it may not sag or bend. (cf. táboy,
lúy-on).

_abóy-abóy,_ (B) Dim. of abóy: Also A primitive cradle or hammock
made of a blanket, an old skirt or the like. Ang bátà nagakatulúg sa
abóy-abóy. The baby is sleeping in the make-shift hammock. (cf. dúyan,
duyán-dúyan).

_abóyon_, (B) Abóyon without prefix is not in use; paabóyon is employed
in the sense of: To accede to one's wish, do one's bidding, let one
have his will or way. Paaboyóni siá. Let him have his will. Let him
do as he may see fit. Let him please himself. Ipaabóyon ko lang sa
ímo iníng mga ságing nga ginapangáyò mo. I'll let you have these
bananas you ask for.

_abráso_, (Sp. abrazo) Embrace, clasping, hugging; to embrace, clasp,
hug, press to one's bosom. Sang pagabút níya sa balay ginabrasóhan
siá sang íya nga ilóy. When he arrived home, his mother clasped him
to her bosom. Indì siá magpaabráso. She does not allow herself to be
embraced. Nagabrasoháy silá. They embraced each other. (cf. hakús,
púgus).

_ábri_, (Sp. abrir) To unlock, unfasten, open; to begin, commence,
said of schools, classes, sessions, meetings, etc. Abrihi ang puérta,
ang bintánà, etc. Open the door, the window, etc. Naabrihán na ang
mga kláse. Classes have commenced. Ang makáwat walâ makaábri sang
káha. The thief could not unlock--, open--, the safe. Kon walâ ka
sing yábi nga ikaábri sa ganháan, bingkalá na lang. If you have no
key that can unlock the door, simply burst the door in. (cf. bukás).

_abrigána_, (Sp. abrir, gana) Stimulant, appetizer, hors d'oeuvre,
anything taken before a meal to whet the appetite.

_abrígo_, (Sp. abrigo) Shawl; to use a shawl, etc. Abrigóhi
siá. Put a shawl on her, cover her with a shawl. Ang mga babáye,
nagapangabrígo. Women wear shawls. (cf. abláy, kúnop).

_abríl_, (Sp. abril) April. (cf. Kilíng).

_abrilátas_, (Sp. abrir, latas) Can-opener, tin-opener.

_absolbér_, (Sp. absolver) To absolve, acquit, declare free. A, kon amó
inâ, índì akó makaabsolbér sa ímo. Oh, if that is so, I cannot absolve
you. Absolbehí siá. Absolve him. Give him absolution. (cf. patáwad,
luás, pasáylo).

_absolusyón_, (Sp. absolución) Absolution, acquittal. (cf. pagpatáwad,
kapatawáran).

_absuélto_, (Sp. absuelto) Absolved, acquitted, declared free. Also
used as a verb. Ginabsueltohán siá sang hukóm. He was acquitted by
the judge. (cf. pinatáwad, luwás, luás).

_absúrdo_, (Sp. absurdo) Absurdity, nonsense: absurd, nonsensical,
foolish. (cf. pagkabúang, puriákot, waláy sáyod; binúang, linóko,
tinónto).

_ábtan_, For abután from abút--to arrive.

_ábtik_, Dexterity, adroitness, skill, quickness, expertness in
invention or execution; to be or become expert, adroit, dexterous,
skillful. Bisán pa gánì ang búndul nga táo kon maghánas sing may
kapísan magaábtik. Even a slow man, if he practises diligently, will
become dexterous. Abtiká ang pagsulát. Try to write quickly. Naabtikán
gid akó sang iya nga pagtahì. I was much impressed by her skill
at sewing.

_ábud_, A plant with medicinal properties.

_abúd_, (B) Hem, edge; to hem, or edge garments by doubling and
sewing. Abdi ang kamiséta ko or butangán mo sing abúd ang ákon
kamiséta. Hem my shirt. (cf. sidsid, pilô, píod, dóble).

_abuéla_, (Sp. abuela) Grandmother. (cf. úlang, úyang, úway, bayí).

_abuélo_, (Sp. abuelo) Grandfather. (cf. úlang, úyong, lakí).

_abúkan_, A kind of sea-shell. (cf. pakinháson, búskay, mángay, sigáy,
búli, lampírong, tipáy, búdyong).

_abúkay_, To ruffle, rumple, disturb the surface of; to
rummage. (cf. balúkhay, balúskay).

_abúnda_, (Sp. abundar, abundante) Abundant, plentiful, amply
sufficient, more than enough, enough and to spare, abounding; to
abound, be abundant, etc. Abúnda na or nagaabúnda na ang humáy. There
is plenty of rice now. Naabundahán na kitá sang áton pangabúhì. We
have now plenty to live upon. Maíwat karón ang ísdà, ápang magaabúnda
man liwán kunína. Fish is now scarce, but it will be plentiful
again. (cf. bugánà, dagáyà, dagásà, óya, úya).

_abusár_, (Sp. abusar) Misuse, abuse; to misuse, abuse. Nagabusár
siá sang kaálwan sang íya tíà. She abused the generosity of her
aunt. Ayáw pagabusahí ang íya kaáyo. For God's sake, don't abuse her
goodness. Ginabusahán níla ang íya kalólot. They took advantage of
his kindness.

_abúso_, (Sp. abuso) Abuse, wrong-doing, impropriety, reprehensible
conduct, bad custom; to abuse, beguile, cheat, misuse. A, abúso gid
inâ. Oh, that is a bad custom. Ah, that is very improper. Dílì mo
pagabusóhan ang ímo isigkatáo. Don't cheat your fellow-man.

_abút_, To arrive, come to, reach, to appear on the scene. Sán-o pa
ikáw magabút? When did you arrive? Sán-o ikáw magaabút? When will
you come? Abutan ko ikáw karón sa ímo balay. I will come to see you
presently at your home. Inabután siá sing dakô nga kahádluk. Great
fear came over him. Anó ang ginapaabút mo? What are you waiting
for? Paabutón ta pa ang koríyo kag ugáling magpaúlì. Let us wait for
the mail to come in and then go home. Maglakát ka na sing madásig,
agúd makaabút pa ikáw dídto sa napát-ud nga táknà. Now, walk quickly,
that you may reach there at the appointed hour.

_ábut_, To reach, come up with, overtake, catch up with. Abúton ko ikáw
karón. I shall soon overtake you. Dalágan ka, agúd dílì ka maábut kag
sungáyon sang karabáw nga simarón. Run, lest the wild buffalo should
catch and toss you. Básì maábut mo pa siá sa dálan. Possibly you may
overtake him yet on the road. Nagabút gid siá, ápang walâ makaábut sang
misa. He arrived, indeed, but too late for hearing Mass. (Literally:
"------, but he could not reach Mass").

_abút-abút,_ Freq. of abút. Also: Following one another in quick
succession, (cf. abák-abák).

_abút-ábut,_ Freq. of ábut. To come and go, pass off and on; to come
within reach, to reach nearly, but not quite. Nagaabút-ábut sa íya
ang balatían. The disease attacks him periodically or in frequent
fits. Ang kánding ginaabút-ábut na sang idô nga nagalagás. The goat is
being nearly caught up to by the pursuing dog. Ang tá-ub nagaabút-ábut
dirí siníng baybáyon túbtub sa tungâtúngà sinâ nga búgsok. The high
tide on this beach usually rises to about the middle of that post.

_ábwà_, To make or scramble for, gather, collect, lay up. See hábwà id.

_ábyan_, See ábian id.

_abyérto, ábyog, abyogán_, See abiérto, ábiog, abiogán.

_áda_, (Sp. háda) Fairy.

_adá-áda,_ To receive in trust, to acquire with the prospect of
ultimate ownership, to have some property provisionally settled on
oneself during the lifetime of the testator (especially applied to
lands distributed to their children by parents with the stipulation
that the parents retain the ownership as long as they live, and may
at any time change the previous arrangement). Nagaadá-áda siá siníng
(or ginaadá-áda níya iní nga) bántud sámtang (miéntras) buhì ang íya
ginikánan. This enclosed field is in his possession or administration
during the lifetime of his parent (with the promise of ultimate
ownership after the death of his parent). Ginpaadá-adahán níya ang íya
mga anák sing mga dútà. He distributed some lands among his children.

_ád-ad,_ To cut in thin slices, to slice with a frame-set knife. Ad-adá
ang kamóti. Slice the sweet potato. Iád-ad akó ánay siníng mga
patátas. Kindly slice these potatoes for me.

_ád-ad_, To reject food, slobber, slubber, drivel, slaver, let food
slowly flow from the mouth (as babies often do). Indì mo pagadadón ang
kán-on. Do not slobber your food. Indì mo pagadadón ang ságing. Don't
slobber and spit out, the banana.

_ád-ad_, To gossip, divulge or let out secrets, give full rein to the
tongue. Indì mo pagad-adón ang mga tinágò sang ímo isigkatáo. Don't
let out your neighbour's secrets.

_ad-adán_, A slicer, a frame-set knife for slicing potatoes, radishes,
tomatoes and the like, (ád-ad).

_adárna_, A singing bird. (Perhaps from the Sp. alóndra--lark).

_ádat_, Acridity, pungency, sharpness, bitterness; to be or become
sour, sharp, bitter, hot, biting, acid, pungent, acrid. Ang nagakáon
sing búnga nga línghod sang kabúgaw maadátan. He who eats unripe
fruit of a pomelo tree will find it very bitter. Ang sabór siníng
kabúgaw nagpaádat sang ákon dílà. The taste of this pomelo was like
acid on my tongue. Naadátan ang tutúnlan ko. I feel a biting in my
throat. (árat id.).

_adelantádo_, (Sp. adelantado) Progressive, advanced, modern; fast
(of a watch). (cf. mainuswagón, matín-ad; madásig).

_adelantár_, (Sp. adelantar) To promote, ameliorate, introduce
progressive methods or modern inventions; to advance,
put on. Adelantahí akó ánay sing kwárta. Advance me some
money. Paadelantahá ang taknáan (relóh) sing napúlò ka minuto. Put
on the clock ten minutes. Kon magadelantár ikáw sa ákon sing napúlò
ka mángmang magakosinéro mo akó. If you advance me ten pesos I am
willing to become your cook.

_adélpa_, (Sp. adelfa) The rose-bay, oleander.

_además_, (Sp. ademas) Moreover, further, besides. (cf. lábut pa,
kapín pa).

_ádgaw_, A tree, whose leaves and flowers are supposed to possess
cough-curing properties.

_adí_, Give me. Hand me. Let me have a look. Adí, tan-awón ko. Bring
it here, I'll have a look at it. Adí, ákon inâ. Hand that to me, it is
mine. Adí ang lápis sang ákon útod. Give me my brother's pencil. (adí
is probably a contraction of "dálha dirí"--"Bring it here").

_adíkdik_, Dandruff, scurf, scurfiness.

_adikdikón_, Full of dandruff, scurfy, one affected with dandruff.

_adíng_, A term of endearment used in addressing that class of
effeminates known as "agî": Deary! My dear!

_adióng_, A large ship; the ark (of Noe).

_adiós_, (Sp. adios) God bless you. God speed
you. Good-bye. Farewell. Also used as a verb, mostly with
pa--. Nagpaadiós siá sa ákon or ginpaadiosán níya akó. He bade me
good-bye. Ihátag mo iní sa íya nga ipaadiós ko sa íya. Give him this
from me as a farewell keepsake. (cf. paálam).

_adisyón_, (Sp. adicion) Addition, extension, increase. (cf. súma,
dúgang).

_ádlaw_, Sun; day; daylight; to be or become daylight; to pass or
spend a day. Nagabútlak na ang ádlaw. The sun is rising. Adlaw na;
lakát kitá. It's daylight now; let us go. Kon magádlaw (umádlaw)
na, pagadayúnon ta ang áton paglakát. When daylight appears, we will
continue our march. Sa sulúd sang duhá ukón tátlo ka ádlaw mapamanílà
akó. Within two or three days I'll depart for Manila. Naadlawán kitá
dídto. We passed a full day there. Naduhaán kitá ka ádlaw dídto. We
spent two days there. Sa ádlaw nga Miérkoles. On Wednesday. Sang
naglígad nga ádlaw nga Miérkoles. Last Wednesday. Maáyo nga ádlaw. Good
day. Good morning. Adlaw nga inugpuása kag inugpaúmud sa kárne. A
day of fasting and abstinence. Sang isá sinâ nga mga ádlaw nga
naglilí-gad------. One of these last days------. Sa tanán nga
ádlaw. Every day.

_adláw-ádlaw or adláwádlaw_, Daily, every day.

_adláwon_, Full daylight after sunrise. Adláwon na, bángon kamó. It's
full day, rise. It's bright daylight. Get up.

_administrasyón_, (Sp. administración) Administration,
management. (cf. dulumaláhan, talatapán).

_adóbi_, (Sp. adobe) Mud-bricks, sun-dried bricks, adobe.

_adóbo_, (Sp. adobo) A dish of meat cut up or sliced and mixed
with vinegar and various spices; to make or serve adóbo. Adobóha
ang báboy. Work the pork up into adóbo. Bákli akó sing kárne, kay
adobóhon ko sa panyága. Buy me some meat, for I am going to prepare
from it a dish of adóbo for dinner. Anhon mo iníng kárne?--Adobóhon
ko. What are you going to do with this meat?--I am going to make
adóbo of it. Adobóhi ang mga bisíta. Treat the visitors to a dish of
adóbo. Makahíbalo ka magadóbo? Do you know how to prepare adóbo? Anhon
mo iníng lánggaw?--Iadóbo ko sa kárne. What are you using this vinegar
for?--I am going to use it for a dish of adóbo.

_adódos_, To glide, slide, slip down. (cf. dáhog; dalús-us, alóg-og).

_adorasyón_, (Sp. adoracion) Adoration, worship. (cf. pagsímba
sa Diós).

_adórno_, (Sp. adorno) Adornment, ornamentation, decoration,
embellishment; to ornament, adorn, embellish, decorate. Butangí
sing mga adórno ang simbáhan or adornohí ang simbáhan. Decorate the
church. Iníng púngpung nga búlak iadórno ko sa tulungtúngan sa tungâ
sang balatonán. With this bunch of flowers I'll adorn the table in
the middle of the reception-room. (cf. puní).

_ádtang_, The forehead. (cf. ágtang).

_ádto_, That, that there; it is there. Ang ádto dídto. The one that
is there. Adto ang ímo kálò. There is your hat. Ang ímo kálò ádto
dídto. Your hat is over there. (cf. yádto, ató).

_aduána_, (Sp. aduana) Custom-house; customs-duty, toll, tax,
import duty.

_adudúlay_, A large earth-worm, dew-worm (larger in size than the
lalágo).

_ádyò_, A contr. of tarádyon--irascible, irritable, getting angry on
the slightest provocation. (cf. pikón).

_ága_, Morning, from near sunrise to mid-day; to be
or become morning. Kaína sang ága. This morning. Buás sa
ága. Tomorrow morning. Kon magága or umága na------. When morning
comes------. Duhádúha gid kon maagahán pa ang masakít. It is very
doubtful, whether the sick person (man, woman or child) will live
until tomorrow morning. Naagahán kamí sa alipokpokán sang búkid. By
morning we were on the top of the mountain. Maáyong ága. Good
morning. Mapaága akó anay kag ugáling malakát. I'll wait till morning
and then start. Naagahán silá sang kinánta, sináut, panahî, lagás sa
makáwat, etc. They sang, danced, sewed, pursued the thief, etc. the
whole night through till morning.

_agá-ága_, Every morning, regularly in the morning. Agá-ága or sa
agá-ága makítà mo siá sa íya sululátan. Each morning you will find
him at his writing desk.

_ágad_, To serve, especially applied to prospective husbands serving
for their betrothed. Nagapangágad na siá dídto. He is serving there
for his betrothed. May batásan silá nga ang mga laláki mangágad or
magpangágad sa baláy sang íla pangasáw-on (nga íla pangasáw-an). They
have the custom that the men should serve in the house of their
intended wives (of their future parents-in-law). The Freq. pangágad is
mostly used; ágad without the prefix pang occurs in umágad--son-in-law.

_agád_, Notwithstanding, in spite of, still, but yet, contrary
to what one would expect, in defiance of all one would be led to
believe. Nagpaninguhâ siá gid sa pagmánggad, agád namúsmus siá. He
made great efforts to get rich, and yet he became very poor. Agád
ginamligán ko ang ákon pagtikáng sa madánlug nga dálan, tapát
gánì nakadúpyas akó. Although I carefully picked my steps on the
slippery road, yet I slipped. Agád ginahingabút ang Sánta Iglesia
sang íya mga kaáway, tapát gánì nagadúgang ang mga tumulóo. In spite
of the fact that Holy Church is being persecuted by her enemies,
her faithful adherents increase. Agád nahúlug akó. In spite of all
I fell down. Agád napatáy siá! Yet he died! Who would have thought
that he would die! (cf. tapát, hinonó-o).

_agád-ágad_, Freq. of ágad. Also: To wait for, expect. Indì
ka magdúgay dirâ, kay agád-agádon ko ikáw sing diótay nga oras
lámang. Don't tarry there long, for I will wait for you only a short
while. (cf. angán-angán, hulát).

_ág-ag_, To separate, cull, pick, weed out. Ag-agá ang mga bató sa
balás. Pick out the stones from among the sand. Ag-agi ang saburán sang
hilamón. Weed out the grass from the plot of rice-seedlings. Iág-ag akó
ánay sang mga óhot sa humáy. Please gather the empty ears from among
the rice-grains. Inag-agán mo na sang mga lánsang ang sinapíyo? Have
you picked out the nails from among the shavings?

_agahán_, Morning tuba or palm-wine collected from the coconut-palms in
the morning. (cf. haponán--tuba gathered in the afternoon or evening).

_agák_, Cock, rooster. (cf. sulúg, manók; sumaláyhaw--a young cock).

_ágak_, To support, help along invalids or sick persons, etc.; to
help, assist, succour in straits or difficulties. Agáka siá. Help
him along. Ipaágak siá sa ímo sologoón. Let your servant lend him
support. Order your servant to help him along. Ginaágak silá sang íla
mga ábyan. They are being helped along in life by their friends. Agákon
ko siá sa pagtabók sa subâ. I will lead him by the hand whilst crossing
the river. (cf. agubáy, tóytoy, búlig, tábang).

_agálon_, Lord, master, employer, boss, (cf. ágad).

_agám_, To cope with, be able to perform or accomplish, to
manage. Agamón ko gid iníng trabáho. I will readily undertake to
perform this work. Makaagám ikáw sinâ? Can you cope with that? Can
you manage that? (cf. ágap).

_ágao_, To seize, take by force, usurp, snatch away from another. Indì
mo pagagáwon ang íya sang ibán. Do not take what belongs to
another. Ginágaw níla ang íya dútà. They took the land away from him
by force. Inagáwan akó níla sang ákon bántud nga dídto sa bakólod. They
seized my plot of enclosed farmland there on the hill. Agáwa sa íya ang
binángon. Snatch the bolo away from him. Ang mga bátà nagainágaw sang
tinápay. The children are fighting or scrambling for the bread. Tabúga
iníng idô nga malúyag magágaw sang báboy sa bátà. Drive off this dog
that wants to snatch away the pork from the child. Inágaw nga háyup,
bátà, etc. Stolen cattle, a kidnapped baby, etc.

_ágao_, Prepossessing, charming, captivating, attractive and hence
having many admirers, clients or customers, being much sought after
or resorted to. Agao nga dalága, magtotóon, manugbúlong, buluthóan,
etc. A charming young lady, a favourite teacher, a doctor much in
request, a school or college that attracts many pupils, etc.

_ágap_, To cope with, manage, be able to perform or accomplish. Agápon
mo lang inâ. Do your best to cope with it. Try to accomplish
it. (cf. agám, gahús).

_agáp_, To rise early, be early at work, to do early in the morning,
anticipate. Agapí ang pagarádo. Be early at the ploughing. Rise early
in the morning for the ploughing. Agapá ang pagbúhat sinâ. Do it early
in the morning. Ginaagapán nila ang pagpangítà sing mga tulún-an,
bisán madúgay pa ang pagbukás sang mga buluthúan. They are already
looking for books, though the opening of the schools is still a long
while off. (cf. pamúka).

_agás_, Petroleum, kerosene. (cf. gas id.).

_ágas_, To close, heal, form scabs (said of small-pox, measles and
other diseases affecting the skin). Ang butí nagaágas na. The small-pox
is forming scabs, is slowly healing. Ginaagásan na ang bátà sang típgas
(típdas, tígpas), butí, etc. The child is now recovering from measles,
small-pox, etc.

_agás-agás_, A kind of grasshopper, (cf. tibákla).

_agás-ágas_, Dim. of ágas. To begin healing, start to form scabs,
be on the way to recovery.

_ágaw_, See ágao.

_agáw-agawón_, What is to be or should be snatched from or saved
at once. Sang pagabút námon dídto walâ na siá sing pangalibútan kag
agáwagawón gid siá. When we arrived there he was already unconscious
and it was high time for us to try to save him. (cf. ágaw, hingagawón,
hilingagawón).

_ágay_, To trickle, dribble, run down in drops, flow slowly and
gently. Nagaágay ang mapaít níya nga lúhà kag nagatúlò sa íya
kamót. Her bitter tears are trickling down and dropping on her
hand. Ináng kalisúd nagpaágay sang íya mga lúhà. That trouble brought
tears into her eyes. Ang masakit nga bátà ginapaagáyan sing madámò nga
mga lúhà sang íya ilóy. The sick child is being much wept over by its
mother. Nagbúswang na ang íya hubág kag nagágay ang nánà. His boil
burst and the pus flowed out. Nagpangabúdlay siá sing támà sa ínit
nga ang masulúg nga bálhas nagágay sa tanán nga mga buhôbúhò sang íya
pánit. He worked very hard in the heat of the sun, so that streams
of perspiration poured from all the pores of his skin. (cf. tubúd,
túlò, talabirís, tululágay, ílig).

_agáy-ay_, Decomposition, rottenness, decay, blight, produced
by the action of small worms, vermin, insects, parasites (both
vegetable and animal), the decayed parts frequently being turned into
powder. Also used as a verb. May agáy-ay or ginaagáy-ay ang káhoy,
bugás, tápì, salúg, etc. The wood--, rice--, board--, floor--,
is worm-eaten. Igátong na lang ang inagáy-ay nga káhoy. Use the
worm-eaten timber for firewood. Ang kadiós inagay-ayán na man. The
black peas have also become infested with blight.

_ágbà_, Dumb, mum, silent, taciturn (applied to persons who
habitually talk little, and rarely allow themselves to be drawn into a
conversation, but particularly said of those, who on being questioned
or asked an explanation keep a sullen or stubborn silence). Agbà nga
táo. A very taciturn man. Iníng batà ágbà gid. This is a very stubborn
child from whom it is difficult to get an answer to questions. Kaágbà
sa ímo. How stubborn you are! Have you lost your tongue! Indì ka
maginágbà or magpakaágbà. Don't pretend to be deaf and dumb. Don't
act as if you could not speak. (N.B. ágbà is related to apâ, but in
speaking of persons afflicted with dumbness "apâ" only is used and
never "ágbà").

_ágbat_, To follow, go after. (cf. ábat).

_ágbay_, To put one's arms on or round another's shoulder. Nagalakát
silá nga nagaagbayánay. They are walking with their arms round each
other's shoulders. Agbayí siá. Place your arm on his shoulder. Indì ka
magágbay sa íya. Don't put your arm on his or her shoulder. Paagbayón
mo ang masakít. Let the sick person put his arm on your shoulder. Sa
dakô nga kakáhas nagágbay siá sa kay Fulána, apang dáyon siá níya
sinúmbag kag siníkway. With great boldness he put his arm on Miss
N.N.'s shoulder, but immediately he received a slap from her and was
repulsed with contempt.

_ágbon_, (H) Fine ashes, cigar-ash; to be converted into ashes. Ang
ákon abáno nagágbon na. My cigar is converted into ashes. Pilá ka abáno
ang ginaágbon mo sa isá ka ádlaw? How many cigars do you convert into
ashes in the course of one day? (cf. abó).

_ágboy_, A kind of tree with leaves spotted with green and white.

_ágda_, To invite, to ask or request one's presence. Agdahá siá. Invite
him. Ginágda mo na ang tanán mo nga mga ábyan? Have you invited all
your friends? Ang áton piésta pagaagdahán ko sing madámò nga mga
Párì. I shall invite many priests to assist at our feast. I shall
request the presence of many priests at our feast. Ari na ang mga
inágda. The invited guests are now here. Nalipatán níya sa pagágda
sánday Pedro. Paagdahón ko siá sa íla or ipaágda ko silá sa íya. He
forgot to invite Peter and his friends or Peter and his family. I'll
make him invite them. Padálhan ko siá kuntánì sing sulát nga iágda ko
sa íya, ápang walâ gánì akó kasáyod kon diín siá nagapuyô karón. I
should like to send him a letter of invitation, but I do not know
where he is staying at present. (cf. abiár, hágad, kángay.)

_ágday_, Slowness, weakness, laziness; to do
slowly,--leisurely,--lazily, to be slow at work, dilatory in
execution, dull of understanding. Anó ang ginaágday mo? Why do you
work so slowly? Indì ka magágday sa pagóbra or indì mo pagagdayón ang
pagóbra. Don't be lazy at work. (cf. hínay, lágway, lágday, lamínday,
luyò, búndol, pákok).

_agdayán_, Slow, lazy; dull, stupid, slow of understanding. Agdayán
siá sa pagtoón sa paghámbal sing ininglís. He is slow in learning to
speak English. (cf. mahínay, malagway, etc.).

_ágdom_, A kind of shrub with rather dark leaves. Hence: to darken,
be or become dark. Nagágdom ang íya guyá, kay nagasúngon. His face is
darkening, for he is angry. Nagpaágdom siá sang íya guyá. He darkened
his face to the colour of ágdom. He glowered.

_agéu, ágeu_. Fine soot, smoke blacks, lampblack. (cf. agyú, ágyu,
id.).

_agéw, ágew_, See agéu, ágeu, id.

_ághò_, A small tree much used for fences.

_ághon_, Compass, mariner's compass.

_agî_, Soft, effeminate, not manly, said of men with feminine voice
and manners, hermaphrodite.

_ági_, Passage, trace, incident, event; to go by, pass by, pass
through. Ang mga ági kag bilín sang salâ. The traces and remains of
sin. Ang mga ági sang íya kabúhì. The incidents of his life. Kon magági
ka dirí, hapíti kamí. If you pass this way, visit us. Indì ka makaági
dirâ, kay nakodalán ang umá. You cannot pass through there, for the
field is fenced in. Ang dálan nga íla ginágyan (ginagíhan)--. The
road over which they passed--. Iági akó siníng tulún-an sa kay
Fuláno. Kindly hand this book over to N.N. in passing. Buás ágyon ko
ikáw. Tomorrow I'll call for you in passing (and take you along). Buás
ágyan ko ikáw. Tomorrow I'll visit you on my way. Paágyon mo kamí sa
ímo umá. Let us pass through your field. Dílì mo pagpaágyan sa íla ang
áton umá. Don't allow them to pass through our field. Walâ pa akó kaági
(makaági) dídto. I have never been there yet, I have had no occasion
to pass that way, I have not seen or passed that place at all.

_agí-ági_, Passing, transitory, transient, going by or through
occasionally; to pass by occasionally, to visit now and then.

_agî-ágì_, Dim. of agî. A little effeminate, womanish.

_agî-agión,_ See the foregoing agî-ágì.

_agíd-ágid_, Similar, like, resembling; to resemble, to be like
or similar. Nagaagíd-ágid silá sing pamatásan. They resemble each
other in their ways or behaviour. Agid-agída silá, kon nagaparého
ang íla dágway. Compare them to see, whether their shape is the
same. Iníng baláy, agíd-ágid sa ámon. This house is something like
ours. (cf. ánggid, anggíd-ánggid).

_agigísing_, The temple, the part of the head between the ear and
forehead. (cf. dungán-dúngan).

_agíhis_, A kind of small shell-fish.

_ágila_, (Sp. águila) Eagle.

_agíl-agíl_, Stunted in growth, undersized, lean and weak; to become
stunted, etc. Agíl-agíl nga táo. An undersized person. Nagagíl-agíl
siá sa balatían. He became stunted through illness. (cf. arí-arí).

_agíl-agilón_, Stunted, kept back or checked in growth, underdeveloped.

_agináldo_, (Sp. aguinaldo) Christmas box, Christmas present; Mísas
de Aguináldo--Solemn Votive-Masses celebrated early in the morning
from the 16th. to the 24th. of December.

_agipó_, A firebrand, a partly burning or smouldering piece of wood.

_agíron_, A kind of tall grass with sharp-edged blades.

_agís-is_, The mange, scab or itch of dogs and other domestic animals.

_agis-isón_, Mangy, scabby, itchy; pertaining to the mange called
agís-is.

_agísod_, To follow one after another, to succeed regularly. Agisóda
(-óra) or iagísod ang ímo mga buluhatón. Perform your tasks one
after another. Do your various duties in regular order. Paagisóda
(-óra) ang mga bátà. Make the children follow in line, one behind the
other. (cf. sunúd, dasón, abák-abák. N.B. The plural form alagísod
is more in use).

_áglot_, A harsh sound of creaking or grating; to creak, to grate. Ang
balás nagaáglot sa ngípon. Sand grates on the teeth. Ang balás
nagapaáglot sang ngípon. Sand makes the teeth grate. (cf. ágrot id.).

_agnáya_, A kind of vine and its stem used for binding purposes
and wickerwork.

_agogóling_, The humble-bee or bumble-bee.

_agóho_, A kind of tree.

_agohós_, Shunning work, avoiding labour, lazy, slothful; to be or
become lazy, slothful, indolent, averse to work. Mostly used with pa-
in the meaning of: to shirk or avoid work, to perform lazily. Indì
ka magpaagohós sang pangabúdlay or indì mo pagpaagohosán ang
pagpangabúdlay. Don't be lazy or indolent at your work. Don't work
lazily. Ang mga matámad nagapaagohós sang pangabúdlay. Lazy people
are averse to hard work. (cf. támad, amád, ágol).

_agók-ok_, A plant, whose tender shoots are edible.

_ágol_, Lazy, indolent, slothful; to be lazy, indolent, slothful. Indì
ka magágol. Don't be lazy. Indì mo pagagólan ang pagtúman sang ímo
mga katungdánan. Don't be indolent in the performance of your duties.

_agól-agól_, Dim. of ágol. A little lazy, somewhat indolent. Agól-agól
nga táo. A rather lazy fellow. Iníng kaláyo agól-agól láng. This fire
burns dull,--does not burn bright.

_agolán_, Lazy, indolent.

_agóng_, A trickster, sneak, cheat, thief in a small way; to trick,
cheat, deceive, obtain under some plausible pretext. Ginagóng níya ang
ákon páyong. He deprived me of my umbrella by a mean trick. Agongá
ang íya kálò or agongi siá sang íya kálò. Get hold of his hat by
some stratagem. Likawí ang mga agóng kag makáwat. Avoid sneaks and
thieves. (cf. dáyà, límbong, tíkas, takáb, káwtì, lág-it).

_ágong_, A native drum, gong, sounding-plate.

_agonías_, (Sp. agonia) Agony, death-struggle, death-rattle;
knell, death-bell, passing-bell; to knell, toll the bell. Sin-o
ang ginaagoniásan? Whom is the passing-bell ringing for? Paagoniási
siá. Have the passing-bell rung for him.

_agonisár_, (Sp. agonizar) To agonize, struggle between life and
death, to be in the death-agony. Ang nabadlisán kag na-biatikohán
kaína nagaagonisár na, konó. They say, that the one who received
Extreme Unction and Viaticum a short while ago is now in his agony.

_agóp-op_, Mouldiness, mustiness, mould. Also used as a verb. Iníng
tinápay may agóp-op or ginaagóp-op. This bread is mouldy. Indì akó
kaúyon sang tinápay nga inagóp-op or inagop-opán. I do not like to eat
musty or mouldy bread. Indì mo pagpaagóp-opón ang tinápay, kán-on,
dólse, etc. Do not let the bread, rice, sweetmeats, etc. become
mildewed or musty.

_agóp-opón_, Musty, mouldy, mildewy, mildewed.

_agós-os_, A kind of snail similar to tamburukò and tibótíbo.

_agósto_, (Sp. agosto) August. (cf. lubádlúbad).

_agóy_, An exclamation of pain and suffering. Agóy, kasakít siníng
hubág ko. Oh, dear me. Oh, the pain of this boil of mine! Agóy, daw
sa dílì na akó makabatás siníng kahápdì. Oh, dear, I can hardly stand
this pain any longer. (cf. aragóy).

_agoyókoy_, A small crab living in holes in the sand on the beach.

_ágpang_, A hank of yarn or thread. Also used as a verb. Agpangá
ang binúlung nga búlak sang búlak. Make up the spun cotton
into hanks. Bunáng nga inágpang. Yarn in hanks, yarn by the
hank. (cf. labág).

_agrikultór_, (Sp. agricultor) Farmer, husbandman. (cf. mangungúma).

_agrikultúra_, (Sp. agricultura) Farming, agriculture. (cf. pangúma).

_agrimensór_, (Sp. agrimensor) Land-surveyor.

_ágrot_, See áglot id. Even in Hiligáynon ágrot seems to be more
commonly used than áglot.

_agrót_, A boaster, braggart, exaggerator; boasting, bragging,
exaggerating talk. Agrót gid siá; lakás na man ang agrót nga íya
sinúgid. He is a great braggart; his exaggerations are really too
much. Indì ka magsúgid sang ímo agrót. Don't boast. Don't tire other
people with your boastful talk. (cf. búrà, hákal, hádak, hámbug,
wákal, etc.).

_ágsa_, To work another's fields for part of the produce. Agsa ko lang
iníng umá. I work this farm only as a tenant. Sín-o ang ginaagsahán
mo? Who is the owner of your leasehold? Ang agsadór ko amó ang nagaágsa
sang ákon dútà. My tenant is the one who works my farm. Ginapaágsa
níya ang íya dútà sa isá ka salalígan nga agsadór. He let his land
on lease to a trustworthy tenant. Kon may lúyag ka ipaágsa ko sa
ímo ang ákon umá. If you like, I'll let you have my farm in tenure
by lease. Agsahí siá. Become his tenant. Take his land in tenure by
lease. Take some of his land on lease.

_agsadór_, The one to whom a field is let or leased for part of the
produce, a lessee, tenant, leaseholder.

_ágsap_, To chip--, trim--, dress--, hew--, wood by cutting or
splitting off small pieces. Agsapí ang káhoy. Dress the wood by
chipping. Inágsap nga káhoy. A chip--, splinter--, of wood. Ang
mga inágsap sang kawáyan ginapaámak sa kaláyo. Bamboo-trimmings
are useful for lightning or kindling a fire. Iágsap akó ánay siníng
káhoy. Please trim this piece of wood for me. Nagtínlò na ang inagsapán
nga halígi. The post that was trimmed has become smooth. Paagsapá ang
pánday siníng halígi. Let the carpenter trim this post. (cf. sápsap).

_ágsik_, To fly off, scatter, spray, splash, bespatter. Sang pagbí-al
ko sang káhoy ang mga inágsap nagágsik sa malayô. When I split the
wood, the chips flew to a distance. Naagsikán akó sang lúnang. I got
bespattered with mud. Indì ka magpalapít dirâ, kay básì maagsikán
ka sing binílbig nga bató. Don't go near there, for you may be hit
by a flying piece of stone. Paagsiká ang bató. Let the stone-chips
fly. (cf. ásang, ásik, ápok, lásik).

_ágtà_, Blackish, black, negro-black. Abáw, dáw ágtà ang bátà. Oh,
the child is as black as a negro. Diín ka man magágtà? Where did you
become so black? Naagtaán gid akó siníng áti. I consider this Negrito
very black. (cf. áta, id.).

_ágtang_, (H) The forehead, brow, front. (cf. dahì id.).

_ágtò_, (B) To go to, etc. See kádto id.

_agubáraw_, A common shrub, whose leaves are made use of to keep off
or drive away bugs.

_agubáy_, To support, guide, help along persons who cannot walk well
by themselves; to assist people in their necessities. Agubayá iníng
piáng. Help along this lame person. Iagubáy akó ánay siníng masakít
nga batà. Please support this sick child for me. Ipaagubáy ko lang
iníng makaloló-oy nga tigúlang sa mga mádre. I'll get the nuns to
take care of this poor old man. Makaagubáy ka sa íya? Can you help
him along? Ginagubáy námon siá, kay malúya siá maglakát. We helped
him along, as he had little strength to walk.

_agúd_, That, in order that, so that; agúd índì or agúd dílì--lest,
in order that not. Magtoón kamó, agúd magálam. Study, that you may
become learned. Basáha ang tulún-an sing matalupángdon, agúd ímo
masáyran ang ginabása mo. Read the book with attention, in order
that you may understand what you read. Kápti ang alobáybay, agúd
índì ka mahúlog. Keep hold of the handrail, lest you should fall
down. Amligí ang pagdalá mo siníng báso, agúd dílì mabúong. Carry this
glass with care, in order that it may not break. N.B. The particle
"nga" is frequently added to agúd (agúd nga, agúd nga dílì, etc.),
but it may be left out without change of meaning.

_águd_, Use, usefulness, utility, advantage. Walâ gid siá sing águd. He
is quite useless. Ang ákon plúma walâ na sing águd. My pen is of no
use any more. (cf. pulús).

_agúd-agúd_, Dim of águd. Diótay lang ang agúd-agúd siníng táo. This
man is not of much use.

_águm_, To obtain, reach, enjoy the possession of, gain, get, acquire,
reap. Ang mga matárung magaágum or magahiágum kunína sang himáyà sa
lángit. The just will finally enjoy the glory of heaven. Pagaagúman
ko gid ang búnga sang ákon ginkabudlayán. I shall surely reap the
fruit of my labours. Ipaágum mo sa íya ang ígò nga bálus. Grant
him a fitting reward. Paagúma siá sang ímo kamót. Let him feel your
hand i.e. strike, box, slap, hit him. Inagúman na níya ang íya nga
ginhándum sang madámò nga mga túig. He has now reached the goal
desired for many years. (cf. dángat, ángkon).

_agumá-a_, A kind of fish that is frequently cut in two, salted and
dried in the sun. Agumá-a nga pinákas. Salt agumá-a.

_agúmud_, To murmur, grumble, complain; to coo; to chirp. (cf. gúmud,
kúmud).

_agúnta_, To wheeze, be short of breath. Kon mamuérsa ka sa paghákwat
siníng bató, magaagúnta ka. If you exert yourself much in lifting
this stone, you will gasp for breath.

_agúnto_, See agúnta id.

_aguráng,_ A term of endearment used towards persons that are older
than the one who addresses them.

_águs,_ To clean or scrape with a sharp-edged tool. Agúsi ang
owáy. Clean the rattan. Scrape the rattan smooth and clean. Owáy nga
inagúsan. Clean, trimmed or dressed rattan ready for binding or weaving
purposes. Iágus ang binángon sa siní nga liníyas nga kawáyan. Scrape
this piece of split bamboo clean with the bolo.

_agutílò,_ Resentment, grudge, ill-will, antipathy; to have--,
entertain--, harbour--, a grudge, etc. May agutílò or nagaagutílò
siá sa ákon. He has a grudge against me. (cf. aligótgot, kasíb-ot).

_agutíng,_ Decay, rottenness, decomposition, caries of the teeth. Ang
kalawág bulúng sa agutíng. The kalawág-plant is a remedy for decaying
teeth.

_agutingón,_ Pertaining to, or suffering from, decaying teeth. Ang
agutingón índì magkáon sing dólse, kay magabúsug ang íya ngipon. One
suffering from decayed teeth should not eat sweets, for it will give
him tooth-ache.

_aguyóng,_ A moan, groan, sigh; to moan, groan, sigh. Nagadígwà siá,
nagaaguyóng kag nagahápò ang íya ginháwa. He is retching (as if about
to vomit), groaning and breathing with difficulty. (cf. agóy, aragóy,
bákhò, ugayóng).

_ágwa,_ (Sp. agua) Water; perfume, scented water, scent. Ano nga ágwa
ang ímo ginagámit? What sort of scent do you use? (cf. túbig--Water
for drinking, cooking and washing is nearly always called "túbig"
or "túbì", whilst the term "ágwa" is almost exclusively applied to
perfumes). (cf. pahamút).

_agwáda,_ (Sp. aguada) To get or fetch water (especially with two
tins suspended from a pole carried over the shoulder). Agwáda ka or
magagwáda ka sing túbig sa subâ kag dálha dirí. Fetch water from the
river and bring it here. Agwadáhi akó sing túbig sa madalî, kay ilútò
ko sa panyága. Fetch me some water at once, for I'm going to use it
for cooking the dinner. (cf. ság-ub).

_agwadahán,_ Vessel for fetching or carrying water, water-bucket.

_agwadór,_ (Sp. aguadór) Water-carrier. Húy, agwadór, agwadáhi akó
sing túbig sa ímo agwadahán. Hello! Water-carrier fetch me some water
in your bucket.

_agwánta_, (Sp. aguantar) To bear, tolerate, suffer, let pass, put
up with. Dáw dílì na akó makaagwánta sinâ. I seem not to be able
to bear it any longer. Anhon mo, kóndì magagwánta lang? What can
you do, but suffer it patiently? Agwantahá lang! Just bear it with
resignation! (cf. batás, ántus).

_agwantádo_, (Sp. aguantádo) Robust, strong with great powers of
resistance to fatigue, pain and stress; one who can stand or bear much,
one suffering patiently or with fortitude. Agwantádo siá sa tungâ
sang tanán nga pagpangabúdlay kag kalisdánan. He bears up bravely in
the midst of all fatigues and difficulties. Dúro siá kaagwantádo. He
can stand very much. He is able to bear--, support--, a good deal.

_agwardiénte_, (Sp. aguardiente) Brandy; alcohol; any strong spirituous
liquor.

_agwása_, (Sp. guasa, guason) Lively, cheerful, good-humoured; to
be lively or of a cheerful disposition; to flow freely; to exude,
to break forth, particularly applied to matter or pus oozing out of
a wound, ulcer or boil. Ang komód nga táo dílì agwása. A man inclined
to retirement and silence is not of a lively disposition. Nagaagwása
na ang hubág. Pus is now flowing from the tumour. Ginapaagwása níla
ang hubág. They are using remedies to cause the pus to flow from
the tumour. Paagwasáha ang hubág. Make the tumour (by pressure,
etc.) discharge its matter. Ipaagwása akó ánay sang ákon hubág sa
lí-og. Kindly remove the matter (by pressure, poultices, etc.) from
the tumour on my neck. Si Fuláno dúro gid kaagwása sa íya mga
sugilánon. N.N. is very cheerful in his talk. N.N. is a chatterbox.

_agwáson_, A very poisonous snake, growing to the thickness of a
man's arm, living mostly in the jungle and looking for its prey,
wild chickens, etc., at night-time. It is quite dangerous to meet an
agwáson, for instead of gliding away it often attacks persons coming
upon it.

_agwatáto_, Procurer, pimp, go-between. (cf. búgaw).

_ágyu, agyú_, See agéu id.

_ah_, An exclamation: Ah! Oh! (cf. a).

_ahâ_, To beseech, ask fervently, insist on obtaining some favour,
importune. Nagahâ siá sa ákon sing bulúng sa pilás. He asked me
insistently for some medicine for the wound. Ginahaán akó níya sing
diótay nga humáy, kay nawád-an siá. He earnestly begged a little rice
of me, for he had run short of it. Dilì matúod nga akó amó ang nagahâ
sa íla, kóndì, hinonóo gánì, silá nagpangáyò sa ákon. It is not true
that I importuned them, but, on the contrary, they asked me.

_aháng_. Daring, boldness; to be or become daring, bold,
impertinent. Nagaháng siá galî or ginahangán níya galî! Was he really
so bold! Magaháng ka lang sa pagkúhà sing lubí or ahangí lang ang
pagkúhà sing lubí. Pluck up courage and take a coconut. (cf. ahás,
dahás, káhas).

_áhao_, Newly harvested rice. Karón may áhao na nga ginatíg-ang. There
is new rice now being cooked or there is now new rice to cook. Ang
áhao dílì maúkad. New rice does not swell much (when boiled).

_ahás_, See aháng, káhas id. Ahasí (pangahasí) lang ang pagbukás sang
ganháan. Open the door boldly.

_ahát_, To do something prematurely, before the regular or proper
time or even against one's inclination. Ahatá lang ang pagpópò sang
páhò. Pluck the mango, even though it is not yet quite ripe. Ginaahát
níla ang ságing nga línghod. They are eating unripe bananas. Ahatón
mo ang buót mo sa paglakát, bisan índì ka malúyag. Make up your mind
to go, although you do not like to. Masakít karón ang íya solóksolók,
kay man ginahát níya ang mga sirig-wélas nga hiláw. Of course he has
stomach-ache, he has eaten green plums.

_áhaw_, See áhao.

_aháy_, Ah! Oh! Alas! Aháy, nga pagkawaláy pálad! Alas, bad
luck! Aháy, pagkalisúd sang ákon maláut nga kapaláran nga dáw waláy
paaliwánsan! Oh, the wretchedness of my fate from which there is
no escape!

_áhay_, See aháy id.

_áhè_, Milt, spleen, (cf. áyì).

_ahedrés_, (Sp. ajedrez) Chess. Nagahámpang silá sang ahedrés. They
are playing chess.

_ahénsya_, (Sp. agencia) Agency, an agent's office; pawnbroker's shop,
an agent's or commissioner's bureau, especially one for the advancing
of money on pledges or for buying second-hand goods.

_ahénte_, (Sp. agente) Agent, actor, minister,
commissioner. (cf. manugtátap, tulugyánan, manugpalápnag).

_ahíg-ahíg_, To treat with neglect, to disregard, pay no
attention to, to ignore, take no heed or account of, to put aside
contemptuously. Ginaahíg-ahíg níla ang mga manák. They are neglecting
their stepchildren. Ahíg-ahigá lang inâ. Simply ignore it or treat
it with contempt or pass it over without notice. (cf. ihíg-ihíg id.;
ihíd, pabayâ, pabíyà; támay).

_ahíti_, (Sp. ajete) Young garlic; leek.

_ahíto_, A kind of odoriferous flowering plant.

_áhog_, To wash, rinse, pour water over something or somebody,
and the like. Ahógi akó sing túbig. Pour water over me. Iáhog ang
túbig sa úlo ko. Pour the water over my head. Ahóga ang ákon likód
sang túbig. Pour water over my back. May inugáhog ikáw? Have you a
scoop or vessel for pouring out liquids? Sang íla pagpalígos sa subâ
nagahogáy or nagahogánay silá. When they took a bath in the river
they poured water over each other. (cf. bóbò).

_áhos_, (Sp. ajo) Garlic; leek. Butangí sing áhos or ahósi ang
kárne. Put some garlic with the meat.

_ahós_, To tease, to stroke or caress a child against its will,
to pat or fondle a child averse to such handling till it cries,
gets angry or runs away. Ahosá siá. Tease him. Ipaahós mo sa íya ang
bátà. Let him tease the baby. Nagmasakít ang bátà kay inahós ni Fulána
nga áswang. The baby got sick, because the witch N.N. had caressed
it or had teased it. (cf. ulít, tiáw-tíaw, lahóg-láhog).

_ahóy_, An exclamation to draw another's attention:
Hey! Hello! Ahoy! Ahóy, hulatá akó ánay. Hey, kindly wait for
me. Ahóy! kamó dirâ! Kumarí kamó dirí kag bulígan nínyo kamí. Hello,
you there! Come here and help us! (cf. hóy).

_aiháda, aihádo_, (Sp. ahijada, ahijado) Goddaughter,
godson. (cf. anák, iháda, ihádo).

_áire_, (Sp. aire) Air, atmosphere; liveliness, cheerfulness,
sprightliness; gracefulness, elegance in manner, bearing, carriage,
etc.

_áka_, To sell well, be much in demand, be much sought after. Nagáka
karón sa Ilongílong ang páhò, ságing, ísdà kag manók. At present
mangoes, bananas, fish and chickens are much in demand in Iloilo. Sang
túig nga tinalíkdan maíwat ang pamaligyáon sang sibúkaw, ápang nián
nagáka na. Last year the market for sibúkaw-wood was dull, stagnant,
but now it is much in demand. (cf. maáka, kaáka, mabákal, bákal,
ágaw, dásà).

_ák-ak_, To tear off, to bark, to strip (a tree of its bark). Ak-aká
ang pánit sang káhoy. Strip the bark off the tree. Ak-akí ang káhoy
sang íya pánit. Strip the tree of its bark. Pánit nga inák-ak. Bark
torn or pulled off. Káhoy ngga inak-akán. A tree stript of its
bark. (cf. bákbak).

_akál-akál_, To bubble, to seethe; to throb. Nagabukál na ang
túbig, kay nagaakál-akál na. The water is boiling now, for it is
bubbling. Nagaakál-akál ang tutúnlan ko. My throat throbs. Indì mo
pagbak-itón ang tsaréra, kóndì paakál-akalá ánay ang túbig sing
maáyo. Don't take the tea-kettle off the fire, but let the water
first boil properly.

_akáso_, (Sp. acaso) Chance, coincidence, casualty; by chance,
perchance, perhaps, maybe, mayhap, possibly. (cf. básì, áyhan, dámlag).

_akásya_, (Sp. acacia) Acacia-tree.

_akáy_, (B) Darling. A term of endearment used towards small girls,
sweethearts, daughters, daughters-in-law and other near female
relations. Diín si akáy? Where is darling? Ihátag iní sa kay akáy. Give
this to darling. (cf. índay, gíngging, néna, nénè, néning, púngpung;
the corresponding masculine terms are nónoy, tótò, tútò).

_ákiat_, To challenge, provoke, defy, invite to a combat. Akiatá
siá. Defy him. Challenge him. Iákiat ko sa íya iníng binángon. I will
challenge him with this bolo. (cf. ákyat id.).

_akíd_, "Pal", chum, comrade, friend, companion. (cf. atíd).

_akíg_, (H) Angry, wroth, irate, furious, exasperated, in
a--rage,--passion.

_ákig_, (H) Anger, ire, wrath, rage, passion, choler, fury,
indignation; to be or make angry, become angry, irate, wroth, wrathful,
furious, indignant. Indì ka magákig or mangákig. Don't be angry. Tî,
kon may salâ ang bátà mo akígi kag hanóta. Well, if your boy is at
fault, show him your displeasure and give him a whipping. Indì mo siá
pagakígan, kay dílì siá amó ang may salâ. Don't be angry with him,
for he is not the one to blame. Indì ka ánay maghámbal sa íya, kay
básì maákig siá. Don't talk to him now, for he may get angry. Inakígan
níya gid ang ámon paglatás sa íya nga talámnan. He flew in a rage,
because we had cut straight across his field.

_ákli_, A kind of tree and its timber much used for building purposes.

_aklihís_, To shun, shrink from, draw back, avoid being touched
or taken hold of. Nagaklihís siá sa ákon. He shrank from me, drew
back from me. Aklihisí siá. Shun him. Avoid him. Don't go near
him. Paaklihisá si akáy mo sa kay Fuláno. Order or tell your darling
girl to keep away from N.N. (cf. líkaw, likáw, kuyáw).

_ákmol_, Crustiness, thickness; to thicken, to harden, become crusty,
to crust or incrust, said of dirt, dusty perspiration on the body,
too much starch on clothes and the like. Nagákmol sa íya nawóng ang
bálhas kag bulíng. Perspiration and dirt incrusted his face or his
face was coated with sweat and dust. May duhá ukón tátlo ka báhin sang
ákon báyò nga ginpaákmol sang mamumunák sang almidón. My dress was
coated with starch in two or three places by the washerwoman. Kabáskug
siníng pakô nga naakmolán sang almidón! Oh, the stiffness of this
over-starched sleeve! (cf. dákmol, dámol, ápol).

_akó_, The first person singular of the personal pronoun: I. Sín-o
ikáw?--Akó?--Hóo.--Akó amó si Fuláno. Who are you?--I?--Yes--I am
N.N. Akó amó ang nagbúhat siní. I did it, I was the one who did it. Akó
sing ákon or akóy ákon walâ sing lábut sinâ. I, for my part or as far
as I am concerned, have nothing to do with that. Akó amó ang amó sa
gihápon. I am He who is ever the same, "I am who am", (Sum qui sum).

_ákò_, To be able to, to be capable of, to have the power or ability;
to undertake, to assume the responsibility for. Ginaakóan ko ang
pagbúhat sinâ. I undertake to do that or I am ready to accept the
responsibility for that. Ginaákò or ginaakóan ko iníng sayúp. I accept
all the blame or responsibility for this fault. Indì siá makaákò sa
pagpatigáyon sinâ. He is not capable of accomplishing that. (cf. kaákò,
makaákò; gahúm, saráng, agám, ágap).

_akólito_, (Sp. acólito) Acolythe, altar-boy, mass-server. Akólito
ko siá. He is my acolythe. Nagakólito siá. He became an acolythe. He
was an altar-boy. He served mass. Makahibaló ikáw magakólito? Do you
know how to serve mass? Do you know how to serve as an altar-boy?

_ákon_, My, mine; by or through me; sa ákon--me; to, on, upon, from,
away from, towards, in, at, into me. Ang ákon kálò. My hat. Akon iní
nga baláy. This house is mine, --belongs to me. Yanâ nga umá ákon
gid. That field is my own, --belongs to me alone. Dílì ákon iní nga
tulún-an. This book is not mine or does not belong to me. Akon ginhímò
iní. This was done by me, I did it. Akon siá pagaluasón. Through me
he will get free, I will free him. Walâ siá paghigúgma sa ákon. He
has no love for me, does not love me at all. Kon sa ákon lang walâ
akó sing kabilinggan. As far as I am concerned I have nothing against
it. Nagapalapít siá sa ákon. He is coming towards me, is approaching
me. Sa dak-ú nga katístis ginhímò níya iní sa ákon. He did this to me
very maliciously. Kútub sang paghalín níya dirí sa ákon túbtub nián
walâ ko siá makítà. Since he went away from me until now I have not
seen him. Sa ákon bántà índì na siá magbálik sa ákon. In my opinion
he will not return to me any more. Kon kís-a dumángat sa ákon ang
masubô nga panghunâhúna----. Now and then sad reflections come upon
me----. (cf. nákon, ko; ímo, nímo, mo; íya, níya; ámon, námon; áton,
náton, ta; ínyo, nínyo, íla, níla).
N.B. The difference between the use of "ákon" and "nákon, ko" is
as follows:
1) in the meaning of a possessive pronoun "ákon" is put before and
"nákon, ko" are put after the word they respectively qualify, e.g. Ang
ákon idô. Ang idô nákon (ko). My dog. Ang ákon amáy tigúlang na. Ang
amay nákon (ko) tigúlang na. My father is now old.
2) in the meaning of a predicative adjective "ákon" is always used
and never "nákon" or "ko". Akon iní nga pínggan or Iní nga pínggan
ákon. This plate is mine, belongs to me. Dilì ákon iní nga páhò or
Iní nga páhò dílì ákon. This mango is not mine, does not belong to me.
3) in the meaning of a personal pronoun with the preposition "s",
"ákon" is used exclusively and never "nákon" or "ko" e.g. Ginhátag
níya inâ sa ákon. He gave that to me. Nagsúmbag siá sa ákon. He hit
(boxed) me.
4) in the meaning of "by me, through me" as a personal agent "ákon"
always stands before the verb and can only be used, if the verb is not
negatived. Akon ginbúhat iní. This was done by me. Sa waláy duhádúha
ákon siá pagaduáwon. Of course, he will be visited by me i.e. I will
pay him a visit. Dílì balá matúod nga ákon siá nabayáran? Isn't it
true, that he was paid by me i.e. that I paid him? "Nákon" and "ko",
if employed in such sentences, take their place invariably after
the verb: Ginbúhat ko (nákon) iní. Sa ualáy duhádúha pagaduáwon ko
(nákon) siá. Dílì balá matúod nga nabayáran ko (nákon) siá?
But if the verb is negatived "ákon" cannot be used; "nákon" or "ko"
must then be employed and be placed between the negative adverb and the
verb: Walâ ko (nákon) pagbuháta iní. This was not done by me. Dílì ko
(nákon) malipatán iní. I cannot forget it. Indì ko (nákon) malíngkang
iníng bató, kay mabúg-at gid. I cannot move this stone, for it is very
heavy. Indì pa nákon (índì ko pa) mapúy-an ang bág-o ko nga baláy,
kay walâ ko pa (ualâ pa nákon) pagbutangí sing mga galamitón nga
kinahánglan. I cannot live in my new house yet, because I have not
yet put in the necessary furniture. Walâ ko (nákon) siá pagagdahá
kag índì man nákon (índì ko man) siá pagagdahón, kay maláin siá sing
pamatásan. I neither invited him nor will I invite him, because he
has vicious habits.
5) in sentences where the verb is preceded by a quasi-auxiliary or by
adverbs of time or place like "saráng, buót, diín, dirí, dirâ, sán-o
pa, etc." "nákon" or "ko" should be used before the verb, even if the
latter is not negatived, e.g. Saráng ko mabúhat iní. I can do it. Buót
ko ímnon iníng bino. I wish or like to drink this wine. Sán-o ko pa
(sán-o pa nákon) mapatíndog ang bág-o nga baláy? When shall I be able
to build the new house? Diín ko (nákon) makítà ang kwárta? Where can
I find the money?
The foregoing examples and rules are applicable to all personal and
possessive pronouns, "ímo, íya, ámon, áton, ínyo, íla" following
"ákon" and "nímo, mo, níya, námon, náton, ta, nínyo, níla" following
"nákon, ko".

_ákon,_ To appropriate or acquire for oneself in the first
person. Akónon ko iníng dútà. I'll appropriate this land, I'll make
this land my own. Ginákon ko lang iní. I appropriated this for myself.

_ákra,_ To pout, to sulk, to say "A", "Hem" and the like in ill-humour,
or in rejecting a favour, or refusing a kindness. Anó ang ginaákra
mo? Why are you so sulky? What causes you to pout or sulk? Ginhatágan
ko ikáw sing duhá ka bílog nga páhò kag nagákra pa ikáw? I gave you
two mangoes and still you are discontented?

_ákta,_ (Sp. acta) Records, documents, minute-book, written protest.

_ákto,_ (Sp. acto) An act. Isá ka ákto sang pagtóo. An act of
faith. (cf. búhat, bubuháton, buluhatón).

_akúl-akúl,_ Coarse, rough, badly done (of work); thoughtless,
careless. (cf. dakúldakúl, dagóldagól).

_akúl-akúl,_ To fondle, pet, take on one's knees (children,
etc.). (cf. okól-ókol).

_ákup,_ To take under one's care, to receive hospitably or kindly, to
give board and lodging to, to shelter, feed and clothe. Ginákup níya
akó sing mahigugmáon. He received me kindly, charitably, hospitably,
supplying all my needs. Akúpa sing maáyo iníng makaloló-oy nga
táo. Receive this poor fellow in all kindness. Take good care of this
wretched man. Ipaákup ko lang iníng makilímos sa mga punoán. I will
hand this beggar over to the care of the authorities. (cf. sagúd,
sapópo, tábang).

_akús,_ All persons included in, or belonging to, the same household,
members of a family, (cf. panimaláy).

_ákyat,_ See ákiat.

_alá,_ Pull! Haul! Now then! Hello! An exclamation used in animating
workmen, in enforcing attention and the like. Alá na kamó nga
tanán! Now then, pull all together! Alá ikáw dirâ, halín ka. Hello! you
there, clear out. (cf. halá id. and the more usual form; perhaps from
the Sp. hala).

_alâ,_ A Tagala, a Tagalog woman, (tagála id.).

_alâ-álà,_ To hesitate, be in doubt, be undecided. Nagaalâ-álà siá
sa pagsulúd or ginaalâ-aláan níya ang pagsulúd. He hesitates to enter
(cf. alág-ag, aláng-álang, duhádúha).

_ala-asáwa,_ Concubine, an unmarried or illegally married
woman. (cf. araasáwa, oloasáwa).

_ala-asendéra, ala-asendéro,_ (derived from the Sp. hacendera,
hacendero) The female (male) owner of a comparatively small farm;
a farmer on a small scale.

_alába,_ (Perhaps from the Sp. alabar) To beseech, ask in prayer,
to call on God or the Saints in prayer. The Freq. pangalába is
usually employed. Nagapangalába kamí sa ímo------. We beseech
you------. Ginapangalába námon sa ímo nga------. Ginapangalabáhan
námon ikáw nga------. We beseech thee or we call on thee,
that------. (cf. pangamúyò, pangáyò, pangadî, panawág).

_alabá-ab,_ Moderate warmth, tepidity, lukewarmness; to be or become
warm, lukewarm, tepid. Ang alabá-ab sang gúgma, sang sílak sang ádlaw,
etc. The (mild, soft) warmth of love, of the rays of the sun, etc. Ang
sópas nga maínit kaína, nagalabá-ab na. The soup that was hot a while
ago is lukewarm now or has become tepid. Paalaba-ába lang ang túbig,
índì mo pagpainíton gid. Make the water only lukewarm, do not make
it quite hot. Naalaba-ában ang íya nga dúghan sang matám-is nga
handumánan. His heart waxed warm with sweet recollections. Padálhi
akó sing ísa ka báso nga tsa nga maalabá-ab. Get somebody to fetch
me a glass of lukewarm tea.

_aláb-ab,_ See alabá-ab id.

_alábri,_ (H) Anything used for the purpose of opening, a key,
etc. Also: The plural form of ábri (Sp. abrir) Diín ang alábri? Where
is the key? Ang mga lampitáw nagalábri sang tanán níya nga mga
baúl. The detectives opened all his boxes, (cf. lyábi).

_alabríhan,_ (H) The point or place where something is opened;
key-hole, (cf. ábri).

_alabú-ab,_ Leavings, sediment, dregs, lees, admixtures; offspring,
progeny. Ang alabú-ab sang túbig. The sediment of water. Ang
alabú-ab or inalabú-ab sang táo. The progeny or offspring of a
man. Also used as a verb. Nagalabú-ab ang túbig. The water has
formed a sediment. Ginaalabu-ában akó sang túbig sa sulúd siníng
áwang. The water in this cistern contains too much sediment for
me or it appears to me that the water in this cistern is mixed
with sediment. (cf. lábud--dregs of wine, tubâ, vinegar, etc.;
lágtok--sediment in a tube, tobacco-pipe, etc.; halabú-ab id.).

_alabu-ábon,_ Mixed with sediment, turbid, etc. (cf. alabú-ab).

_alábut,_ (H) To follow one thing or work after another. Also:
The plural form of ábut. Sámtang nga buhî kitá dirí sa ibábaw sang
kalibútan ang mga kabúdlay kag kalisúd magaalábut gid sa waláy
langán-langán. As long as we are living in this world labours and
difficulties will follow one another without ever coming to an
end. Nagalábut silá sa íya sa subâ. They overtook him at the river,
(cf. abút-abút, abák-abák).

_alabútan,_ (H) Place of arrival, goal, end to be reached or come
to. (abút).

_alabúton,_ One subject to periodical fits, especially said of idiots,
maniacs, lunatics with lucid intervals of some duration, but liable at
any moment to fall back into their former mental derangement. (ábut,
abút).

_alabwáan,_ (H) Store, stock, hoard, capital, assets. (cf. ábwà,
halabwáan, hábwà).

_alád-ad,_ To chat and laugh immoderately, to tell stories, or let
out secrets, with much laughing and joking. Anó na man ang ginalád-ad
mo dídto? What pleasant stories did you tell there? Nagainalád-ad
silá sang mga tinágò ni Fuláno. They have unbridled tongues when
they talk about the secrets of N.N. Indì ka magalád-ad sináng mga
butáng. Don't give your tongue full rein in talking of those things,
(cf. ád-ad, of which alád-ad is not merely the plural form).

_aladláwan,_ (H) Anything to be paid for by daily labour. Ang asáwa
nakakúhà sing kárne nga aladláwan sang íya bána. The wife took some
meat, which her husband will pay for by his daily work. (cf. ádlaw).

_alagád,_ To wait for another to follow or come up with on the road; to
wait dinner or the like. Ang madásig maglakát magalagád sa mahínay! The
fast walker should wait for the slow one! Húy, alagadá (-ará) akó
ánay. Hey! Wait for me. (cf. hulát, agád-ágad, angán, angán-angán).

_alágad and alagád,_ Servant; employee. Kitá nga tanán mga alágad
sang Dios. We are all servants of God. Ang mga alágad or alagád sang
pangolohán. The employees of the government, government employees.

_alágad,_ To serve. Magalágad ka sa íya baláy. Serve in
his house. Alagári siá. Serve him. Become his servant or
employee. (cf. ágad).

_alág-ag,_ Hesitating, doubtful, timid, shy; to be or become
doubtful, etc. Nagaalág-ag ang buót ko sa pagsulát sa íya, kay básì
magasúngon. I am afraid to write to him, for he may get angry,
or he may take it ill. Indì ka magpangalág-ag, kóndì dayóna lang
ang ímo igahámbal. Don't be shy or don't hesitate, but continue
what you have got to say. Nagapangalág-ag siá magsulúd, kay básì
akígan. He hesitates to enter, for he may possibly meet with an angry
reception. (cf. alâ-álà).

_alagarán,_ (H) Place where, or person for whom, one works; work,
job, employment. (cf. palamúgnan).

_alágian,_ (H) Passage, thoroughfare, transit, road, way, path,
track. (ági; alágyan id.).

_alagílang,_ (H) Old, yellow leaves, attached still to the plant, but
about to fall off; old, withered, dry, sear, sere, said of leaves. Ang
alagílang nga dáhon madalî madágdag. The dry leaves will soon fall
to the ground.

_alagísod,_ (H) A much used plural form of agísod--to follow one the
other in regular order or succession.

_alagít-it,_ A bird like a lark with white breast and white down on
the inside of its wings.

_alagóng-ong,_ A small tree, whose fruit is much liked by ravens and
other birds.

_alágyan,_ (H) See alágian.

_aláhas,_ (Sp. alhajas) Jewels, jewelry; adornments, trinkets,
etc. made of the precious metals with or without stones.

_álak, alák,_ Wine, arrack, arack. (cf. bíno).

_alaká-ak,_ Spread, distributed, dispersed over a large area
with considerable distances between; to be spread or distributed,
etc. Alaká-ak or nagaalaká-ak ang mga háyop sa latagón, ang mga gál-um
sa lángit, etc. The cattle are scattered over the open country, the
clouds are distributed over the sky, etc. Alaká-ak gid lámang ang
mga baláy dídto sa bakólod. The houses there on the hill are widely
spaced. (cf. aták-aták).

_alakápa,_ (Sp. a la capa) For appearance only, for politeness' sake,
coldly formal, not heartily or sincerely. Ginágda man akó níya, hóo,
ápang alakápa lang. He invited me also, yes, but only to keep up
appearances. Nagtámbong man siá, ápang alakápa lang, dílì hutúhut. He
put in an appearance too, but in a coldly formal way, not with right
goodwill. (cf. pasamústra, pakuláhaw id.).

_alakáyo,_ Buffoon, jester, merry-andrew, clown; to act the clown,
crack jokes, converse wittily, utter pleasantries. Ginalakayóhan akó
níya. He made me laugh with his pleasantries or he acted like a clown
in my presence. (cf. bilyáko, payáso, társo, páskin).

_alákre,_ (Sp. lacre) Sealing-wax.

_ál-al,_ To get loose, to peel or scale off, as a piece of bark, skin,
flesh, etc. Nagál-al na ang kogán sang ákon butí. The scabs of my
smallpox have now fallen off. Lauyáha ang kárne túbtub nga magál-al
sa túl-an. Boil the meat till it comes loose from the bone. Al-alá
or paal-alá ang pánit sang manók. Boil the chicken till the skin
comes away.

_alalágo,_ Worm, dew-worm. (cf. lalágo, lagó).

_alalápok,_ To splash, slap, emit a sound as of spattering, splattering
(cf. ápok, alálpak).

_alálpak,_ To splash, turn over with a flop, as sods in ploughing
or the like. Nagalinágpak lámang ang mga súk-ay nga nagaalálpak kon
iní nga karabáw amó ang nagagúyud sang dáro. If this buffalo draws
the plough the sods turn over with a flop. (cf. óklab, balískad;
ápok, alalápok).

_álam,_ (H) Knowledge, wisdom, learning; to be or become wise,
learned, to know. Walâ siá sing álam. He has no learning, has had
no education. Pisáni ang pagtoón mo, agúd magálam ka. Study with
application, that you may become learned or well educated. Sádto ánay
walâ siá sing tinón-an, ápang karón nagálam na gid siá. Formerly he
had no schooling, but now he is quite learned. Indì kamó manúgid sa
íya sinâ, kay maaláman man níya sa olíhi. Don't tell him that now, for
he will get to know it later on all the same. Paalámi siá. Tell him
or warn him beforehand. Anó ang ímo naaláman? What do you know? What
have you learned? Ginpaaláman níya kamí nga dáan nga maabút ang
manugusísà sa amó nga ádlaw. We were warned by him long before, that
the inspector would come on such a day. Ipaálam sa íya nga nagubâ ang
táytay. Send him word that the bridge is broken down. (cf. kaálam,
maálam, kinaálam, kinaádman, máan).

_alámag,_ (H) Must, mould, mustiness, mouldiness,
mildew. (cf. agóp-op).

_alámag,_ The phosphorescence of seawater.

_alamagán,_ (H) Attractive, having an attraction, alluring,
enticing. Ang kalámay alamagán sang mga subáy. Sugar is an attraction
for ants. (amág).

_alamágon,_ (H) Musty, mouldy, mildewy. (cf. alámag; agóp-opón id.).

_alamagón,_ (H) Attracted, allured, enticed; to be allured or enticed,
etc. Ang mga subáy alamagón sang kalámay. Ants are attracted by
sugar. (cf. amág).

_alámak,_ (H) Light and easily inflammable material,
kindling. (cf. ámak, paámak).

_alám-álam,_ (H) To coax, wheedle, cajole, persuade by flattery,
gain by soft words, ingratiate oneself with, and the like. Alám-alámi
ang idô. Be nice to the dog. Coax the dog. Ginalám-aláman níya siá,
agúd magsáksi sa íya. He coaxed him to testify on his behalf. Indì
siá magpaalám-álam. He is not amenable to flattery. Ipaalám-álam
sa íya ang idô. Let him make friends with the dog. (cf. unís, utís,
odót, paayónáyon).

_aláman,_ Learned, wise, clever, intelligent, erudite, possessing
knowledge. (cf. maálam, manginalámon).

_alámbre,_ (Sp. alambre) Wire.

_alamílaw,_ To doze. See alumilaw.

_alamlígan,_ (H) Delicate, to be handled or looked after
with care; anything to be treated or guarded with caution and
circumspection. (ámlig; cf. alandáman).

_alamotán,_ (H) Contribution, subscription; anything for which
contributions or alms are required or solicited. (cf. ámot; báyad,
baláyran, tákay, limós, lilimósan, lilímsan).

_alampóan,_ (H) Oratory, chapel, place of prayer and worship; room
or furniture used for prayer. (cf. ampo).

_alamúsa,_ (Sp. a la musa) To the Muse! An expression frequently used
in connection with games, cardplaying, feasting, etc. and signifying
the last game or round before the parties rise or disperse. Butangán
ta pa sing alamúsa. Let us have a last round in honour of the
Muse. Nagaalamúsa na silá. They are now having the last round or
drink in honour of the Muse.

_álan,_ Rancidity, rankness of taste or smell; to become rancid,
rank, strong-scented, turn bad, said of fats, oils, bacon and
the like. Nagálan na galî ang tosíno. After all the bacon has
gone rancid. Naalánan akó sang búnga. I became dizzy from chewing
betelnut. Amligí ang mantéka, agúd índì magálan. Take care of the lard,
lest it should turn bad.

_alandáman,_ (H) Delicate, precious, to be handled with care or
caution. Ang tanán nga mga butáng nga mahapús mabúong ukón dolóktan
sang bulíng alandáman. All things easily breakable or liable to be
soiled should be treated with care. (cf. ándam; alamlígan, talatapón).

_alangá-ang,_ A slight cold, catarrh, a touch of fever. May alangá-ang
siá or ginaalangá-ang siá. He has a slight cold. Inalangá-ang akó. I
contracted a slight cold or catarrh. (cf. aláng-ang id.).

_aláng-álang,_ Neither "fish, flesh nor fowl"; untimely, inconvenient,
immature, not quite qualified or capable; to lack maturity, timeliness,
qualities or conditions required. Ang mga páhò aláng-álang pa. The
mangoes are not quite ripe yet. Aláng-álang pa ang tiémpo. The time
is not convenient yet, the weather is still unreliable,--not quite
suitable. Iníng batà aláng-álang pa sa pagbúthò. This child is too
young to go to school. Also used as a verb. Dílì mo pagaláng-alángon
ang pagabút mo dirí. Don't arrive here too late. Ginaláng-alángan akó
sa pagdúaw sa ínyo, kay----. I was prevented from paying you a visit,
because----. Kalití ang pagpaúlì, agúd dílì ka maaláng-alángan sang
ulán. Make use of the first opportunity to go home, lest you should
be detained by the rain.

_aláng-ang,_ (B) A trivial cold or slight fever. See alangá-ang id.

_alángay,_ (H) The much used plural form of ángay. Also used
adverbially: sing alángay--equally, in the same manner, without
difference, favour or distinction. Ginlímsan silá níya sing alángay
sing tagnapúlo ka dakô. He gave them an alms of ten centavos each
without distinction. Ginabílang kag ginasagúd níya ang mga manák
kag ang mga sumúod niya nga anák sing alán[g]ay gid. He looks
upon as equal and takes equal care of his stepchildren and his own
children. (cf. saláma, parého).

_alanghílan,_ (H) A shrub with very odoriferous flowers.

_alangílan,_ See alanghílan.

_alangíngi,_ A very tender vine often seen climbing bamboo, etc.

_alángkon,_ (H) Godson or goddaughter to be. May alángkon ikáw? Have
you a child to hold (for baptism or confirmation)? Are you going
to be godfather or godmother to somebody? Sín-o ang tagbátà sang
alángkon mo? Who is the parent of your godchild-to-be? (cf. anák;
aiháda, aihádo).

_alaníhon,_ (H) Rice to be harvested, rice ripe and ready to be
reaped. (áni).

_alánion,_ (H) See alaníhon, alányon.

_alantúson,_ (H) Bearable, tolerable, supportable; to be suffered,
tolerated, borne with. Dáw sa dílì na alantúson inâ. That is scarcely
to be tolerated any longer. Ang íya balatían makúlì nga búlngon,
ápang alantúson, kay dílì gid man mabúg-at ang íya pagbátì. His
disease is difficult to cure, but it is bearable, for he is really
not seriously affected. (cf. ántus; balatasón, palas-ánon).

_alányon,_ See alánion, alaníhon id. from áni--to harvest rice with
the kayóg.

_aláo,_ A slight affection of the skin which becomes a little
swollen and inflamed or covered with rash. Walking barefoot through
dense underbrush, coming bare-armed in contact with branches,
etc. is frequently quite sufficient to contract this inflammation
on the exposed parts of the skin. The aláo is the lightest of all
skin-diseases and can easily be cured. Also used as a verb. May aláo
siá or ginaaláo siá. He is affected with aláo. Inaláo siá or inalaoán
siá. He contracted the skin-disease aláo. Inalaoán siá sa íya nga
bútkon. He got an attack of aláo on his arm. (aláw id.).

_aláo,_ To treat, offer to visitors tobacco, cigars, materials
for betelnut chewing, a drink, etc. Ialáo sa íla iníng mga abáno
or alaoí silá siníng mga abáno. Offer them these cigars. Alaoón ko
silá sa baláy. I'll entertain them at home. Ialáo akó sa íla sang
malám-on nga dídto sa hulút. Please offer them the materials for
betelnut-chewing that are there in the room. (cf. amóma--to give food
to, offer estables, etc.; aláw id.).

_aláo-álao,_ To go to meet, to receive. Nagaláo-álao silá sa Ginóong
Obispo. They went out to meet the Bishop. Aláo-aláoa siá. Go and meet
him. Ipaaláo-álao sa íya iníng pilá ka táo. Send out these few men
to meet him (at some distance). (cf. súgat; aláw-álaw id.).

_álap,_ The last cleaning of rice before it is washed and got ready
for the kettle; to clean rice after the two siftings called "tahúp"
and "sisíg" respectively. Alápi ang bugás. Clean the rice. Separate
from the rice all admixtures (that should not be boiled together with
the clean, properly hulled rice). Iálap akó ánay sináng bugás. Please
clean that rice for me. Ipaálap ang bugás sa bátà. Get the servant
to clean the rice. Walâ siá sing inalápan. He has no clean rice.

_aláp-álap,_ Freq. of álap. The phrase "Walâ siá sing aláp-alápan"
means: "He is so busy that he is unable to cope with the
work". Literally: he has no clean rice in the house (being unable to
attend to that on account of having much other work).

_aláp-ap,_ White spots on the skin, especially on the arms and
legs. May aláp-ap ang íya bútkon. His arm has white spots on
it. Inalap-apán ang íya batíis. His calf is covered with white spots.

_aláp-apón,_ Pertaining to aláp-ap; one who has white spots on his
skin. (cf. aláp-ap).

_alapátan,_ (H) Measuring one fourth or quarter; a measure for the
fourth part of. Pulakán nga alapátan. A measure containing one fourth
of a gantang. (cf. talatlóhan--measuring one third).

_alapígot,_ Hardship, trial, difficulty; hard, trying, difficult; to
be or become hard, etc. Alapígot karón ang pangabúhì Life at present
is trying, (cf. lapígot id. and the more usual form).

_alapláag,_ (H) To disperse, spread, separate, (said of crowds, clouds,
smoke, etc.). Ang asó nagaalapláag. The smoke is dispersing. Ang mga
táo kon maggwâ sa simbáhan magaalapláag sa madalî. The people, when
they come out of church, will soon disperse. Alaplaága ang mga bátà,
háyup, etc. Make the children, the cattle, etc. spread, or separate,
in different directions. (cf. aláplag, lápnag, lápta).

_aláplag,_ (H) See alapláag id. Alaplagá or paalaplagá ang mga
karnéro. Disperse the sheep. Ipaaláplag mo ang mga kánding sa kay
Pédro. Get Peter to disperse the goats. Ang pagkakristiáno nakaaláplag
na sa búg-os nga kalibútan. Christianity has now spread throughout
the world. Yádtong bakólod naalaplagán sing madámò nga kahayópan. That
hill has many farm animals scattered over it.

_alapogán,_ (H) A lime kiln (ápog--lime).

_alapogón,_ (H) Fit for--, capable of--, being made into lime; to
be converted into lime (for betelnut chewing, building purposes,
etc.). Bató nga alapogón. Stones convertible into lime. Many shells
like those of the ígi, tamburúkò, tibótíbo, awís, etc. are "alapogón"
for betelnut chewing. (cf. ápog).

_alapután,_ (H) Goal, end, termination of a journey, resting place,
abode. Táo nga walâ sing alapután. A man that has nowhere to go to,
to stop at or live in, a man without settled abode. Kon may malumús sa
ilayá sang subâ iníng báhin sang báybay amó sing masamí ang alapután
sang bángkay. If someone (drowns) is drowned further up (in) the river,
this part of the beach is quite frequently the place where the corpse
is washed ashore. (cf. áput, apútan).

_álas,_ To wind up, coil. Alása ang písì. Wind up the rope. Iálas
akó ánay sang kalát. Please, coil up the rope for me. Kon índì ka
makahibaló magálas sang káble ipaálas mo lang inâ sa kay Pédro. If
you don't know how to wind up the cable, get Peter to do it.

_alás,_ (Sp. as) The ace in cards, the card or die with a single pip.

_alaságas,_ The south-east wind (cf. laságas).

_alasálan,_ (H) Roasting-spit. Buháti akó sing alasálan. Make me a
roasting-spit. (cf. asál; asálan, arásal, arasálan).

_alasálon_, (H) Fit for roasting or that is to be roasted on a
spit. Kárne, manók, báboy, etc. nga alasálon. Meat, chicken, pork,
etc. that is to be roasted on a spit. (cf. asál, alasálan).

_alasawá_, (H) To be married, wedded, in wedlock. Nagaalasawá or
nagaalasawaháy silá. They are married, they are living in wedlock,
they are husband and wife. Ang mga magalasawá. Married people,
(cf. asáwa, asawá).

_alasínan_, (H) Place where salt is kept, salt-cellar, (asín).

_alasogón_, (H) Suitable for fattening and sterilization; to be
fattened and sterilized, applied chiefly to sows. (ásog).

_alasóhan_, (H) Chimney, funnel, hole for the escape of smoke. (asó).

_alasóyon_, (H) Capable of an explanation or to be
explained,--exposed. (ásoy).

_alát_, A small fish-basket; any other small basket with wide meshes
to let water pass through or flow off easily.

_alatasán_, (H) A water channel that can be drained for catching fish
by the method of "átas", (which see).

_alatasón_, (H) Fish to be caught by draining away water and leaving
them stranded. (átas).

_alátay_, A disease manifesting itself by trembling and great
dizzines; chickens are particularly liable to, and often die of,
this disease. May alátay or ginaalátay ang manók. The chicken has
been,--is attacked by alátay. Also: a swelling and inflammation of
the eyelids. (cf. arátay id.).

_alatáyon, alatayón_, One suffering from alátay.

_alatipanón_, Attention, care, that is to be attended to,--taken care
of. (cf. atipán).

_alátpan_, (H) Anything to be roofed in,--put under a roof. (atóp).

_alátpon_, (H) Any kind of roofing material. (atóp).

_aláw, aláw-álaw_, See aláo, aláo-álao.

_alawayán_, (H) Battlefield, field of combat, scene of a fight. (áway).

_alawayón_, (H) Motive of--, cause of--, reason for--, a quarrel
or fight; anything fought for, or worth a fight. Ano ang ínyo
alawayón? What are you fighting about?

_álay_, Stiffness, tiredness; to be or become stiff and tired from
a long walk, overwork or the like, said especially of limbs and
muscles. Nagálay ang íya páa. His leg has become stiff. Naalayán akó. I
am stiff and tired. Metaphorically: Ginaalayán akó siníng mga bátà. I
am getting tired of,--disgusted with--, these children. (cf. kápoy,
kotóy, páol).

_aláy-ay_, To carry in--, support with--, one's arms, a child, sick
person or the like, the person carried or supported assuming a leaning
or half-lying position. Ginaaláy-ay níya ang masakít níya nga ilóy. She
supports with her arms her sick mother. Alay-ayá ang bátà. Carry the
baby in your arms. Ialáy-ay akó ánay siníng pilasón. Kindly support
this wounded man with your arms. Paaláy-ayá siá sang masakit. Let
him support the sick person.

_aláypan_, (H) Asylum, refuge, shelter. (ayúp).

_alba_, (Sp. alba) Alb.

_albasíya_, (Sp. albacea) Testamentary executor, one appointed to
execute a last will and to see that all its provisions are complied
with.

_albíno_, (Sp. albino) An albino, an abnormally white person usually
with pink eyes and very light hair. This absence of pigment is also
found among animals, birds and fishes, (cf. bukáy).

_álbum_, (Sp. album) Album.

_albútra_, A kind of medicinal plant and its seeds taken as a remedy
against stomach-ache. (Perhaps from the Sp. almorta--vetch).

_alehandríya_, (Sp. alejandria) A beautiful flowering plant; a kind
of rose.

_alensyáno_, Clever, skilful, expert, adept. (cf. ansyáno, antígo,
anad, sagád, batíd).

_álgo_, (Sp. algo) Something, somewhat. Máy álgo dirâ. There is
something behind, some secret or the like. May álgo siá sa kay
Fulána. He is somewhat in love with N.N.

_algodón_, (Sp. algodon) Cotton, cotton cloth, cotton
thread. (cf. búlak, búrak; hílo).

_algwasíl_, (Sp. alguacil) Sheriff, bum-bailiff, bailiff,
under-bailiff, any other judiciary official below a judge; an armed
patrol or guard.

_alhebrá_, (Sp. álgebra) Algebra.

_alhíbi_, (Sp. aljibe) A water-tank or reservoir, especially one used
for storing rain-water.

_álhom_, (H) Not burning well, that does not soon catch fire, difficult
to light, said of green wood, wet leaves, tobacco, cigars, etc. Also
used as a verb: to be or become difficult to light, etc. Alhom kaáyo
iníng abáno. This cigars burns very badly. Naalhomán siá sang ákon
abáno. He could not light the cigar I gave him, or he had difficulty in
lighting my cigar. Dî mo pagpaalhomón ang tabákò. Be careful with the
tobacco, lest it should get wet, burn badly or be difficult to light,
(cf. arúm).

_alì_, Liked, appreciated, cherished; attached to, partial to; to like,
etc. Alì ko gid iníng kálò, tulún-an, pagkáon, etc. I am partial to
this hat, this book, this kind of food, etc. Ginaálì or ginapakaálì ko
gid iníng mga sapátos. I like these boots very much. Dáw sa dílì gid
matahúm iní, ápang ginálì mo. This does not seem to be nice at all,
yet you liked it. Alíon mo na lang ang bág-o nga huégo nga ginhátag
sa ímo ni tíyà mo. Just try to be contented with the new suit that
aunt gave you. (cf. lúyag, palánggà, úyon, wíli, pakamahál).

_alî-álì_, Dim. of the foregoing. To consider rather nice, etc.

_álias_, To fly off, to fly out in all directions from a hole
or receptacle, as rice grains from the mortar, if pounded
unskilfully. Magaálias ang humáy sa lusóng kon tótwon sing
bikwálon. Rice-grains will fly off in all directions from the mortar,
if pounded awkwardly. Dî mo pagpaaliasón ang humáy. Don't let the
rice-grains scatter. Don't send the rice-grains scattering or flying
off in all directions. Sang pagbayó ni Fuláno naaliasán ang salúg sing
madámò nga bináto nga humáy. When N.N. was pounding rice, many grains
flew out and scattered over the floor. (cf. ályas, id.; ásik, ágsik,
ásang; álwak, ályak--to spill (of water, etc.); wisík--to sprinkle,
splash).

_alibákaw_, The quite ripe betelnut that is preferred for
chewing. Malúyag akó magmamâ sang alibákaw. I like to chew ripe
betelnuts.

_alíb-álib_, A circular arrangement around a common axis as the
steps of a winding staircase; arranged in such fashion; to arrange
in a circle around a common centre. Alíbalíba ang paghaníg sang
kólon. Arrange the leaves in a circle, when you line the bottom of
the rice-kettle. Alíbalíbi sing mga dáhon sang burí ang tabungós,
kon maggákut ka sang humáy nga bilinhíon. Close the tabungós-basket
with burí-leaves arranged in a circle, when you tie up the rice to
be preserved as seed-grain.

_alibángbang_, Butterfly; a tree with beautiful leaves resembling
butterflies.

_alíbhon_, A shrub whose leaves possess cough-curing properties.

_alibiár_, (Sp. aliviar) To mitigate, alleviate, ease, relieve, to
afford relief. Ang amó nga bulúng nagalibiár sa bátà. That medicine
has given some relief to the child. (cf. hagánhágan, pahagán-hágan).

_alíbio_, (Sp. alibio) Belief, ease, mitigation, alleviation;
consolation, comfort. (cf. bulúng, tábang, paaliwánsan, utwásan).

_alibógbog_, A slight headache, vertigo, dizziness and pain in the
head. Also used as a verb. Nagaalibógbog ang úlo ko. My head feels
giddy. Ginaalibógbog akó or may alibógbog akó. I have a slight
headache.

_alibótbot_, A shrub, whose leaves are a remedy for headache and
whose juice is made use of as a remedy against punctures, cuts and
bruises from thorns, splinters, sharp stones, nails, etc. Butangí
sing alibótbot ang ákon pilas. Put some alibótbot-juice on my wound.

_alibubungán_, See alibungán.

_alibungán_, The ridge of a roof and the like. (cf. bulubungán,
bubungán, ibubungán from bubúng, bobóng).

_alibútdan_, Half-boiled, half-cooked, not properly cooked, the
inside remaining hard, especially applied to all kinds of tubers like
potatoes, ube, banáyan, etc. (cf. bútud).

_alibútud_, Core, centre; lowest depth. Sa alibútud sang kalibútan. In
the very centre of the world. Sa alibútud sang inpiérno. In the lowest
depth of hell.

_alíbyo_, See alíbio.

_aligí_, The fat, the soft and most savoury part of a crab's meat,
especially applied to the alimángo-crab. Only well developed crabs
have aligí.

_aligianán_, Having much aligí; rich, wealthy, well-to-do,
influential. (cf. bangkílan, manggáran, manggaránon).

_alígmat_, To remain awake, watch, keep vigil, stay up waiting for
somebody, etc. Aligmatá akó túbtub nga magabút akó. Stay awake for
me till I come. Magalígmat kamó. Keep vigil. Stay awake. (cf. puláw).

_aligóng-ong_, See alagóng-ong id. Also: aligúnung, aligúlung, id.

_aligótgot_, Resentment, ill feeling, grudge, anger, animosity,
umbrage, pique, ill--, bad--, blood, ill-will, to bear--, owe--,
a grudge, harbour or nurse resentment, to be angry, have an ill
feeling. May aligótgot siá sa ákon. He has a grudge against me. Indì mo
siá pagaligotgotán. Don't bear him any resentment. Nagaaligótgot siá
sa kay Fuláno, kay walà níya pagtumána ang íya ginsáad. He has an ill
feeling against N.N. because he did not fulfil his promise. (cf. ákig,
súnggud, súngon).

_aligotó_, (H) Regret, grief or pain caused by the want or loss
of something; to miss, regret, feel the loss of, be sorry for the
absence or loss of. A, ginaaligotoán (ginaaligotohán) ko gid ang
pínggan nga nabúung! Oh, I am so sorry for the broken plate! Madámò
nga mga ginikánan nagaaligotó sang galastóhon sa pagpatoón sa íla
mga bátà. Many parents regret the expense of providing instruction
for their children. (cf. ngílin, ngúsul, hílak).

_aligúlung_, To be dizzy, giddy, confused, upset. (cf. libúg, língin,
lingín, gómon, gomón).

_aligúnung_, Confused, upset; to confuse, worry, upset. (cf. língin,
lingín, aligúlung).

_aligyanán_, Having much aligí, etc. See aligianán.

_alíhid_, Side, edge, border; to pass along the side of, to go in a
parallel line along the border of, to take a side-track. Magalíhid
lang kamó sa pángpang. Just pick your way along the bank. Kon madámò
ang lúnang sa dálan saráng kamó makaalíhid sa isá ka bánas. If there
should be much mud on the road, you can take the footpath at the side
of it. Metaphorically: Nagapangalíhid siá sa mga kadalagkuán. He
avoids contact with high-class folks, holds aloof from them, keeps
his distance in their presence.

_alikabút_, To rise, soar, fly aloft, mount upwards as on wings
(said of wind, dust, etc.). (cf. alintabó).

_alikáya_, Gay, sprightly, cheerful, cheery, merry, good-humoured;
to be or become gay, etc. Alikáya nga nawóng. A gay expression. Sádto
ánay masubô siá, ápang karón nagalikáya na siá. Formerly he used to be
sad, but now he is cheerful. Naalikayáhan akó sang íya pangguyáhon. His
face impressed me with its cheeriness. (cf. nayánáya, manayánáya).

_alíkdik_, Dandruff, scurf. See adíkdik id.

_alikís_, A skin disease. See arikís id.

_alikisón_, One affected with alikís. (cf. arikisón).

_alílà_, To nourish, nurture, rear, bring up, foster, take good care
of, look after with kindness and consideration. Aliláa sing maáyo ang
bátà, ang masakít, ang pilasón, etc. Look well after the baby, the sick
person, the wounded man, etc. Ialílà akó ánay siníng makaloló-oy nga
táo. Kindly take upon yourself the care of this poor fellow. Si San
Hosé dílì sumúod nga amáy ni Hesukrísto, kóndì amáy nga manugalílà
lámang. St. Joseph was not the real father of Jesus Christ, but only
his foster-father. Ginalílà níya ang ílo nga bátà súbong sang sumúod
níya nga anák. She brought up or reared the orphan-child as if it
were her own daughter. (cf. sagúd, batití, sapópo).

_alíli_, A loan contract, the loan to be paid, mostly at usurious
interest, in agricultural products; to borrow money on such a
contract. Kon índì ka magbáyad sing túbò, índì ka makaalíli. If you
are unwilling to pay interest, you cannot get a loan. Nagsilíng
siá sa ákon nga pagapaalilíhan ikáw níya sing napúlò ka mángmang
kon magbáyad ka sa íya sing ánum ka pásong nga humáy sa tubás. He
told me that he will lend you ten pesos, if you will pay him six
bushels of rice at the harvest-time. Ipaalíli lang sa íya ang tátlo
ka mángmang nga íya kinahánglan. Just lend him the three pesos he
needs. Sing masamí ang mga manugpaalíli nagasokót sing lakás nga
túbò. Very often money-lenders on an alíli-contract charge exorbitant
interest. (cf. útang, hulám, língit; ángkat).

_alíling_, (H) A wheel. Also used as a verb. Alilíngi ang káro or
butangí sing alíling ang káro. Put a wheel to the cart. (cf. ruéda;
aríring).

_alíma_, (B) The hand. Pagpangalíma--to handle, handle roughly,
come to blows, etc. Indì ka mangalíma sa íya or índì mo siá
pagpangalimáhon. Don't touch him. Don't strike him--, handle him--,
roughly. (cf. kamót).

_alimá_, (B) To take in hand, to handle or take care of. Alimahón
mo gánì iníng mga bátà. Take care of these children, then. Ialimá
akó ánay siníng mga bátà. Lend me a hand, please, in taking care of
these children.

_alimángo_, A crab, much esteemed for food, the "aligyanán" in
particular being much in demand. (cf. kaság).

_alimátok_, Mountain-leech, black and white in colour, a little
smaller than the ordinary leech. (cf. líntà).

_alimbukád_, To bubble, froth, foam, seethe; a bubble, foam,
froth. Nagaalimbukád ang túbig sa bubón. The water in the bathing-hole
is bubbling. May alimbukád ang túbig sa áwang. The water in the
cistern is frothy or foamy. Paalimbukará (-adá) ang túbig. Make the
water bubble (by stirring, throwing stones into it, etc.). (cf. bukál,
akál-akál).

_alimbúyug_, Black, blackish, brown, dun, swarthy, swart, swarth,
dark, especially applied to fowls, but also to the coloured races of
men. Ang mga bukáy kag alimbúyug. The whites and blacks, the white
and dark-coloured races. (cf. ilómilóm, kayumánggì).

_alimbuyungán_, A whirl, eddy, whirlpool, vortex, a rapid circular
current of air or water. (cf. búyung--to revolve or turn round).

_alimódyas_, A plant whose seeds are often made up into necklaces or
used as beads.

_alimókon_, A bird; a kind of wild pigeon.

_alimósan_, A fish similar to the haroán, but smaller.

_alimpapáw_, Superficial, on the surface, not deep, not from the
heart, hypocritical, insincere, cool, merely formal; careless,
perfunctory, negligent. Abáw, alimpapáw gid lang ang pagtúman mo
sang ímo katungdánan. Why, you are very negligent or careless in the
performance of your duties. Alimpapáw lang ang íya nga pagsímba. He
goes to church only to keep up appearances. (cf. halimpapáw,
salimpapáw, pakuláhaw).

_alimpásong_, A hollow, a shallow depression in the soil, in a floor,
etc.; hollow, depressed, lower than the surrounding ground; to be
or become depressed, etc. Tápana ang mga boklód-bóklod kag tampokán
mo ang mga alimpásong, agúd magsaláma ang dútà. Lower the mounds
and fill in the hollows in the ground, that the land may become
level. (cf. limpásong, libaón, lúpyak).

_alimpúlus_, The top--, crown--, apex--, of the head; the whorl or tuft
of hair on top of the head, any other whorl of hair on the scalp, a
cowlick, lines on the finger-tips, lines in the palm of the hand, etc.

_alimpúlus_, See alimbuyungán--whirlpool, eddy.

_alimpúrus_, See alimpúlus id.

_alimúgtaw_, To sleep restlessly or brokenly, awake frequently and
at short intervals, sleep only a little at a time; restless, broken,
(of sleep). Nagalimúgtaw ang bátà nga masakít. The sick child slept
restlessly. Alimúgtaw gid lámang ang íya katulúgon. His sleep was
very restless, he slept but little, he awoke every now and again,
(cf. búgtaw; alumílaw).

_alimúnaw_, To be struck speechless, to become speechless and
breathless from a sudden shock, to yell or scream in sudden fear,
anger or pain and lose speech and breath immediately afterwards for
a short time, or even die on the spot without recovering either; to
be affected with a choking fit. Ang bátà nagaalimúnaw. The child has
a choking fit. Dî mo pagpaalimunáwon ang bátà. Don't give the child
a choking fit. Dî mo pagbuháton inâ, kay básì magaalimúnaw siá. Don't
do that, for he may get a choking fit. (cf. himúnaw, id. and the more
common form in use).

_alimúnaw_, To disappear suddenly or unexpectedly, to melt away;
to vanish, be missing. Nagalimúnaw gid lang ang ákon isulúlat
sa tulungtúngan sang ákon sululátan. My pen was missing from the
table in my writing office. Bantayí iníng mga páhò, agúd nga índì
magalimúnaw. Watch these mangoes, lest they should melt away or
disappear. (cf. limúnaw id. and more in use).

_alináynay_, Mild, soft, gentle. (cf. hínay, alugáynay, nagáynay).

_áling_, Aunt; fostermother; dear old woman, kind soul. This term
seems to have been borrowed from the Tagalog dialect, (cf. tíà, tíyà,
darâ, mánding, bóboy).

_alingá_, To watch, guard, see to, pay attention to, supervise, attend
to, as mothers to their children, shepherds to their flocks, hosts
to their visitors, etc. Ang bakéro nagaalingá sang mga karabáw. The
cowherd is tending the buffaloes. Alingahá ang ímo mga bátà. Look
after your children. Indì akó makahalín, kay nagaalingá akó sang
akón mga bisíta. I cannot get away, because I have to attend to my
visitors. Ialingá akó ánay sang ákon mga eskuéla. Kindly watch my
pupils or my classroom for a while. (cf. bántay, libáng, alimá).

_alingág-ngag_, A little deaf, hard of hearing; to be a little deaf,
have one's sense of hearing slightly impaired. Alingágngag siá. He
is slightly deaf. Sang isá ka simána maánting pa siá, ápang karón
nagalingágngag na. A week ago he could still hear well, but now he is
a little deaf. Sán-o pa ikáw magalingágngag? When did you have your
sense of hearing impaired? Ginaalingagngagán akó sa íya. He seems to
me to be slightly deaf.

_alingása_, Noise, hubbub, clamour, disturbance; disturbing, trying
or tiringly noisy, even if not very loud; to be or get noisy, said of
children in school, of people talking and laughing during a discourse,
in a theatre, meeting or the like. Alingása nga kagáhud! Kaalingása
siníng mga táo. What a noise! How noisy these men are. Naalingasáhan
akó sa íya. He became a nuisance to me on account of the disturbing
noise he made. Indì kamó magalingása. Don't make a noise. Don't be
noisy. (cf. alingá-ut id.).

_alingá-ut_, See alingása id.

_alingáyo_, A small, wasp-like insect with a very painful
sting. (kamaláyo, mangaláyo id.).

_alingóg-ngog_, Dulness, dizziness in the head, want of alertness
or keenness, from loss of sleep, after too heavy a meal or excessive
drinking or the like; dizzy, dull, confused; to feel or become dizzy,
lack keenness, etc. Alingógngog ang úlo ko or nagalingógngog ang
úlo ko. My head feels dull. Butangì sing hinébra ang íya tubâ sa
pagpaalingógngog sa íya. Put some gin into his palm-wine to make his
head reel. (cf. língin, lingín).

_alinsóso_, The tender central part or core of the edible marrow
of the coconut--and buri-palm (úbud) as well as of the tip of the
banana-blossom (úbad). Any similar tender core.

_alinsúnud_, To follow in succession, succeed one another. (cf. sunúd).

_alintabó_, The rising of clouds of dust, the splashing or spraying
of water and the like; to rise (of dust), to splash, spray (of water,
etc.). Ang yáb-ok nagaalintabó sa hángin. The dust is rising in clouds
on account of the wind. Ginapaalintabó ang yáb-ok sang hángin. The wind
raises the dust in clouds. Paalintabohá ang túbig sa línaw. Make the
water splash in the quiet pool. Ang túbig magaalintabó kon balángan mo
sing bató nga dakô. Water will splash, if you throw a big stone into
it. Natabónan ang ámon mga panápton sang yáb-ok, kay naalintabohán kamí
bangúd sang mamádlus nga hángin. Our clothes got covered with dust,
because it rose in clouds around us due to the strong wind. Abi,
ipaalintabó akó sang túbig, kay malúyag akó magtán-aw. Well, cause
the water to splash, for I should like to see it.

_alintagá_, A step, rung or round of a ladder; a stair of a flight
of stairs or of a staircase; to do something step by step, leisurely,
with pauses, with delays, interruptions or intervals. Ang hágdan sang
ámon baláy may napúlò ka alintagá. The ladder of our house has ten
steps. Indì ka magalintagá kon magsúgid ka sinâ sa íya, kóndì dayúnon
mo gid ang ímo paghámbal. Don't use broken, hesitating language, when
you recount that to him, but tell him what you have got to say in a
coherent manner. Ginalintagá níla ang pagpatíndog sang baláy. They
built the house slowly, step by step. (cf. halíngtang, halíntang id.).

_alínton_, To transfer, hand over, deliver to, hand down; come down
to, be conveyed or transferred. Ang íya sinâ nga marágtas nagalínton
sa áton sa sugíd-súgid sang mga mál-am. The history of that episode
came down to us through the oral tradition of the old people. Ialínton
ang baúl sa baláy. Transfer the box to the house or convey the box
home. Ginalínton (ginpaalínton) ko ang ákon kasangkápan sa baláy. I
transferred my equipment to the house. Ginpaalintonán kitá sang áton
mga ginikánan sang íla nga mánggad. Our parents handed down to us
their property. Ang mga Apóstoles nagpaalínton sa áton sing madámò nga
mga kamatuóran nga walâ masulát sa sántos nga ebanhélyo. The Apostles
handed down to us many truths that were not written in the gospel.

_alipálok_, (H) A spark of fire, particles of fire emitted by bodies
in a state of combustion. Ang alipálok nagalupád (nagatabúg). The
sparks are flying. Ang ámon baláy nadúktan sang isá ka alipálok. Our
house was set on fire by a spark.

_alipalók_, (H) To emit or send off sparks, to spark, sparkle. Ang
kaláyo nagaalipalók. The fire is giving off sparks. Dî mo pagalipalokón
(pagpaalipalokón) ang kaláyo. Do not cause the fire to send up
sparks. Indì mo pagabrihán ang puérta nga malapít sa dapóg, kay
nagaalipalók ang kaláyo. Do not open the door near the fire-place,
for the fire is throwing off sparks. Ang mga atóp nga kógon madalî
masúnug kon alipalokán sang kaláyo. Thatches of kogon-grass will soon
burn, if a spark of fire alights on them.

_alipasá_, To haste, hasten, hurry, bustle, be in a hurry, make
haste. Nagaalipasá silá sa pagpaúlì, kay básì maulanán. They are in
a hurry to go home, for they may be caught in the rain. Anó gid ang
ginaalipasá mo? Why are you in such a hurry? Paalipasahón mo siá sa
pagpakarí. Urge him to come here quickly. (cf. dalî, kalít, dásig).

_alipatá_, A kind of poisonous plant.

_alipátpat_, To drop asleep, to fall asleep unintentionally, to fall
into a reverie when in company, to lose by day-dreaming the thread
of conversation, to go wool-gathering. A person in this condition,
if spoken to and recovering his wits, will as a rule apologize with a
phrase like this: "Dispensahá akó, nakaalipátpat akó" or "Dispensahá
akó, naalipatpatán akó". "Pardon me, I forgot myself". "Pardon me,
my thoughts were wandering or I was distracted". Excuse me, I was
not listening, (lipát).

_alipátwon_, Stubborn, undisciplined, turning a deaf ear to, unheedful,
unheeding. (cf. batinggílan, dìmanínggol).

_alipokpokán_, Ridge, top, point, summit, crest, highest part of a
mountain or hill, etc. (cf. putokputokán).

_alipudwán_, The top of the head, the part of the head just above
the forehead, the anterior part of the skull.

_alipúngot_, Rage, fury, wrath, passion, great resentment, frenzy of
anger or revenge, exasperation; to be wild with rage or resentment,
to fly into a--rage,--passion, etc. May alipúngot siá or nagaalipúngot
siá tungud nga ginbutangbutángan siá sang mga táo. He is wild with
rage at having been slandered by the people. Ginaalipúngtan níya
ang paglibák sa íya. He very much resents detraction. Ginalipúngtan
níya ang mga naglibák sa íya. He felt great resentment against his
detractors. Ginsúmbag ko siá kay inalipúngot akó. I struck him because
my blood was boiling.

_alipútan_, The anus; the fundament. (cf. kalipunát).

_alipútuk_, Ridge, crest, top (of a wave, etc.); eddy, whirlpool,
(cf. alimpúlus, alimbuyungán; alipokpokán, putokputokán).

_alipútus_, Land lying between two branches of a river.

_ális_, To fight, come to blows. Naga-ális or nagaalisáy ang mga
bátà. The boys are fighting, have come to blows. Alísi siá! Fight
him! Iális ko sa íya ining bastón. I'll fight him with this stick. Indì
ka mangális sa mga bátà nga magamáy. Don't fight--, quarrel with--,
small boys. (cf. árnis, áway).

_alís_, An exclamation: Go away! Take yourself
off. Withdraw! (cf. halín).

_alísbong_, Odour, smell, scent, perfume, emanation, vapour emanating
from the ground, flowers, etc.; to smell, give off a smell, to exhale,
be odoriferous. Anáno nga alísbong ang ginabátyag ko dirí? What
kind of smell do I notice here? Anó ang nagapangalísbong? What is
smelling? Abáw, nagapangalísbong ka ba! Ah, how strong you smell of
scent! (cf. ósbong, súbung, sungáw).

_alisí_, (Sp. hélice) Screw-propeller, screw, propeller. Also verb. Ang
táo nga nahúlug sa bapór naalisí kag naútud ang íya páa. The man that
fell overboard was caught by the propeller and had a leg cut off.

_alísngaw_, Vapour, steam arising from the soil, emanation,
effluvium, exhalation, miasma, steam, etc.; to give off vapour, to
exhale. Nakahák-on akó sang alísngaw sang dútà. I inhaled the vapours
arising from the soil. Ang dútà nga uháw, kon maulanán, magaalísngaw
kag magaalísbong (magapangalísbong). The thirsty soil, if rained upon,
gives off vapours and odours. (cf. súbung, ósbong, sungáw, alísbong).

_alísto_, (Sp. alistar) Ready, prepared, fit for, equipped; to prepare,
get ready. Alisto na kamí sa paglakát. We are now ready to march. Kon
alísto na kamó nga tanán, malakát na kitá. If you are all ready,
we will go now. Alistohá ang mga dalál-on (dalálhon). Get ready the
things to be taken along or to be brought along. Alistohí kamí sing
balónon. Make ready for us some provisions for the journey. Ialísto
ko pa ang ákon maléta, kay dálhon ko sa buás. I am going to get my
hand-bag ready, for I'll take it along tomorrow. (cf. hímos, híkot,
híwat, áman).

_álito_, (Sp. hálito) Breath; vapour, emanation, exhalation, effluvium.

_aliwána_, Width, breadth, wideness, broadness, spaciousness; to be
or become wide, broad, spacious, (cf. hanáhay, álwag, lápad).

_aliwánag_, Advanced dawn of day, clearness, brightness, light
diffusing itself just before the rising of the sun. Also used as
adjective and verb. May aliwánag na. The morning light is here
already. Aliwánag na ang kalibútan. The world (is filling) is being
filled with the light preceding the rising of the sun. Nagaaliwánag
na ang kalibútan. The morning light is diffusing itself over the
world. (cf. bánag, baná-ag, banágbánag).

_aliwánay_, To be wide, spacious, etc. See aliwána.

_aliwános, aliwanós_, (B) To move, stir; to get free, go about
freely. Indì akó makaaliwános. I cannot move about freely, I cannot
stir. (cf. húlag, gího, etc.).

_aliwánsan_, Loophole, escape, refuge, help, salvation, (aliwános;
cf. paaliwánsan, dalángpan, aláypan).

_aliwasá_, To be excited, be anxious, be in a hurry. (cf. alipasá).

_aliwatán_, The wrist. Taknáan nga sa aliwatán. A wrist-watch,
wristlet-watch.

_alkabála_, (H) (Sp. alcabala) Commerce-excise, excise-duty; to
subject to payment of duty, exact or collect excise-duty. Sókta
ang alkabála. Collect the excise-duty. Ginaalkabaláhan ang mga
balalígyà. Merchandise is subject to excise-duty. (cf. arkabála,
buhís).

_alkabaléro_, (Sp. alcabalero) Tax-gatherer, revenue-officer,
(cf. arkabalísta).

_alkampór_, (Sp. alcanfor) Camphor.

_alkansíya_, (Sp. alcancía) Money-box, especially a money-box made
out of bamboo, or out of a coconut shell.

_alkilá_, (H) (Sp. alquilar) Rent, payment for the lease of a house or
shop and the like; to take on lease, to rent, lease. Pilá ang alkilá
sang baláy mo? What is the rent for your house? Alkilahán mo lang
iníng baláy sing tagnapúlo ka mángmang ang búlan. Simply rent this
house for ten pesos a month. Ipaalkilá ko iníng baláy. I will let
this house on lease. Paalkilahá akó sang ímo baláy. Let me have your
house on lease. Indì akó magalkilá siníng hulút, kay lakás kamahál. I
won't take this room on lease, because it is too dear. (cf. hinákay).

_alkitrán_, (Sp. alquitran) Tar, liquid pitch.

_álma_, (Sp. alma) Soul, spirit of man; head, directing
influence. (cf. kalág; úlo).

_almanáki_, (Sp. almanaque) Almanac, calendar,
time-table. (cf. kalendáryo).

_almasín_, (Sp. almacen) Shop, store; storage, shed, go-down,
store-room: barn, store-house or out-house for farm-products,
etc. (cf. tiénda; tambóbo, kamálig).

_alméndra_, (Sp. almendra) Almond; almond-shaped precious stone
or diamond.

_almidón_, (Sp. almidon) Starch; to starch. Ginalmidonán níya ang ákon
báyò. sing lakás. She starched my jacket overmuch. Ialmidón akó sang
ákon báyò. Please starch my jacket for me. Ipaalmidón ko sa mamumunák
ang ákon báyò. I will get the washerwoman to starch my jacket. Ang mga
panápton nga inalmidonán mabáskog. Starched clothes are stiff. Panápton
nga alalmidonán. Clothes to be starched. (cf. amidól, armidól).

_almiránte_, (Sp. almirante) Admiral.

_almirés_, (Sp. almirez) A kitchen mortar, a small
mortar. (cf. lubakán, lusóng--rice-mortar. The pestle of an almirés
is called "baláyo, baráyo", that of a lusóng "hál-o").

_almoháda_, (Sp. almohada) Pillow, bolster, cushion to sit on, or to
rest one's head upon. (cf. ulúnan).

_almohadón_, A large cushion or pillow.

_álmon_, A kind of tree and its commercial timber; a kind of
sugar-cane.

_almoránas_, (Sp. almorranas) Piles, hemorrhoids.

_álò_. Act of endearment, caressing, fondling; to caress, fondle,
pet; to give children something to eat, treat with great kindness
or tenderness. Alóa ang bátà. Caress the baby. May tinápay akó nga
iálò ko sa bátà. I have some bread for the baby. Alói ang bátà sing
matám-is. Treat the baby to some sweetmeats. (cf. dálò, palánggà).

_alô-álò_, Dim. and Freq. of álò. To caress rather often or repeatedly,
to caress now and then. (cf. harô-hárò, dalô-dálò).

_alobáybay_, Handrail, railing to hold oneself by, balustrade. Also
used as a verb. Alobaybayí ang hágdan sang ímo baláy. Make a
handrail for the ladder leading up to your house. Iníng hágdan
walâ sing alobáybay. This ladder has no handrail. Naalobaybayán
ang íla nga pántaw. Their kitchen balcony is surrounded by a
balustrade. Mangalobáy-bay kamó kon manáug. Keep your hand on the
handrail when you go down-stairs. Nagapangalobáybay na ang bátà. The
baby is already learning to walk or making its first steps by keeping
itself up or supporting itself by holding on to a chair, a wall,
etc. (cf. gabáy, gabayán).

_alobaybayán_, Handrail, balustrade. (cf. gabayán, alobáybay).

_alobíhod_, A tree, whose slightly sour leaves are made use of to
flavour meat and, specially, fish.

_alób-ob_, To dip in, to fill by dipping. Ialób-ob lang ang bayóng
sa subâ. Just dip the bayóng into the river and fill it. Alob-obí ang
agwadahán sing túbig. Fill the bucket with water by dipping. Ipaalób-ob
ang bayóng sa kay Pédro. Let Peter dip the bayóng into the water and
fill it. (cf. ság-ub, agwáda).

_alobó-ob_, A heat-bath; to give or administer a heat-bath, to cause
to perspire by means of live coals placed in a pan underneath a person
sitting or standing and closely wrapped up to the chin. Ginaalobo-óban
námon siá. We are giving him a heat-bath. Nagahímos akó sing
bagahán nga inugpaalobó-ob sa íya. I am getting ready a brasier for
administering a heat-bath to him.

_alóg,_ A Tagalog. (cf. tagálog; alâ--a Tagala, a Tagalog woman).

_alogadí,_ Silly, childish, senile, doting, pertaining to the second
childhood of old people. (cf. ulianón, ayopáka, tsótso, urumánon,
payaón, bataón).

_alogán-gan,_ To postpone, procrastinate, tarry, put off, delay;
tarrying, delaying, etc. The verb is frequently used with pa-. Dílì
kamó magpaalogán-gan or maginalogán-gan sa pagsílhig sang hulút. Don't
put off sweeping the room. Ginalogán-gan níya ang pagkádto dídto kag
tungúd sinâ walâ siá makaábut sang tábad. He put off going there and
as a consequence came too late for the dinner or banquet. Indì siá
magpaalogán-gan sa pagsakáy pa Manílà or índì níya pagialogán-gan ang
pagsakáy pa Manílà. He will not postpone his trip to Manila. Alogán-gan
siá sing pamatásan. He is inclined to procrastinate, put things
off. (cf. palántang; agáp--to anticipate).

_alogás-gas,_ Full, complete (of payment); well done, thorough,
perfect, faultless (of work); full, of the best, of a high order
(of crops, etc.); to be or perform well, to become or make blameless,
etc. Ang humáy nga pinatubás ko sang isá ka túig alogás-gas gid, ápang
ang pinatubás ko sa karón nga túig támà kaupahón. The rice I harvested
last year was splendid, but the one I harvested this year is full of
blighted ears. Abáw alogás-gas gid ang ginbáyad ko sang ginbalígyà
mo sa ákon kag karón ang ákon ibalígyà angkatón mo lang! Just think
of it, I paid you cash in full for what you sold me and now you would
like to get on mere credit what I have to sell to you! Maáyo gánì kon
siá ang magapatíndog sang baláy, kay alogás-gas siá sing pangóbra. It
is well, indeed, if he builds the house, for he is thorough in his
work. Kon alogas-gasón ang ínyo trabáho, alogas-gasón ko man ang
igasóhol ko sa ínyo. If you perform your work well, I, on my part,
will pay you a generous wage. Ginalogas-gasán ko siá sa pagbáyad. I
paid him cash in full.

_alóghog,_ A running line, any rope or string, attached by means of
rings or a channel, through which it passes, to a garment, curtain,
fishing-net or the like; any other material used in a similar way and
for the same purpose; to attach or provide such a rope, etc. Aloghogí
ang puróy mo. Put a running string to your short breeches. Ialóghog
ang písì. Put the cord through its channel (or rings, as the case may
be). Ialóghog ang alóghog sa íya nga aloghogán. Thread the cord through
the rings, blocks, tubes, hem, etc. Ginpakábit níla ang kúmbong sa
lúbid nga. inogalóghog (inalóghog). They hung up the curtain on a
running rope. (cf. halóghog id. and the more usual form).

_aloghogán_, The channel, tube, groove, rings and the like through
which an alóghog is passed. (cf. haloghogán id.).

_alóg-og_, To glide or slide down a rope or pole, using chiefly the
hands in doing so. Nagalóg-og lang siá. He just slid down. Alog-ogí
ang kalát. Glide down the rope. Metaphorically: to go away or leave
secretly, go down by stealth or unnoticed. Sa tápus ang panihápon
nagalóg-og lang siá. After supper he just slipped away, left without
the knowledge of those in the house. (cf. kalóg-og id.).

_alokabá_, The shell of eggs, turtles, crabs, etc. (cf. olokabá id.).

_alók-álok_, To run after each other, one trying to catch, the other
to escape, (as is often done by children at play). Nagaalók-álok
silá. They are chasing, running after, each other. (cf. lagás,
lagsanáy).

_alók-alók_, Desultory, rambling, passing from one thing or work to
another and not completing any; to work by fits and starts, to do
something in a desultory manner. Alók-alók nga pangóbra inâ. That
is a poor, jerky way of working. Abáw, natápus na galî ang baláy
nga ginalók-alók níla sa sulúd siníng limá ka túig. Why! They have
actually finished the house at which they have been busy by fits
and starts these last five years. Indì mo pagpaalók-alokón ang
mga táo sa íla trabáho. Don't allow the men to slacken at their
work. (cf. aláng-álang).

_alóla_, A small, coarsely woven basket made of buri-leaves, etc. and
serving chiefly as a hen-nest or receptacle for various fruits and
garden-produce. From the smallness and low value of an alóla it has
become a synonym for: trifle, a small matter, of little concern,
etc. Alóla lang inâ sa ímo. That is only a trifle for you. Such a
thing matters little to you.

_álom_, (H) A mole, a small, black (or even white) spot or pimple,
never larger than a wart. It is indelible, being a birthmark. Larger
protuberances, even if accidentally acquired, are called "bokól" and
more extensive moles of various discolorations are known as "kaláhà,
karáhà". (cf. álong, árong id.).

_álom_, A tree, whose bark is superstitiously worn by some in the
form of a collar round the neck as a supposed remedy against various
ills and diseases, especially against "ugám".

_alóm_, Dark, dim, dimmed, tarnished, lack-lustre, having lost lustre
or shine; to be or become dark, to lose lustre or whiteness, said of
metals, skin, surface of furniture and the like. (cf. ilóm, itúm).

_alóm_, See álhom. (cf. arúm).

_álong_, A mole. (cf. álom, árong).

_alóng-ong_, To know, understand. (cf. inalóng-ong; hibaló, sáyod,
áto).

_alón-on_, (B) To wind and double yarn or thread on a reel. Alon-oná
iníng isá ka ágpang nga bunáng. Wind up and double this hank of
yarn. Iníng bunáng alon-onón (ialón-on) ko sa alon-onán. This yarn I am
going to wind up and pair on the doubling-machine. Ialón-on mo akó ánay
siníng bunáng. Kindly double this yarn for me on the doubling machine.

_alon-onán_, (B) A device for winding up and doubling or pairing yarn
for weaving purposes, a doubling-machine or doubling-reel.

_alóp_, A plug, peg, bung, wedge driven into an object from underneath
or behind; a boss, stud, knob. (cf. halóp id. and more commonly used).

_álop_, To plug, bung up, stop up a hole by means of a pin, bolt,
wedge or the like driven in from inside or from underneath the object
to be plugged or mended. Alópi ang lusóng. Plug the rice-mortar. Iálop
ko iníng káhoy sa lusóng. I am going to stop up the hole in the
rice-mortar with this piece of wood. (cf. hálop; for the cork or
stopple of a bottle "súngsung" is to be used).

_alóp_, The lid or cover at the bottom of a portable fish-trap made
of wickerwork.

_alóphop_, (B) To cook or boil only a small quantity of rice,
especially by means of the ánglit, a much smaller rice-pot than the
kólon. Alophopí akó. Cook a little rice for me. Paalophopí akó. Get
somebody to boil a little rice for me. Kon mga saráng ialóphop mo akó
ánay sing diótay nga bugás. Kindly cook a small quantity of rice for
me. (cf. halóphop id. and more in use).

_alopí_, A rice-cake made of rice-flour mixed with sugar and
coconut-meat, wrapped up in banana-leaves and boiled. (cf. bagódbod).

_alopíhon_, Materials got ready or required for the making of a
rice-cake called "alopí".

_alopínpin_, Half-full grains, particularly of rice. (cf. umáyaw,
amáyaw).

_alopó-op_, Dense mist, fog, vapour, cloud. Also used as a verb. May
alopó-op or nagaalopó-op. There is a mist. It is misty, foggy,
cloudy. Nagapangalopó-op or naalopo-ópan ang búkid. The mountain is
covered with--, shrouded in--, clouds. (cf. ámbon, pangánud, gálum).

_aloró_, (H) Arrowroot, (cf. aroró, sagó).

_aloséuséu, alosíwsíw_, A kind of worm or caterpillar that is very
injurious to plants.

_alót_, (H) Very short-haired, shaved or with the hair cut extremely
short; to cut the hair very short, to shave. Alotí akó sang ákon
bohók. Cut my hair very short. Mangalót akó sang ákon búngot. I am
going to shave off my beard. Mapaalót akó ánay sa manuggúnting. I
am going to have my hair cut very short by the barber. Ipaalót
mo ang ímo búngot sa barbéro. Get your beard shaved off by the
barber. (cf. bulúg).

_alóy_, A young or small turíngan, tulíngan-fish.

_áloy_, A pretended sickness; to feign sickness, pretend to be ill,
to malinger, simulate some illness. Aloy lang ináng íya balatían. That
sickness of his is a mere imposture or sham. Indì ka magáloy. Don't
pretend to be sick. Gináloy lang níya ináng balatían. He merely
simulated that disease. Iáloy mo lang nga masakít ang úlo mo. Simply
pretend to have a headache.

_aloyán_, Pretending to be ill, simulating a disease. Aloyán nga
táo. One who pretends to be ill.

_alpahór_, (Sp. alfajor, alaju) A kind of crisp bread or biscuit,
often mixed with almonds, honey, sugar, etc.

_alpáka_, (Sp. alpaca) Alpaca, the animal as well as the thin, light
fabrics made from its soft, silky wool.

_álpan_, For alópan from álop--to stop, plug, etc.

_alpargátas_, (Sp. alpargata) Sandals or shoes made of cloth and
having thick hempen soles.

_alpilír_, (Sp. alfiler) Safety-pin; pin in general. (cf. sibít,
kiríkol, turúbok, espelér).

_alpómbra_, (Sp. alfombra) Floor-carpet, altar-carpet,
rug. (cf. baníg).

_álpot_, Strumpet, whore, harlot, prostitute, (cf. púta, bigáon,
patótot, bighalán, hiwalán).

_álsa_, (Sp. alza, alzar) A rise in price; the raising of merchandise,
money, etc. on credit; to raise, lift, hoist; to get on credit. Ang
tanán nga mga balalígyà sa almasín siníng komersyánte álsa gid lámang
sa Ilóng-ílong or ginálsa gid lámang níya sa Ilóng-ílong. All the
goods on sale in the store of this merchant are (were) obtained by him
on credit from Iloilo. Alsahá pa gid ang káhoy sing diótay. Raise the
wood yet a little. Alsahí iníng lugár sang mga bató. Remove the stones
from this place. Alsahá ang tíngug mo. Raise your voice to a higher
pitch. Iálsa akó ánay siníng láta nga túbig. Please lift this can of
water for me. Alsahán mo gid ánay ang baráha kag ugáling ipanhátag
(ipanghátag). First cut the cards and then deal them out. (For an
increase in wages and the like "pasákà" is to be used. Napasakáan
ang íya sóhol. His wages have been raised).

_alsapríma_, (Sp. alzaprima) A lever for raising loads.

_altár_, (Sp. altar) Altar. Altár nga mayór. High-altar. Main
altar. Altár nga minór. Side-altar. (cf. halarán, misahán).

_álto_, (Sp. alto) Stop! Halt! A military term.

_alubáksan_, The waist; the place where a native skirt called
"patádyong" is fastened or secured; the securing, fastening of a
patádyong (by tucking in one end at the waist), (cf. ulubítan, ubít).

_alugakâ_, Loose, slack, not tight, not well secured. (cf. halugakâ,
halúg, halugâ, hugák, talungkakâ).

_alugáyan_, A bamboo-mat, square, either quite flat or, more
frequently, with the edges turned up a little, used chiefly to
catch the chaff when newly pounded rice is tossed in the "kalálaw"
to separate the rice from the chaff. Kon táphan ang binayó isálud
ang alugáyan. When you toss the rice free from the chaff, place the
alugáyan underneath, (cf. lugáyan id.).

_alugáynay,_ Slow, gentle, soft, mild, not quick, not impetuous,
not impulsive; chronic, not acute (of disease); to be or become slow,
gentle, mild. Ang mga balatían nga alugáynay. Chronic diseases. Nahúlug
siá sa bintánà, ápang walâ siá masamári, kay nagalugáynay ang pagtupâ
níya sa dútà nga mahómok. He fell out of the window, but was not
hurt, for his fall was soft on the loose earth. Alugáynay gid lámang
ang íya nga pagpangítà sing kabuhián. He earns his livelihood with
difficulty. His earnings are coming in but slowly. (cf. ananáy,
inanáy, hínay, nagáynay).

_alugbáti,_ A creeper, whose soft shoots are edible.

_aluká-it,_ Empty, deprived of contents, said of husks and pods,
especially the emptied kamunsel husks; empty-headed, stupid,
brainless. (It is to be noted that the aluká-it are still attached to
the plant, but empty through the action of birds or vermin. Otherwise
empty pods are called "úpak", the general name for the exterior
coating of fruits, as: skin, husk, pod, peel, rind).

_alulakúb,_ Eyelid. (cf. ilalakúb, ilalangúb); kílay--eyebrow;
amimilók--eyelash; kalimutáw--eyeball; taótáo (sang matá)--pupil
(of the eye).

_álum,_ Mole. See álom.

_alúm,_ See alóm.

_alumílaw,_ (H) Very light, not deep, easily to be awakened from,
with half-closed eyes, said of sleep. Nagkatulúg ikáw?--Hóo, ápang
alumílaw lang ang ákon panúlug. Did you sleep?--Yes, but I was only
dozing, my sleep was very light. (alamílaw id.).

_alungá-og,_ Tastelessness, insipidity, vapidness, staleness,
flatness; to be or become tasteless, vapid, stale, etc. Kon madúgay
nga dílì masag-ahán ang áwang, magaalungá-og ang túbig. If a cistern
is not cleaned out for a long time, the water becomes stale. Indì mo
pagpaalunga-ogón ang túbig. Don't allow the water to become vapid.

_alunga-óg,_ Tasteless, stale, vapid, stagnant; not well done,
underdone, insufficiently or badly cooked, performed carelessly or
negligently. Alunga-óg nga pangóbra. Careless work. Alunga-óg nga
tiníg-ang. Insufficiently or badly cooked rice.

_alungáy_, An insistent request, solicitation, petition; to importune,
to ask earnestly, to solicit, petition, request. Alungayá inâ sa kay
nánay. Ask mother for it. Alungayá sa kay nánay mo ang súbong sinâ nga
hampangánan. Ask your mother for a plaything like that. Ialungáy mo
akó sa kay tátay nga tugútan níya akó sa pagkádto sa Ilóngílong. Please
ask father for me to let me go to Iloilo. Inalungayán níla akó siníng
mga páhò. They kept asking me for some of these mangoes. Ginalungayán
níya si tátay túbtub nga nakadángat siá sang íya ginahándum. He begged
hard of father till he obtained his wish. (cf. ahâ, pangáyò).

_alungáyngay_, To hang or droop loosely, to fall or break down in a
heap, to sink or drop to the ground in great weakness. Nagalungáyngay
siá nga daw mapatáy. She sank to the floor as if about to die. Walâ
níya pagluatí ang pagbálbal sa íya kon walâ siá magalungáyngay kag
magpaalumátay sa salúg. He would not have desisted from giving him more
blows, if he had not dropped to the floor and pretended to be dead.

_aluntagá_, Step, rung, round (of a ladder), stair (of a flight of
stairs). (cf. alintagá).

_aluntagón_, To do something slowly, step by step, in several stages
or in successive parties. Nagaluntagón ang ámon paglakát. We walked
quite slowly or our party broke up on the march into several bands.

_alupídan_, A kind of creeper with acidulous leaves that are edible.

_alusíman_, A kind of grass that is often fed to pigs; a kind of
purslain, purslane.

_álwag_, Width, wideness, breadth, broadness, spaciousness; to be or
become spacious, wide, large, extensive, broad. Nagálwag na iníng sála,
kay ginísol níla ang díngding. This reception room has become large,
for they have set back the partition-wall. (cf. áblang, lápad, álway,
hanáhay, áwhag).

_álwak_, Spilling, spilth; to spill. Kon uyúgon ang báso, magaálwak
ang túbig. If the glass is shaken, the water will spill. Indì mo
pagpaalwakón ang túbig sa pitsíl. Don't spill the water out of the
pitcher. Naalwakán ang lamésa sang túbig. The water was spilt on the
table. (cf. ályak id.).

_álwan_, Liberality, munificence, generosity, open-handedness, bounty,
bounteousness; to be or become generous, liberal, open-handed,
munificent, bounteous, bountiful, free. Maímot (maínot) siá sádto
ánay, ápang karón nagálwan na. He used to be stingy, but now he is
quite generous.

_álway_, Width, breadth, wideness, broadness, extensiveness, largeness,
spaciousness, ampleness, amplitude; to be or become wide, broad,
large, spacious, extensive, ample, roomy. (cf. lápad, sángkad, álwag,
aliwána, aliwánay, hanáhay, áblang).

_alyágan_, A sieve, (cf. ayágan, arayágan, ayág).

_ályak_, To spill. See álwak id.

_ályas_, To fly off in all directions, etc. See álias id.

_áma_, (Sp. ama) Housewife, mistress, landlady,
proprietress. (cf. agálon, tagíya). Also shortened from the Sp. "ama
de leche"--wet-nurse.

_amád_, Lazy, indolent, slothful; to be or become lazy, indolent,
slothful, slack. Ang amád nga táo amó ang isá ka táo nga may katámad. A
lazy man is one who has the vice of sloth. Indì ka magamád. Dont get
lazy. Walâ siá makapasár sa íya grádo, kay nagamád siá sa pagtoón. He
could not pass his grade, because he was too lazy to study. Naamadán
siá sa pagsímba. He is (was) too lazy to go to church. (cf. támad,
ágol, agohós, ligóy, pasalipótpot).

_ámag_, Attraction, enticement, allurement, inducement, lure. Ang
kárne ámag sang idô. Meat is a lure for dogs. Ang mga búlak ámag sang
putyókan. Flowers attract bees.

_amág_, To be attracted by, to be drawn towards. Ang mga ragárága
nagaamág sang sugâ. The insect "ragaraga" seeks the light or is
drawn towards the light. Ang bátà nagaamág sa íya ilóy. The child
clings to--, desires to be with--, its mother. Paamagí ang idô sing
kárne. Attach the dog to you by giving him some meat. Iníng dólse iamág
(ipaamág) ko sa bátà. These sweets I'll use to draw the child towards
me. Ang pamulákan ginaamagán sang mga alibángbang. The flower-garden
allures the butterflies. Iníng táo nagaamág lang sang kinaíya, dílî
sang kaayóhan sang bánwa. This man is working for his own profit,
not for the good of the town.

_amahán_, The large beads of a rosary, the "Our Father" beads.

_ámak_, Easily lighted material, as shavings, dry leaves, grass,
etc. used to start or kindle a fire. Paámak is generally used, also as
a verb. Mangítà ka sing ámak or paámak. Look for some kindling. Paamáki
ang kaláyo. Put some easily lighted material on the fire. Ipaámak ko
iníng lukáy. I'll use as kindling these dry coconut leaves. Pangitái
sing paámak iníng mga rámò kag tútdan mo. Go in search of something
to set fire to this refuse and burn it up.

_amákan_, Bamboo matting used for drying rice, copra, etc. in the
sun. Also for partition walls, ceilings, floor-carpets, etc.

_amalánhig_, One who appears after death and haunts houses, etc.;
a ghost, spectre, phantom, spirit, shade, wraith, spook, apparition;
to appear after death, to haunt. Nakítà balá nínyo ang amalánhig? Have
you seen the apparition? Si Fuláno, konó, nagaamalánhig sa íya
baláy. N.N., they say, is haunting his house. May amalánhig iníng
baláy. This house is haunted by a spectre. Indì ka magpáti sináng
mga ginasugídsúgid nga mga amalánhig. Don't believe the stories about
people who are said to have risen from the grave or who appear in--,
haunt--, houses. (cf. amamánhig, malánhig, maránhig).

_amamákol_, A kind of edible mushroom, often found in banana groves.

_amamánhig_, (H) See amalánhig id.

_áman_, To prepare, get--, make--, ready, make preparations
for. Magáman ka sa paglakát. Get ready for the march. Nagáman
ka na sa pagkonpesár? Have you prepared for confession? Mangáman
ka! Be prepared! Be careful! Beware! Amána ang ákon higdáan. Make
my bed. Amáni akó sing pagkáon. Prepare me some food. Naáman na ang
tanán. Everything is ready. Iáman ko iníng hábul sa bisíta. I am going
to prepare this blanket for the visitor. (cf. hímos, híkot, híwat).

_áman_, To add, superadd, throw in, give something in addition to what
has been bought or is contracted for. Amáni akó sing isá ka gamól
nga humáy. Add one handful of rice gratis or give me one handful of
rice over (in addition to my share for harvesting, etc.). Iaman mo
sa ákon iníng isá ka bílog nga ísdà. Let me have this fish too (in
addition to the fish I have bought, etc.). Also used as a noun. Walâ
sing áman? Is there no gratis-addition? May diótay gid man nga áman
kon matambingán mo ang báyad. There is a little more thrown in,
if you pay spot cash. (cf. támba, dúgang).

_amán_, (B) For "a, man". Dílî ka magpáti sa íya, kay amán butigón
siá. Don't believe him, for he is certainly a liar.

_amáng_, Father, parent. (cf. amáy, tátay, tay, pa, papá).

_amáng-amáng_, Like a father, etc. Dim. of amáng.

_amáno_, (Sp. a mano) Quits, square, paid in full, given into the
hand; to settle, square, pay in full. Amáno na kitá. We are now
square. Nakaamáno na akó. I have settled my debt. Naamanóhan ko na
ikáw. I have now paid you in full. Iamáno ko karón sa ímo iníng
duhá ka mángmang. I am now paying you the last two pesos of my
debt. (cf. kábis, ímpas, túmbas).

_amansebádo_, (Sp. amancebado) One living in concubinage.

_amapóla_, (Sp. amapola) The poppy.

_amaránhig_, (B) See amalánhig id.

_amargóso_, (Sp. amarguera) A cucumber-like vegetable with a bitter
taste. The sampalíya belongs to the same class, but is much smaller.

_amát_, To start slowly, do leisurely, gradually, to do little by
little or step by step, to commence. Nagaamát sang ínit ang ádlaw. The
sun begins to get hot. Nagaamát siá sang níwang. He is slowly getting
thin. Amatón ta na ang trabáho. Let us now begin to work, let us now
go to work. Ginamát námon ang paglakát. We walked quite leisurely
or slowly.

_amát-ámat_, Little by little, step by step; to do slowly, gradually,
leisurely, etc. Nagpadásig balá kamó sang ínyo paglakát?--Walâ, kóndì
amát-ámat lang. Did you walk quickly?--No, quite slowly. Amát-amáton
nínyo ang pagarádo. Plough slowly, little by little. Naamát-amátan
gid námon sa pagbakál ang kalámay. We bought sugar only in small
quantities at a time.

_amát-amát_, Slowly, step by step. See amát-ámat. (cf. hináyhínay).

_amátong_, (B) Pigsty. (cf. tángkal).

_amáy_, (H) Father; to call one father. Amáy ko siá. He is my
father. Ang "Amáy", ang "Anák" kag ang "Espíritu Sánto" amó
ang tátlo ka Persónas nga diósnon. Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
these are the three divine Persons. Ang "Amáy námon". The "Our
Father". Amayá siá. Call him father. Ginamáy níya akó. He called
me father. Ginapakaamáy níya akó. He treats me as if I were his
father. (cf. tátay, tay, papá, pa).

_amáy-ámay_, Stepfather; foster-father. Si San Hosé amáy-ámay ukón
amáy nga manugalílà ni Hesukrísto. St. Joseph was the foster-father
of Jesus Christ. (cf. tatáy-tátay).

_amáyaw_, Rice not quite full and not quite empty, rice that at
winnowing comes to lie between the chaff (upá) blown far off and the
full grains falling down straight (timgas). (cf. umáyaw id. and the
more usual form, alopínpin).

_amáynon_, (H) Fatherly, paternal. (cf. amáy, inamáy, tinátay).

_ámba_, To sing, chant, troll, choir. Maáyo siá magámba. She is a good
singer. Makahibaló ka magámba siníng bág-o nga kalantáhon? Do you know
how to sing this new song? Ginambahán níya kitá sang íya matám-is nga
pagpaníngug. She sang to us in her sweet voice. Kon ímo ambahón iníng
kalantáhon ákon pagaúpdan sa piáno ang ímo ambahánon. If you sing
this song I will accompany you on the piano. Iámba akó siní. Sing
this for me, please. (cf. kánta).

_ambáhan_, Song, hymn, festive song, vocal music, chant, canticle,
lay, ditty; to sing hymns, to praise in song. Nagaambáhan silá or
nagakánta silá sing mga ambáhan. They are singing hymns. Magambáhan
kitá sa Diós or ambahánan ta ang Diós. Let us sing hymns to God. Alá,
iambáhan ta sa Mahál nga Bírhen iníng kalantáhon. Now then, let us
sing this song in praise of the Blessed Virgin.

_ambahánon_, Singing, chanting, song, hymn, (ámba; kalantáhon).

_ámbak_, (B) To jump down; to drop or fall down, as water over a
precipice, etc. Ang túbig nagaámbak sa busáy. The water falls down
over the precipice. Ang bátà nagámbak sa subâ humalín sa pángpang. The
boy jumped into the river from the bank. Ambakí ang bató dídto. Jump
down on that stone there. Ambak lang. Just jump down. Paambaká si
Fuláno. Make N.N. jump down. Iníng subâ may madámò nga paámbak. This
river has many waterfalls or cataracts. Paambakón ta ang subâ, básì
may madakúp nga ísdà. Let us put a barrier across the river, perhaps
we may be able to catch some fish. (cf. túmbò--to jump up straight,
to rebound from the floor; lúmpat, lúkso--to leap, jump, spring).

_ámban_, A polypus, especially a polypous tumour in the mucous membrane
of the nose.

_ambanón_, Pertaining to, or affected with, a polypus in the
nose. Iníng táo nagahámbal súbong sang isá ka ambanón. This man
talks--as if he had a polypus,--as if his nostrils were stopt up.

_ámbas_, To cost much, be expensive, costly, cause greater outlay as
compared with something else. Maámbas ang áni sang sa gálab. Harvesting
rice with the small rice-cutter called kayóg is more expensive than
harvesting with the sickle. Sa súbung siní nga trabáho maámbas ang
sóhol nga inádlaw sang sa pákiaw. For such work daily wages are
more costly than a contract for the whole. Nagámbas ang gásto námon
tungúd sang ápat ka bátà námon nga dídto sa koléhyo. Our expenses
were greater on account of our four children at college. Naambasán
silá sang gásto sa karón nga túig, kay naginilísílis lang silá sang
minasakít. They had larger outlay this year, for they fell sick one
after another. Iníng kláse sang paglútò maámbas. This kind of cooking
is expensive. (cf. hákug).

_ambáy_, (B) I don't know. Diín si tátay mo?--Ambáy kon diín siá
karón. Where is your father?--I don't know where he is now. Also used
as a verb. Indì ka magambáy kon pangkotón ikáw. Don't say "I don't
know" when you are asked. (cf. ambót, máan báy).

_ámbi_, Open or exposed to the rain; to enter, come through, said of
rain being driven in by the wind through an open door or window or
the like. Nagaámbi ang ulán. The rain is coming in. Ang ámon kalán-an
ginaambihán sang ulán. The rain is coming into our dining room. Ang
ákon kwárto ámbi sa ulán. My room is exposed to the rain. Kon mamádlus
ang hángin maambihán ka dirí sang ulán. If the wind is strong the
rain will drive in here where you are. (cf. ábong--open to the wind).

_ambílay_, A shawl or cover for the shoulders; to cover the shoulders
and back, put round the shoulders. Iambílay lang ang pányo mo. Just
cover your shoulders with the shawl. Ambilayí ang likód mo sing
hábul. Put a blanket round your back. Ang mga babáye nagaambílay or
nagapangambílay. Women cover their shoulders with shawls. (cf. abláy,
abílay, abrigo, kúnop, talákdong).

_ambisyón_, (Sp. ambicion) Ambition, covetousness, an eager or
inordinate desire. (cf. hánggab, hingamó, íbug, lúyag).

_ámbit_, Participation, share, part; to participate, have a part
or share in. Húo, magaámbit gid akó sinâ nga bínhì. Yes, I shall
certainly get a share of that seed-grain. Paambitá akó sinâ nga
bínhì. Let me have a share of that seed-grain. Húo, kon malúyag ka,
ipaámbit ko sa ímo ang isá ka pásong sináng bínhì. Yes, if you wish,
I'll let you have a bushel of that seed-grain. Ang tanán nga mga
táo malúyag magámbit (maghiámbit, magpanghiámbit) sang lángit. All
men wish to get a place in heaven--or--to participate in the joys
of heaven. Naambitán ko man ang maáyo níla nga kapaláran. I also
participated in their good luck. Paambití sa íya iníng mga páhò. Let
him have a share of these mangoes, (cf. áyap, ámò, báhin, lábut).

_ámbo_, (Sp. ambo) A combination of two numbers in loto (lotto).

_ámbo_, Mouse, rat. (cf. ilagâ, balábaw, gitíng).

_ámbò_, To insist on, importune, ask for, beg to be allowed to do
something. (cf. ahâ, sakár, panakár).

_ambohóng_, To snort, blow air through the nose in anger or discontent,
to grumble, murmur, complain. Indì ka magambohóng. Don't grumble. Anó
ang ímo ginaambohóng? Why are you murmuring--or--complaining? Indì
mo akó pagambohongán. Don't murmur against me--or--in my presence,
(cf. púsnga--to blow air through the nose as an angry buffalo does).

_ámbon_, Dense mist, fog, vapour, haze, clouds on mountains, etc.; also
used as a verb. Naambonán ang mga búkid sing madámol. The mountains are
densely enshrouded in clouds. May ámbon ang búkid--or--nagapangámbon
ang búkid. The mountain is covered with clouds. (cf. alopó-op,
gál-um, dámpug).

_ámbong_, Loveliness, prettiness, attractiveness; self-respect,
tact, modesty; to be or become nice, pretty, lovely, self-respecting,
tactful, modest, etc. Magámbong ka sa ímo kagawián. Try to be modest
in your behaviour. Be tactful in your manners. Ginámbong níya gid ang
íya pamísti (pagnaúg). She was very properly dressed, took care to
have her clothes neatly arranged. Ambongá ang ímo paglakát. Be modest
or well-mannered in your way of walking. Si Pedro naambongán sa kay
Pulána, ápang si Hosé walâ maambongí sa íya. Peter was well impressed
by the bearing of Miss N.N., but Joseph was not well impressed by
her manner. Nagámbong na iníng bátà. This child has grown quite
pretty. (cf. ányag, gayón, tahúm, mahî; úgdang, lígdong).

_ambót,_ (H) I don't know, I am not aware of it, I know nothing
about it. Diín si Fuláno?--Ambót. Where is N. N.?--I don't
know. Ambót kon sa diín siá nagkádto. I don't know where he went
to. Nagambót siá sa ákon. He answered me with: "I don't know". Indì
ka magambót--or--magpangambót kon pangkotón ikáw. When you are asked
don't say: "I don't know". (cf. ambáy, ilám).

_ambúlung,_ A tropical plant, from whose berries an excellent
mucilage is obtained and whose roots yield tapioca; a cassava
plant. (cf. balínghoy, kamotingkáhoy).

_Ameriká,_ (Sp. America) America.

_amerikána,_ (Sp. americana) A man's coat, American or European
style. (cf. sáko).

_amerikánhon,_ (Sp. Americano) American, an American citizen;
pertaining to America or to American customs and manners.

_amerikáno,_ See amerikánhon.

_ami,_ Second harvest, secondary harvest, harvest after the main or
principal harvest. The "ami" usually falls between the months of
December and March, seldom later, the main crop within the months
of April and December. Also: To plant a second crop, etc. May amí
kamó?--Hóo, ang naányan námon ginamihán námon. Have you got a second
crop?--Yes, where we harvested our rice there we planted a second
crop (of corn, beans, etc.). Iamí ko iníng maís. I am going to plant
this corn as a second crop. Mangamí kamó?--Hóo, kon magulán mangamí
kamí. Will you plant a second crop?--Yes, if it rains, we will.

_amidól_, Starch. See almidón, of which amidól is a corruption,
but is often used.

_amíg_, Chum, pal, friend, shortened from amígo and used very
familiarly and often also ironically or sarcastically. Si amíg ko
Ipíng. My friend Philip. Ihátag mo iní sa kay amíg Tibóy. Give this
to our friend Toribio. Nahisáyran na ni amíg Lúis nga--. Our good
friend Luis (our opponent or adversary) is most likely aware of the
fact that--(cf. atíd, akíd, idól, ábyan, amígo).

_amíga_, (Sp. amíga) A female friend; to be (female)
friends. Nagaamigaháy silá. They are friends, (cf. ábyan, bábay).

_amígo_, (Sp. amígo) A male friend; to be (male) friends. Maáyo ang
íla pagamigoháy. They are good friends. Nagpakigamígo siá kúntà sa
ákon, ápang--He would have liked to become my friend, but--. Amigóhon
ko siá. I'll make him my friend. Mahírup ko siá nga amígo. He is an
intimate friend of mine. (cf. amíg).

_amíhan_, The Northwind.

_amimilók_, (H) The eyelashes. (cf. mirók, milók).

_amínhan_, The North. (cf. amíhan; nórte).

_aminhánon_, Northern, boreal, arctic, septentrional; inhabitants of
the northern hemisphere, people living in the North, (cf. amínhan).

_ámion_, Fragrance, sweet smell, agreeable odour, perfume, scent; to
be or become fragrant, sweet-smelling, scented, odoriferous. Iníng
matahúm nga búlak walâ sing ámion (kaámion). This beautiful flower
has no scent. Nagámion na ang hulút tungúd sináng mga búlak. The
room became fragrant on account of those flowers. Naamionán akó
siní nga búlak, ápang si Fuláno nabahoán. I like the smell of this
flower, but N.N. dislikes it. Ang kalabánan sang mga búlak nga dirâ
sa ámon pamulákan nagapangámion. Most of the flowers in our garden
are fragrant. (cf. kaámion, maámion, pangámion, ámyon, hamút, humút).

_amiríspis_, A small bird.

_amíto_, (Sp. amito) Amice, a square of white linen worn by a priest
on the shoulders below the alb.

_ámlig_, Care, attention, caution; to handle with care, to guard well
or be careful with. Amligí ang bág-o nga kínke. Handle the new lamp
with care. Ginamligán níya ang íya panápton, agúd índì mabulingán. He
was careful with his clothes, lest they should become soiled. Iámlig
akó ánay siní. Please take care of this for me. Paamligán mo sa íya
ang mga báso, agúd nga dílì mabúong. Tell him to handle the glasses
with care, lest they should be broken. Ipaámlig sa íya ang tanán nga
mga galamitón sa baláy. Let him look carefully after all the furniture
in the house. (cf. ándam; kaámlig, mainamlígon).

_amô_, Monkey, ape. Ang ákon ámo may duhá ka amô nga amó ang ginbalígyà
sa íya ni Fuláno. My master has two monkeys that were sold to him
by N.N.

_amô_, To tighten or straighten by pushing and pulling, (as a loom
(terál), so that the cloth to be woven may be even and smooth). Amoá
ang terál. Tighten the loom.

_ámo_, (Sp. amo) Employer, master, lord, boss; proprietor,
owner. (cf. alagarán, palamúgnan, ginúo, tagíya).

_amó_, (H) The same, that. Ang--amó ang--. He--, who--Amó iní. This is
the same i.e. this is it. Amó gid iní. This is the very same. This
is it exactly. Ang matinumánon nga táo amó ang pagabalúsan. The
obedient man is the one who will be rewarded. The obedient man will
be rewarded. Iníng idô amó ang naglagás sa íya. This is the dog that
pursued him. This dog pursued him. Kon amó inâ--. If that is so,
if that is or be the case--. Walâ man akó magapáti sinâ, ápang amó
gid ang íya nga ginsilíng. I do not believe it, but that is what he
really said, (cf. imáw).

_ámo_, To be the same, continue in the same state. The phrase "índì
magkalaámo" means; It will not be the same, implying a great change
(mostly for the worse).

_ámò_, (B) To be--, get--, procure--, share in--, the same kind
of a thing. Amóon ko iníng mga ságing, kay úyon ko. I will get the
same bananas, for I like them. I will get a share of these bananas,
for I like them. Amói akó siníng mga sáhà. Let me have some of these
banana suckers. Ipaámò ko sa ímo ang isá ka pásong siníng bínhì. I'll
let you have a bushel of this seed-grain. Paamói or paamóa akó sináng
mga páhò. Get me some of those mangoes (through somebody else).

_amó-ámo,_ (H) Dim. of amó. To be about the same, to resemble, be
something like. Ang tunúg siníng linggánay nagakaamóámo sa tunúg sang
linggánay sa ámon bánwa. The sound of this bell is nearly the same as
that of the bell in our town. Amóámo silá nga duhá sing kataasón. They
are both of about the same height. (cf. agíd-ágid, anggíd-ánggid).

_amô-ámò,_ Dim. of amô. Also: A game at cards. Nagaamôámò
silá--or--nagahámpang silá sang amôámò. They are playing the game
called amôámò.

_ámog,_ Very touchy, extremely sensitive, thin-skinned, crying upon
the least occasion, etc. Amog nga bátà. A very touchy child. Also:
to be or become touchy, etc. Sán-o pa ikáw magámog? When did you
become so touchy? Since when are you so sensitive? Naamógan kamí
sa íya. We consider him, very touchy. Indì ka maginámog. Don't be
over-sensitive. Indì ka magpatámà sang ímo pagkaámog. Don't go too
far in your sensitiveness. (cf. bingít, pawíkan).

_amoláw,_ (B) To keep vigil, watch, keep or remain awake, to watch over
or by. Nagamoláw silá sa masakít or ginamolawán níla ang masakít. They
watched by the sick person during the night. Iamoláw akó ánay siníng
masakít nga bátà. Please watch over this sick child for me. Ipaamoláw
ko ikáw sa íya. I'll let you watch by him during the night (cf. puláw,
alígmat).

_amolít,_ To harm, damage, injure, spite, do mischief to. Indì ka
magamolít sa ákon--or--índì mo akó pagamolitán. Don't do me any
harm. Don't harm me. Ginamolitán níla ang íya mga tanúm. They did
damage to his plants out of spite. Sarìsárì ang mga pahítò nga íla
gingámit sa pagamolít sang íya pangabúhì. They used various means
to make his life miserable. Madámò nga mga pagbutángbútang ang íla
ginamolít sa íya. They resorted to many calumnies in order to harm
him. Inamolitán níla ang íya kalubihán. They spitefully damaged his
coconut-plantation. (cf. dáut, tístis, panístis).

_amolúgmon,_ A rapacious bird very dangerous to chickens, etc.,
in appearance like an owl, but having small eyes. (cf. murúgmon).

_amóma_, A present or gift of food and drink, hospitable entertainment,
a treat; to entertain, regale, treat, give food and drink to,
etc. Iamóma ko sa íya iníng mga ságing. I'll give him these bananas
as a present. Amomáha siá sing maáyo. Treat him well. Nagamóma silá sa
ámon sing dagáyà nga kalan-ónon. They treated us to plenty of delicate
viands. Ihátag mo sa íya iníng duhá ka búlig nga ságing nga tigáylo
sang kárne nga inamóma níya sa ákon. Give him these two bunches of
bananas in return for the meat he gave me. Maálwan siá sing kamót
sa pagpangamóma sa mga nagadúaw sa íya. He is open-handed in his
treatment of visitors. (cf. aláw).

_amomókol_, An edible mushroom. See amamákol id.

_amomónggo_, A bird of prey like the amolúgmon with the only difference
that the latter is spotted white and black, whilst the amomónggo is
spotted white and red.

_amomótol_, A sort of leprous cancer, starting at the fingers or toes
and slowly eating away whole members of the body.

_amomotolón_, Pertaining to amomótol, one affected with amomótol.

_ámon_, (H) Our, ours, excluding the person spoken to; of, by or
through us; sa ámon--us, to, from, at, on, upon, etc. us. (cf. námon,
ákon).

_amór_, (Sp. amor) Love; amóres--love-affairs, gallantry,
love-stories. (cf. gúgma, paghigúgma, kahagúgma).

_amorókpok_, A bird of prey, a kind of hawk. (cf. amolúgmon).

_amorókpok_, A meteor, shooting-star, meteorite, aerolite, aerolith;
an evil spirit believed to exercise great authority over other evil
spirits.

_ámot_, Contribution, mite, offering, donation; subscription; to
contribute, subscribe, donate, pay a share, donate in common with
others, etc. Magámot kamó. Contribute. You should contribute. Amóti
nínyo ang simbáhan. Contribute for the church fund. Iámot iníng
duhá ka mángmang sa mga nasunúgan sang íla baláy. Contribute
these two pesos for the benefit of those whose houses were burned
down. Amótan nínyo nga tátlo ang ákon báboy. The three of you
should put your money together and buy my pig. May mga paámot
sa madámò nga kinahánglan. Contributions are solicited for many
needs. Paamóta siá sing madámò kay manggaránon man siá. Get
him to contribute a good amount, for he is rich. Madámò ang
walâ pa makahátag sang íla ámot. Many have not yet paid their
contribution--or--subscription. Paamóti sa mga pumulúyò ang áton
hospitál. Get the townspeople to give something in aid of our
hospital. (cf. alamotán, umalamót; báyad, baláyran; tákay).

_amóy_, A term of endearment used when talking to a monkey
(amô). (cf. móy, móy-móy).

_amóy_, Grammatically incorrect, but often used and even printed for
amó ang. Ang timáan sang Sánta Cruz nga amóy ibáwì mo sa ámon--. The
sign of the Holy Cross made use of by Thee as the instrument for
our redemption--.

_ámoy_, A holy man or person, a saint, the picture of a saint; father,
priest, any revered person.

_amoyóng_, (B) To stay, live, take up one's abode. Nagaamoyóng silá
sa umá. They are living at their farm. Ipaamoyóng ko ang ákon masakít
nga bátà sa ínyo baláy sa umá, agúd magáyo ang íya balatían. I'll let
my sick child stay with you at the farm, in order that it may recover
from its sickness. Ang ámon baláy amô ang naamoyongán sang pilasón. Our
house it was in which the wounded man took up his abode. Paamoyongá
iníng makaloló-oy nga babáe sa ímo baláy. Allow this poor woman to
stay at your house. (cf. lúntad, puyô).

_ámpag_, A prominent place, a foremost, reserved or special seat;
to choose a prominent seat, to sit in the front row, take a top seat;
to show off, give oneself airs. Paámpag is mostly used. Dirâ silá sa
ámpag. They are there in the front row. Indì ka magpaámpag. Don't
take a top seat. Don't sit in the front row. Don't show off or be
ostentatious. Nagapaámpag gid siá. She is carrying herself proudly or
showing off. Dílì mo pag-ipaámpag yanáng mga táo. Do not place those
men in the front row. Hándà na ang síya nga igapaámpag ko sa Senyór
Obispo. The chair is now ready which I will place in a prominent
position for His Excellence.

_ampáhan_, A kind of fish, larger than a panít.

_ámpat_, (B) Why, how, for what reason? (cf. ngáa, ándot).

_ampáyo_, (Sp. amparar) Help, assistance; to help, assist, lend a
hand. Ampayóhi siá sa íya mga buluhatón. Help him in his work. Iníng
káro páti karabáw iampáyo ko sa íya sa paghákot sing bató. I will
assist him to carry stones with this cart and buffalo. Paampayóha
sa íya ang ímo sologoón. Let your servant help him or lend him a
hand. (cf. búlig).

_ampílò_, A coarse saddle-cloth, saddle-pad, often only an old sack or
blanket used instead of a saddle by farmers riding on buffaloes, cows
or horses; to use such a saddle-cloth. Nagaampílò siá sing sáko. He is
using a sack as a saddle-cloth. Ampilói ang báka. Put a saddle-cloth
on the back of the cow. Paampilói ang karabáw. Order someone to put
a saddle-cloth on the buffalo. Iníng dáan nga hábul iampílò ko sa
kabáyo. I will make use of this old blanket as a saddle-cloth for
the horse. (cf. síya).

_ámpin_, Favour, sympathy, support, help, partnership; supporter,
sympathizer, helper; to take sides with, to help or support. Walâ siá
sing ámpin. He has no-one to support him, or he has no-one to back
him up. Kon walâ ka sing ámpin índì ka makadaúg. If you have no help
you cannot win. Iníng pányo ilámpin ko sa bátà nga bílang iámpin sa
hángin. I'll wrap the child up in this cloth as a protection against
the wind. Ampiní siá. Support him. Back him up. Itípyok ko ang tanán
ko nga mga ginsakúpan nga ipaámpin ko sa ímo. I will hand over all
my followers to your support. Sín-o ang nagámpin sa íya? Who gave
him a backing? (cf. ápin).

_ámpis_, (B) A Philippine woman's skirt; to use or wear such
a skirt. Nagaámpis siá sing pulá. She wears a red skirt. Ampisí
siá. Put a skirt on her. Paampisí siá. Make somebody put a skirt on
her or provide her with a skirt. Ampisón ko lang iníng hábul. I'll
make a skirt of this blanket, I'll make this blanket serve as a
skirt. Iámpis mo ang ámpis. Put on your skirt. Indì ka na magbistído,
kóndì magámpis ka gid. Don't wear a short dress any more, but put on
a skirt. (cf. patádyong, tápis).

_ámpit_, To call to, call by name, draw one's attention by pronouncing
his name in a loud voice. Ampitá siá. Call him. (cf. tawág, sínggit).

_ámpit_, An act or speech of insolence or contempt, insult, affront;
to insult, affront. (cf. úmpit id. and the more usual form).

_ámpò_, Prayer, petition, request, to pray, beseech, ask, beg,
petition, request. Nagaámpò akó, or ginaámpò ko nga--. I pray,
that--. Iámpò mo akó sa Diós. Please, pray to God for me. Ginaampoán ko
ikáw ánay siníng duhá ka mángmang nga ákon útang túbtub nga makítà ko
ang ikabáyad sa ímo. I beg of you to wait a little with regard to those
two pesos I owe you till I find the money to pay you with. Ampò ka sa
hukóm, básì kalo-óyan ikáw níya. Petition the judge, may be he will
have compassion with you. Mangámpò akó. I surrender; I give in; I ask
for mercy. (An expression often used by one beaten at wrestling, boxing
or the like). Ginámpò ko sa íya inâ, ápang walâ níya pag-ihátag sa
ákon. I asked him for it, but he did not give it to me. (cf. pangáyò,
pangamúyò, pakilóoy, ahâ, etc.; magalámpò--intercessor, patron).

_amúlya_, (Sp. amollar) To ease off, shift a little; to go to, to
go. Usually paamúlya is employed. Diín ka mapaamúlya? Where are you
going to? Diín ka magpaamúlya? Where have you been? Where are you
coming from? (cf. kádto, pakádto).

_amumúklid_, Fungus, mushroom, toadstool. (cf. amomókol, amamákol).

_ámyon_, Fragrance, etc. See amión.

_-an_, A suffix which goes to form nouns, adjectives, and verbs,
and conveys the fundamental meaning of "the place where". Note:
This meaning is very clear in place-names, e.g. Batoán--the place
where there are stones, from bató--stone; Balásan--the place where
there is sand, from balás--sand; Tigbáwan--the place where there is
tígbaw-reed, from tígbaw--reed, etc.
NOUNS: 1) Likóan--a turning, a lane, from likô--to turn aside;
Tuburán--a spring, source, from tubúd--to trickle; Lapakán--a treadle,
from lápak--to tread, etc.
2) The suffix -an in conjunction with the prefix ka- goes to form
abstract and collective nouns, e.g. Kasugtánan--agreement, from
sugút--to agree; Kakahóyan--forest, trees, from káhoy--tree, wood;
Kabatáan--children, from bátà--child, baby; Kataóhan--men, mankind,
from táo--man; Kabulúyhan--habit, custom, from buyó--to accustom, etc.
ADJECTIVES: Isganán--brave, powerful, from ísug--to be or become
brave; Manggáran--rich, wealthy, from mánggad--wealth, property;
Gamhánan--mighty, powerful, from gahúm--might, power; Pahóan--one
who possesses many mango-trees, from páhò--a mango-tree, etc.
VERBS: -an goes to form what is called "the passive in -an", and
denotes:
1) the place where an action (expressed by the root) is performed,
e.g. Ang alipokpokán siníng bakólod pagapatindogán ko sang bág-o ko nga
baláy. I will build my new house on the top of this hill. (patíndog--to
erect, build). Amó iní ang lugár nga linúbngan níla sa kay Fuláno. This
is the place where they buried (the body of) N.N. (lubúng--to bury).
2) the person for whose benefit, or to whose detriment, an action
(expressed by the root) is performed, e.g. Ginbuhátan níya akó sing
asálan. He made a roasting spit for me. (búhat--to make). Indì mo siá
paghimóan sing maláin. Don't harm him. (hímò--to do, with maláin--to
do harm).
3) an impression, affection, sensation, mental state, or the like,
e.g. Natahumán akó sinâ. That impressed me with its beauty. That
appeared to me quite nice, (tahúm--to be or become nice,
beautiful). Nalas-ayán akó sa íya. I am disgusted with him. He is
abominable to me. (lás-ay--to be or become insipid). Nagin-otán
akó. I feel it sultry. (gínot--to be or become sultry). Ginaitumán
akó siníng báyò. This dress (jacket)--looks black to me,--is too
black for me. (itúm--to be or become black), etc.
N.B. It should be borne in mind that the context alone can
determine the exact meaning of -an. "Naadlawán akó"--to quote
only one example--means: "Full daylight was (came) upon me". But
in connection with what may precede or follow this phrase can
be translated in various ways, e.g. "I stayed till (late in the)
morning". "I continued to do something without interruption till the
sun stood high in the heavens". "I arrived in bright daylight (and
came--too late,--too soon,--in time)". "I passed part of the day,
or a full day", etc. Hence the translations given in this dictionary
are not exclusive of other versions.

_ána_, Information, news. (Now obsolete; see pakiána--to inquire, ask).

_ána_, (B) His, her, hers, its. See íya, níya. Ana gid diá nga
salâ. (íya gid iníng salâ). This fault is undoubtedly his.

_ánad_, To practise, exercise, accustom to, train, break in,
perform regularly or habitually. Anára ang batásan mo nga dílì
ka na magpamuyáyaw. Try to get the habit of not using profane
language--or--acquire the habit of not cursing and swearing. Naánad
na akó dirí siníng lugár. I am now accustomed to this place. Indì
akó maánad siníng lugár. I cannot accustom myself to this
place. Naanáran--or--naándan ko na iníng lugár. I am now familiar
with--, accustomed to--, this place. Ipaánad ko sa ímo iníng karabáw
nga simarón. I'll hand this wild buffalo over to you to be trained or
tamed. Magpaánad ka siní nga trabáho. Try to exercise--, practise--,
accustom yourself to--, this kind of work (cf. hánas, ságad, batíd).

_anád_, Experienced, practised, expert, adept, well versed in,
accustomed, trained, broken in. (cf. sagád, batíd).

_anád-ánad_, Dim. of ánad. Ginaanád-ánad níya ang íya ginháwa sa
pagtabakô. He is gradually contracting a habit of smoking.

_anagás_, A kind of tree and its edible fruit, from which the kernel
protrudes as in the kasóy.

_anáhaw_, A kind of palm.

_anák_, Child, son, daughter; godson, goddaughter; to give birth to,
to bear a child, to be delivered of a child, to bring forth; to be
godfather or godmother to a child at baptism or confirmation. Naganák
siá sing isá ka laláki. She gave birth to a male-child, she was
delivered of a boy. Iníng bátà ginanák ni Fulána. This child was born
of N.N.--or--N.N. was godmother to this child. Buót ko ipaanák sa
ímo iníng bátà. I should like you to be godfather (godmother) to this
child. Manganák siá sa Sábado. He will be godfather on Saturday. Anka
(ángka) iníng bátà. Be godfather (godmother) to this baby. Ang íla mga
inanák. Their children or offspring. Anák--or--inanák siá sang isá ka
panimaláy nga lutáw. He was of noble family, of good family. (cf. bátà;
alángkon).

_anák-ának_, Foster-child, an adopted son or daughter.

_anamán_, Lath, small board or slip of wood nailed to the rafters
and supporting the roofing; a rib, purlin. (cf. hawák).

_anám-anám_, Caution, circumspection, wariness; to be careful, wary, to
beware, be cautious, act with circumspection or precaution. Anám-anamá
gid ang paglápak mo sa pántaw, káy básì magubâ. Be careful how you
walk on the kitchen-balcony, for it may give way. Anám-anamí gid iníng
táytay sa ímo paglakát. Walk cautiously over this bridge. (cf. ándam,
tagám).

_án-an_, A kind of tree.

_ananáy_, Quiet, noiselessness, tranquillity; quiet, gentle, tranquil,
noiseless; to do quietly or noiselessly, perform without bustle. Ananáy
ka sa pagbángon mo, agúd índì makibót ang mga nagakatulúg. Rise
quietly, lest the sleepers should be startled. Ananayá ang paghákwat
sang kólon, agúd índì mabúong. Lift the pot slowly (carefully), so
as not to break it. Iananáy akó ánay sa paghákwat siníng masakít
nga táo. Please, lift this sick man gently. (cf. hínay, mahínay,
inanáy, alugáynay).

_anáno_, (H) What; of what kind, condition or quality; What? Of what
kind? What is the definition, explanation or meaning of--? Anáno ang
pagkaláwat? What is Communion? What does Communion mean? Makahibaló
ikáw kon anáno ang pagkaláwat? Do you know what Communion
is? Can you give a definition or explanation of the meaning
of Communion? (cf. náno, anó; "anó" and "anáno" are often used
promiscuously, though they are not quite identical in meaning; "anó"
refers simply to the thing itself or asks its name, whilst "anáno"
inquires into the real aim, purpose, explanation or definition of a
thing together with its qualities, use, utility, etc. Anó iní? What is
this? What is the name of this? What do you call this? Anáno iní? What
kind of thing is this? What are the qualities, use, purpose, utility,
etc. of this?

_anánoy_, (H) A contraction that stands for "anáno ang". Like the
similar contraction "amóy--amó ang" it is grammatically incorrect,
but not infrequently employed. Anánoy salâ? What is sin?

_ánao_, Deluge, flood; to deluge, flood. Dáw maánao. It looks as if
a deluge is coming. (cf. ánaw id.).

_ánas_, The reach, sweep or range of fire over dry grass, leaves,
shrubs etc., as in jungle-burning (kaingín); to overrun, sweep over,
said of fire. Iníng dútà inágyan sang ánas. This land was overrun by
fire. Kon may kaingín dirâ maanásan man iníng dútà. If a kaingín-fire
is started over there, this land also will be overrun by the flames.

_ánaw_, See ánao.

_ánay_, White ants, termites. (cf. lúlid--the queen of white ants).

_ánay_, First, before something else; Wait a little! Have a little
patience. Kindly--. Be good enough to--. Please. Makádto pa akó ánay
dídto. First I'll go there. Hulát ánay. Wait a little. Anay! Have a
little patience! Wait a little! Bulígi akó ánay. Kindly help me. Anay
pa. Forbear still a little. Tabángi akó ánay, kon mga saráng. Be good
enough to help me, if possible.

_-ánay_, A suffix denoting reciprocity. Nagahigugmaánay silá. They
love each other. Nagsondánay silá. They followed one another. At
times "ánay" is shortened to "-ay". Nakasugataáy silá. They met each
other. Nakakitaáy silá. They saw each other.

_ánda_, (B) Their, theirs. Anda diá nga nióg. (Ila iníng lubí). This
coconut is theirs--, belongs to them. (cf. íla).

_ándak_, To boast, brag; boasting, bragging. Nagaándak silá sing
támà. They are boasting too much. (cf. hágak, wákal, etc.).

_andadór_, (Sp. andador) A kind of baby-carriage on rollers or small
wheels made use of in teaching little babies to walk.

_ándam_, Caution, wariness, carefulness, prudence, circumspection;
to be cautious, to beware, to be careful, wary, circumspect. Andamá
ang pagkapút sang báso, agúd índì makapalús sa kamót mo. Grasp the
glass carefully, lest it should slip out of your hand. Andamí iníng
báso. Handle this glass with care. Paandamí sa íla iníng karabáw, kay
palasúngay. Let them beware of this buffalo, for it tosses. Iándam akó
ánay siníng báso. Kindly take care of this glass for me. Inandamán
níla gid ang síngsing, agúd índì madúlà. They were very careful
with the ring, lest it should be lost. Ipaándam ko sa ímo iníng
taknáan. I entrust this watch to your care. Andam ka! Beware! Be on
your guard! Look out! (cf. anám-anám, tagám).

_andámio_, (Sp. andamio) Gangplank, gangway, gangboard, a narrow
framework or platform for the passage of vehicles and pedestrians;
scaffold; to use or apply a gangboard, etc. Butangí sing andámio ang
baróto. Place a gangplank on the ferryboat. Andamiohí ang alágyan. Put
a gangplank where the people pass. Iandámio ko iníng tápì. I'll use
this board as a gangway. Andamiohá iníng káhoy. Make a gangway out of
this wood. Paandamiohán mo sa íla ang sakayán, agúd makasákà ang mga
sumalákay. Let them put a gangway to the boat, that the passengers
may be able to go on board. (cf. latayán).

_ándan_, For anáran from ánad--to accustom, practise, etc.

_andána_, (Sp. andana) File, line, row, tier; to walk in file or
line. Ang mga soldádo nagaandána. The soldiers walk in file. Paandanáha
silá. Make them, or let them, march in line. (cf. ídas, kóro).

_ándas_, (Sp. andas) A bier, litter or stretcher with shafts;
a pedestal for a statue, fitted with shafts for carrying in a
procession. (cf. ándras id.).

_ándo_, (Perhaps from the Sp. andar) One go, push, jerk, toss or
pull; to take--, lift--, pull off--, with a jerk, etc. Andohá ang
baráha. Lift the card--or--take off one card after another from the
pack. Isá lang níya ka pagándo (ándo) ang isá ka pínggan nga laúya. He
just gulps down in one go a plateful of boiled meat. (cf. gólpe,
hinálì).

_ándot_, (B) How? Why? How is that? How was that? Andot haw? Why? How
was (is) that? (cf. ngáa, ámpat, tungúd sa anó, paáno).

_ándras_, See ándas.

_anékdota_, (Sp. anécdota) Anecdote, story, yarn. (cf. súgid, ági,
tabô, inágyan, etc.).

_ang_, The definite article: The. Ang baláy. The house. Ang káhoy. The
tree or wood. In many instances the Visayan language uses the definite
article where it is left out in English, e.g. Ang Diós, ang lángit,
ang pagkaláwat, ang bádlis, ang Manílà, ang Ameriká, ang pagkalipát,
etc. God, heaven, Communion, Extreme Unction, Manila, America,
forgetfulness, etc. (cf. si).

_angá_ Pretending to be deaf, stubborn, acting as if not hearing;
to be or become stubborn, etc. Angá nga bátà. A child that pretends
not to hear--or--is stubborn. Ginaangaán kamí sa íya. We consider
him stubborn, we get the impression that he merely pretends not to
hear. (cf. ágbà).

_angá_, Half-witted, idiot, (cf. hángà, balingá, balingág, tipangág).

_angá_, A small fish, very small tabyós-fish; small fry.

_angán_, (B) To wait for, to expect. Anganá akó sing diótay nga
hóras. Wait for me a little while. Iníng kán-on iangán ko sa kay
tátay. This cooked rice I am keeping in expectation of father's
coming. Nagaalipasá akó sa pagpaúlì, kay ginaangán akó níla sa
pagpanyága. I am in a hurry to get home, for they are waiting for me
to come to dinner--or--are waiting dinner for me. (cf. hulát).

_angán-angán_, Dim. of angán. To wait a little, etc.

_áng-ang_, To stammer, to stutter; stammering, stuttering. Nagaáng-ang
siá kon maghámbal. He stammers when he talks. Indì ka magáng-ang sing
támà. Try not to stammer so much. (cf. gágo; pihít, hát-on).

_ángay_, Match, equality, suitability, propriety, fitness; matched,
equal, suitable, proper, fit, adapted, proportioned; to be well
matched, equal, suitable, fit, etc. Waláy ángay nga kalípay. A joy or
pleasure that has no equal. Iníng báyò ángay gid sa ímo. This jacket
fits you well. Dílì ángay inâ. That is not proper, is unharmonious,
is out of proportion, etc. Dílì magángay sa ímo iníng kálò. This hat
does not suit--, fit--, you. Iníng bátà maangayán gid sináng bistído,
duág, etc. That short dress, colour, etc. will suit this girl very
well. (cf. ányò).

_angayán_, Fit, fitting, proper, suitable, right. (cf. anyóan).

_angáy-ángay_, Dim. of ángay. Also: To compare. Angáy-angáya silá
nga duhá kon nagaparého ang íla kataasón. Compare the two of them to
find out whether they are equal in height. Angáy-ángay ang íla guyá,
ang duág sang íla báyò, etc. They have pretty much the same face, the
colour of their jackets is about the same, etc. (cf. anggíd-ánggid).

_ánggà_, Petting, fondling; to pet or fondle. Anggaá ang bátà. Pet
the child. (cf. dálò; palánggà).

_anggaán_, A pet child, a child spoilt by too much fondling or
indulgence. (ánggà).

_ánggid_. Likeness, similarity, resemblance, similitude; like, similar,
resembling; to be like or similar to, to compare with. Walâ sing ánggid
sa íla nga duhá. There is no resemblance between the two. Anggid silá
nga duhá--or--nagaánggid silá nga duhá. The two of them resemble
each other--or--are like each other. Ang kápid nagaánggid gid. The
twins are very much like each other--or--very much alike. Iánggid
(but better "ipaánggid") iníng estampíta sa isá, kay tan-awón ko kon
parého silá. Compare this picture with the one there, for I want to
see, whether they are alike or resemble each other. Paanggidí ang
patádyong ko, kon maghabúl ka sang ímò. Imitate or copy my skirt,
when you weave one for yourself. (cf. agid-ágid).

_anggíd-ánggid_, Dim. of ánggid. Nearly alike, something like, similar,
resembling a little, etc. (cf. agíd-ágid, apít-ápit).

_ánggot_, To get used to take proper food, to get a liking for, or to
relish, proper food, applied especially to a baby or to a young animal
just weaned. Sang úna iníng tínday nagdolodámgot (nagdolodánggot)
lang sang hilamón, ápang karón nagánggot na sa halálbon. Formerly
this calf used only to nibble at the grass, but now it is beginning
to graze. Bisán lutasón na iníng bátà, kay maánggot na sa pagkáon
sing kán-on. There is no harm now in weaning this baby, because it
already likes to eat rice.

_anggóy_, An exclamation of pain and grief. Oh, dear me! (cf. aragóy,
agóy).

_ánghaw_, To look out of a window, watch, observe, gaze out, thrust out
or pop out one's head, to visit, inspect, oversee, superintend. Anghawá
kon sín-o ang árà sa idálum. Pop out your head and see who is down
there. Anghawí kamí dirí sa sílong sang baláy. Look down at us here
underneath the house. Iánghaw sa ámon ang ímong nawóng. Show us your
face. Walâ ka gid magánghaw sa ábyan mo nga nagmasakit. You have not
visited your friend who has fallen sick. (cf. gáwa, láaw, lántaw;
bísta, bisíta, dúaw).

_angháw-ánghaw_, Dim. and Freq. of ánghaw. Angháwanghawá kamí dirâ,
agúd makatúdlò ka sa ámon sa paghíkot siní sing maáyo. Visit us over
there that you may show us how to arrange it well.

_ánghit_, Goat's smell; to smell like a goat or buck. Ginabahoán kamí
dirí sang ánghit. We are annoyed here by a smell like the smell of
a goat. Ang kánding nagaánghit. The goat stinks. Naanghitán akó sang
katsúrì. I smell the goatish smell of a katsúrì (a kind of fieldmouse
or rat with an obnoxious smell). Ginaanghitán kamí dirí. We smell a
goat here.

_ánghod_, A term of endearment usually addressed to Negritos: Friend,
deary, my dear man. Anghod, diín ka makádto (maágtò)? Friend, where
are you going to?

_ánghol_, The smell of perspiration; to smell of
perspiration. Ginaangholán akó sang ímo mga médyas. I notice the smell
of your socks. Nagaánghol ikáw, kay walâ ka pagpalígos. You smell of
perspiration, because you never take a bath.

_angilá_, See anilâ, alingá. Angilahá ang mga bátà. Watch--, look
after--, the children.

_angingípot_, (H) The fire-bug, firefly, (cf. aninípot, ipót-ípot).

_ángka_, To please oneself, do as one likes, eat, drink, etc. as
much as one likes. Angkahán lang nínyo ang pagkáon, kay manámit
kag dagáyà. Eat as much as you like, for the food is good and
plentiful. (cf. kánkan).

_ángkab_, A snap, bite; to snap, bite, seize suddenly with the
teeth. Ginángkab siá sang idô. He was bitten by the dog. Angkabá
siá. Snap him. Angkabí lang sing diótay iníng páhò. Just take a bite
of this mango. Hípus ka, kay kon dílì ipaángkab ko ikáw sa ákon
idô. Be silent, otherwise I'll get my dog to bite you. (cf. ikíb,
ínkib, kíbkib, kítkit, áb-ab, áp-ap, ót-ot).

_ángkag_, (B) The peeled off layers or folds of a banana-stem or other
stalk similar to it in construction. (cf. tinúb-an, úpas, búnlak).

_ángkak_, A kind of reddish pepper-like seasoning for fish, etc.

_ángkas_, To ride behind someone else, to accompany somebody on
the same riding animal, bicycle, automobile, etc. Angkasí nínyo
nga duná ang ákon kabáyo. Ride on my horse, the two of you, one
behind the other. Ginangkasán níla ang ákon karabáw. They rode on my
buffalo. Iángkas lang ang bakág. Simply take the basket along (on
horseback, etc). Iángkas mo akó siníng bakág. Please take along on
the back of the buffalo, etc. this basket. Buót ka magángkas? Would
you like to get up behind me? Paangkasá akó. Let me get up behind
you. Let me accompany you. Ginpaángkas níya akó sa íya karabáw. He
allowed me to get up behind him on the back of his buffalo.

_ángkat_, An open seam, a joint, a chink or crack; to get loose, to
loosen, to prise apart, to form chinks or cracks, to lose connection
with, said of seams, junctures, joints and the like. Nagángkat ang
kinitáan sang lamésa. The joints between the boards of the table
opened. Ginpaángkat sang pánday ang tápì sa (íya) kinitáan. The
carpenter forced the board loose at its joint.

_ángkat_, (B) Buying on credit,--on account,--on tick; to obtain
on credit, to buy on account. Angkatí akó sing duhá ka metros nga
kóko. Get me on credit two meters of white cloth. Angkatá lang
inâ. Just buy it on credit. Ipaángkat sa ákon iníng bunáng. Let me
have this yarn on credit. Angkatí man akó siníng sapátos, kay hulatón
ko man ikáw sa pagbáyad túbtub sa lapás ang piésta. Take also these
boots from me on credit, for I am willing to wait for your payment
till after the feast. Paangkatá lang akó sinâ. Simply give me that on
credit. (cf. the foregoing "ángkat"; the connection between the two
is obvious. They are really the same term, whose first meaning is
"to get loose seams, etc." and whose secondary meaning is "to get
loose merchandise, etc." i.e. "to get or obtain on credit").

_ángkat_, To challenge, etc. See ákyat, hángkat.

_ángkob_, The beater or handle attached to the reed in a loom and
used to beat the weft closely up against the web.

_ángkod_, Incisor, front-tooth, (cf. sígmit--eyetooth, canine;
bág-ang--grinder, molar tooth; panúok--wisdom-tooth).

_ángkon_, From anák.

_ángkon_, To acquire, take or get possession of,
appropriate. Magapaninguhâ gid akó sa pagángkon sinâ nga dútà. I
will make great efforts to get possession of that land. Angkoná
lang inâ. Just make it your own. Ipaángkon ko sa ímo iníng báka,
kon magbáyad ka sa ákon sang matárung níya nga bilí. I'll let you
have this cow, if you pay me a fair price for it. Ginángkon níya ang
salâ. He took the blame upon himself.

_ángkop_, To close well, to shut or lock a door, etc. properly. Angkopá
ang ganháan, ang ba-úl, talamwáan, etc. Lock the door, trunk,
window, etc. Básì nga walâ siá dirâ sa íya hulút, kay naángkop ang
mga bintánà. Perhaps he is not in his room, for the windows are
shut. (cf. será, dápat, háom, háup).

_ángkwa_, (B) What's his name. What d'ye call it. A thingummy,
thingumbob. (cf. kwan).

_ángkwan, angkwán_, See ángkwa id.

_ánglit_, A small cooking-pot used chiefly to boil small quantities
of rice in. (cf. alóphop, halóphop--to cook a little rice, mostly
done in the ánglit).

_anglít-ánglit_, Dim. of ánglit. Anything resembling a small
cooking-pot. The phrase "nagaanglít-ánglit silá nga duhá" is often
used in connection with quarrelling couples, cooking and eating their
meals separately.

_angód_, (B) Yet, still, at this or that time, thus far,
hitherto. Warâ angód tána magabút. (Walâ pa siá magabút). He has not
come yet. (cf. pa, gihápon).

_angól_, (B) Close-fisted, miserly, selfish, greedy. (cf. hangúl,
hákug, ímot, maóg).

_angól-angól_, Dim. and Freq. of angól. See hangúl-hangúl id.

_angól-angól_, Botched, bungled, clumsy, not
well--done,--performed,--wrought,--cooked; etc.; to
do--carelessly,--lazily,--clumsily, to bungle, botch. (cf. agól-agól,
balotanóg, bástos, barághal, barúbal, manól).

_angót_, To join, tie, fasten, bind, connect. Angta (angotá) ang
higót. Join the ends of the string. Angti ang tímbà sang kalát. Fasten
the bucket to the rope. Iangót ang isá ka písì sa isá. Connect one
cord with the other. Angta ang kalát. Splice the rope. (cf. higót,
gáid, bángot, bangót, gôos, balíghot),

_ángot_, To follow close, cling--, stick--, adhere--, to; to
be--with,--connected with,--attached to. Ang bátà nagaángot sa íya
ilóy. The child clings to its mother. Ginaangótan siníng anák ang íya
ilóy sa bisán diín siá magkádto. This child follows its mother wherever
she goes. Ipaángot mo ang bátà sa íya tíyà. Let the child be with--,
remain near--, its aunt. Nagaangtánay (nagaalángot, nagaalalángot)
silá nga tanán. They are all united, attached to--, connected with--,
one another. (cf. amág, tábid, únung).

_ángrus_, The smell of a goat. (cf. ánghit).

_ángso_, (B) The smell of urine; to smell of urine. Naangsohán akó
sang rabanós. The smell of the radishes seemed to me like that of
urine. (cf. pángsot, pánsot).

_ángsod_, The smell of the armpit; to smell of the armpit. Naangsorán
akó sang íya bálhas. His perspiration smelt (smelled) to me like the
smell of the armpit.

_angsodón_, (B) One who suffers from strong smelling armpits.

_angsorón_, (H) See angsodón id.

_ángtan_, For angotán from angót--to fasten to, etc.

_ángtod_, The smell of burned or scorched food. See ántod, antóos.

_ánhel_, anhél, (Sp. angel) Angel, a heavenly spirit; a small child
that dies before coming to the use of reason.

_anhél-ánhel_, Dim. of ánhel. Anything bearing some resemblance to an
angel as commonly pictured, especially used with regard to children
representing angels at the "Sugatán" on Easter Sunday.

_anhelíto_, Another Dim. of ánhel; a small child.

_ánhing_, The late, defunct, deceased. Si ánhing Hosé. The late Joseph.

_áni_, The rice-harvest; to harvest rice by means of a small
rice-cutter called a "kayóg". Magaáni kamí sa buás. We will harvest
rice tomorrow. Ania or ánya ang humáy mo, kay gúlang na. Harvest your
rice, for it is ripe. Iníng talámnan sang maís ginánian or ginányan
ko sang duhá ka búlan. I got a crop of rice from this corn-field
two months ago. Mangáni or manganíhan pa kamí. We are going to work
at harvesting rice. Indì mo pagpaaníhon ang mga táo sa ádlaw nga
Domíngo kon waláy kabangdánan nga dakô. Don't order--, permit--,
the people to harvest rice on Sunday without grave reason. Ginpaáni
ko sa íla ang tungâ sang ákon humáy kag ang tungâ ginpagálab ko sa
íla. I let them harvest one half of my rice with the rice-cutter
(kayóg), and one half I ordered them to cut with the sickle. Indì na
nákon pag-ipaáni sa táo ang ákon talámnan, kóndì ipagálab ko lang, kay
pagahimúslan ko man ang dagámi. I will no longer permit the harvesters
to cut the rice on my field with the kayóg, but I will order them to
cut it with the sickle, for then I shall get some profit out of the
straw as well. (cf. alányon, alaníhon--rice to be harvested).

_aníb_, A layer, stratum, course (of bricks, etc.); a sheet, board;
pile, stack; to arrange by laying one thing on top of another, said of
leaves, sheets, boards and the like. Anibá ang mga papél, tulún-an,
tápì, etc. Lay the papers, books, boards, etc. nicely one on top of
the other. Ianíb ang mga tápì sa idálum sang baláy--or--anibí ang
idálum sang baláy sang mga tápì. Put the boards neatly one on top of
the other on the ground-floor of the house. (cf. kamáda).

_aníla_, A hive; a cluster or swarm of bees, etc. May duhá ka aníla
sang putyókan dirâ. There are two swarms of bees over there.

_anilâ_, To watch, supervise, etc. See alingá id.

_anílaw_, A kind of tree somewhat resembling a baláyong, but less
valuable for building purposes.

_aniláwan_, Full of--, having many--, anílaw-trees.

_anílyo_, (Sp. anillo) A small ring, hoop, circular
band. (cf. síngsing).

_animál_, (Sp. animal) Animal, beast, brute; dunce, blockhead,
a brutal fellow. (cf. sápat, háyup).

_ánimas_, (Sp. ánimas) The ringing of the churchbell in memory of
the Souls in Purgatory. The usual time for the ringing of this bell
is at 8 o'clock p.m.

_ánimo_, (Sp. ánimo) Life, energy, will power; understanding,
reason. Walâ siá sing ánimo. He has no energy. He lacks
understanding. (cf. kabúhì, kapísan, kaísug; kalibútan, pangalibútan).

_anínas_, The flame--, blaze--, flare--, of a fire. Abáw, katáas
sang anínas. Oh, how high the flames are shooting up! (cf. sáblab,
íbwal, ánas).

_anínaw_, Picture, reflection of a mirror, model, type; to look
into a mirror, to keep before one's eyes, to study as a model
or type to be imitated, etc. Panganínaw is mostly used for the
verb. Manganínaw ka sa íya. Study and imitate him. Ikáw ang dáyon ko
nga ginapanganináwan. I have your picture constantly before me. Siá
gid ang ákon ginapanganináwan. He is my model. (cf. panganínaw,
palanganináwan).

_aníng_, (B) An exclamation of joy, wonder or surprise. Aníng,
nagabút ka galî! So you have really come. What a surprise! Kay sin-o
ináng baláy nga tísà?--Kay Fuláno.--Aníng! Whom does that brick-house
belong to?--It belongs to N.N.--Is that so? I am astonished to hear
it. (cf. abáw, abá, kananáks).

_aningál_, Echo; to hear an echo. Ginaaningál ko ang matám-is níya
nga tíngug. I hear the echo of his (her) sweet voice. (cf. aniníngal).

_aniníngal_, Echo, repercussion, reverberation; to echo, reecho,
to reverberate, etc. Sa siní nga lugár may aniningal--or--sa siní
nga lugár nagaaniníngal ang tíngug. In this place there is an
echo--or--sounds are here reechoed.

_aninípot_, (H) Fire-bug, fire-fly. (cf. ipót-ípot, angingípot).

_aníno_, Shadow, outline, trace, silhouette, often used as a figure of
speech. Walâ akó sing aníno sa paglakát dirâ. I have not the shadow
of a thought or intention of going there. Walâ sing aníno ang tiémpo
nga magaulán sa madalî. It does not look at all as if it were going
to rain soon. (cf. lándong; tándà).

_anípay_, A whitlow. See típay.

_aníra_, See aníla--bee-hive.

_ánis_, (Sp. anis) Anise, anise-seed.

_anít_, Flayed, peeled; fleeced; one who has lost heavily in gambling,
speculation, or the like. (cf. ánit).

_ánit_, To flay, to peel or strip off the skin, etc. Aníti ang
karabáw. Flay the buffalo. Aníta ang pánit. Strip off the skin. Iánit
sa iníhaw nga báka iníng binángon. Use this bolo to flay the
slaughtered cow. (cf. ák-ak, bákbak, úpak).

_aníto_, Superstitious practices, ceremonies and sacrifices; to make
use of or perform superstitious rites. Indì ka magpáti sináng mga aníto
nga walâ sing naigoán. Don't believe in those superstitious practices
that are so nonsensical. Ginanitóhan níla siá. He was subjected by
them to superstitious rites. (cf. diwáta, babáylan, diósdíos).

_ánkla_, (Sp. ancla) Anchor; to anchor. Ihúlug ang ánkla. Drop or
cast anchor. Batáka ang ánkla. Hoist anchor. Anklahí ang bapór. Anchor
the steamer. (cf. sinipít).

_anó_, What; what?; Also used as a verb. Bisán anó or bisán kon
anó. Whatever, whatsoever. Anó man ang íya sinâ nga kahulúgan? What is
the meaning of that? Anó iní? What is this? Ginaanó mo ang idô? What
are you doing to the dog? Anhon mo? What will--, can you--, do? Paanó
kamó dirâ? How are you there? How are you getting on there? Maanó
kamó? What do you want? Nagaanó kamó dirí? What are you doing
here? (cf. anáno).

_áno_, (Sp. ano) Anus. (cf. kalipunát, kilipután, palamus-ónan).

_áno_, To claim, lay claim to, appropriate, take possession of; to
choose, select, prefer. Indì ka magáno sang dílì ímo. Don't appropriate
what does not belong to you. Ngáa man, nga anóhon mo ang íya sang
ibán? Why are you laying claim to what belongs to another? Gináno
níya ang dútà ni Fuláno. He took N.N.'s land. Ngáa man nga nagapangáno
ka? Why are you claiming everything? (said of one who claims everything
that has no apparent owner). Anó balá ang ímo anóhon, ang lángit ukón
ang inpiérno? What will you choose, heaven or hell? (cf. ángkon; pílì).

_ánod_, To float, glide or swim along the surface of a fluid, to
carry off (of liquids). Ginánod sang subâ ang ákon dútà. The river
carried off my land. Andamí ang imó nga káhoy nga malapít sa subâ,
kay básì anóron (anódon) sang sulúg. Look after your timber lying
near the river, for it may be carried off by the current. Ang kawáyan
nga pulúnton ginapaánod sa subâ. Bamboos for fish-traps are floated
down the river. Ipaánod--or--paanóra (paanóda) ang káhoy. Float the
wood. Get the wood down by floating. Paanóri (paanódi) ang túbig sing
kawáyan. Throw a bamboo in to float on the water. (cf. utáw-útaw,
lutáw, kútaw).

_anók_. Well cooked, boiled till soft. Anók nga kán-on, lánkà, kamóti,
etc. Rice boiled till soft, a well cooked jackfruit, thoroughly done
sweet potatoes, etc.

_ánok_, To boil soft, to cook well, especially said of all kinds of
tubers and vegetables. Tánki akó sing kamóti kag anókon mo. Boil some
sweet potatoes for me and cook them well. Ginaánok níya na ang mga
patátas, kay nakasáyod siá nga índì gid akó kaúyon sang talangkónon
nga latâ ukón alibútdan. She now boils the potatoes properly, for she
knows, that I do not at all like tubers that are overdone or underdone.

_anónang_, A tree whose fruit yields a sticky, viscous juice from
which mucilage is prepared.

_anónas_, A tree with edible fruit.

_anóng_, (B) An exclamation used to emphasize a statement:
Why! Surely! Certainly! There is no doubt about it. Tî, kon
amó inâ nga walâ ka paghúgud sa pagtoón, índì ka makabáton sing
prémyo. Anóng! Indì balá? Why, if you won't study diligently, you
won't receive a prize. That is certain! Is it not?

_anonóo_, A kind of banana whose fruit is not round, but has rather
sharp ridges with flat surfaces between. (cf. sáb-a, ságing; katsíla,
morádo, túndal, pákol, lisóhan).

_ános_, Phthisis, consumption, tuberculosis; to give or cause
consumption. May ános siá or ginaános siá. He has consumption. Inános
siá. He is consumptive. (cf. ás-as).

_anosón_, Consumptive, phthisical. (cf. as-asón).

_ansyáno_, (Sp. anciano) Old, aged, ancient, stricken in years;
clever, expert, experienced. (cf. alensyáno id.).

_ánsyas_, (Sp. ansia, ansiar) Eagerness, anxiety, desire for; to be
eager, anxious, to desire, hanker after or crave; want; to dissemble
or hide one's eagerness, to refuse or decline only apparently. May
ánsyas siá sa pagtoón, paglakát, paghalín, etc. He is anxious to
study, to walk, to go away, etc. Nagaánsyas siá sa pakigáway. He is
eager for a fight. Ansyasí ang pagbátok mo sa íya. Show that you are
eager to oppose him. Iánsyas mo sa íya iníng bastón. Use this stick
to show him that you are quite ready to fight him. Nagánsyas siá,
ugái nakaúyon man sinâ. He apparently refused, but in reality he
liked it. Indì ka magánsyas, kay nakasáyod man akó, nga malúyag ka
magtámbong dídto. Don't hide your eagerness, for I know well enough
that you wish to be present there. (cf. hánggab, lúyag, pangabáy,
himúlat; bisyó-bísyo, birô-bírò, indî-índì).

_ansyás-ánsyas_, Dim. of ánsyas. Ginaansyás-ánsyas níya ang pagbáton
siníng dúlot ápang sa pagkamatúod nagawíli siá gid sinâ. He declines
for mere appearance' sake to accept this present, but in truth he
wants it very much. (cf. birgî-bírgì; bisyó-bísyo, etc.).

_ánta_, To smell of scorched or burned food; the smell of burned
food. (cf. ángtod, ántod, antóos).

_antâ_, Tame, domesticated, broken in, trained, (cf. mánso).

_antà_, To tame, train, break in, domesticate. Antaá ang karabáw
nga simarón. Train or tame the wild buffalo. Gamíta iníng bolobód
nga iántà mo sa iláhas. Make use of this poultry-food to tame the
wild chicken. Sa mabúot nga pahítò maántà man ang león, Under wise
management even a lion can be tamed. (cf. pahagúp; ánad, buyó; rumál).

_ántad_, Distance, separation, difference; to make room, give way,
yield space. Malayô ang ántad. The distance is great or far. Malayô
silá sing ántad. They are far asunder. Antará (--adá) ang síya. Put
the chair farther away. Antarí nínyo ang lugár. Make room. Iántad ang
mga hinaláy. Space what is hung on the line farther apart. Magántad
kamó. Give way. Make room. Ipaántad sa íya ang mga nalábhan nga
hinaláy. Let her space farther apart the washed clothes hung on the
line. Ang íya nga sinabát malayô sing ántad sa patád. His answer is
beside the mark i.e. his answer is vague, evasive.

_ántaw_, Visible from afar, prominent. (cf. pántaw).

_ántay_, To move, to transfer one's residence, go to live somewhere
else, to carry or transport to some other place. Nagántay kamí sa
umá sang tigtalánum. During the planting-season we lived at the
farm. Iántay ang mga kasangkápan sa bánwa. Transfer your outfit to
the town. Kon matápus ang áni maántay kamí liwán sa bánwa. After the
rice-harvest we shall move to town again. Antayi ang umá mo sa bakólod,
kay maáyo sa ímo láwas ang pagpuyô mo didto. Go to live at your farm
on the hill, for staying there is good for your health. (cf. líton).

_antídoto_, (Sp. antidoto) Antidote, counter-agent, counter-irritant,
counter-poison; preventive means applied to counteract vice, error
and evil in general. (cf. bulúng, laláng, tápnà, pugúng, sagáng).

_antígo_, (Sp. antiguo) Old, experienced, cunning, clever, full
of tricks and resources, one who is "an old hand at the game",
one who "knows the ropes". Antígo siá magsugál, magsáot, magtokár,
magpaníkas, etc. He is an experienced gambler, a clever dancer, a
skilful music-player, a cunning sneak, etc. (cf. anád, banád, ábtik,
batíd, sagád, lísto, sampáton).

_antikrísto_, (Sp. Antecristo) Anti-christ.

_ánting_, To be or become keen of hearing, to hear well. Bungúl siá
sádto ánay, ápang karón nagánting na. He was deaf before, but now he
hears well. Naantingán akó siníng táo. This man hears and understands
me at once. (cf. kaánting, maánting).

_antíng-ánting_, Amulet, charm, any object worn in the belief that
it possesses mysterious powers. Indì ka magpáti kag índì ka magdalá
sa láwas mo sináng ginatawág nga antíng-ánting. Don't believe in, and
don't wear on your body, those things called amulets. (cf. pinangálap).

_antióhos_, (Sp. anteojos) Spectacles, eye-glasses, glasses; to use
or wear spectacles. Nagaantióhos or nagapangantióhos siá. He wears
spectacles. Mangantióhos ka kon manahî ikáw, kay madulúm na ikáw sing
matá. Use eye-glasses when you sew, for your sight has grown weak.

_ántip_, The pole that passes through the end of the web and
is fastened by ropes to the body of the weaver in a primitive
kind of weaving without the use of a loom. Nowadays nearly every
household has a loom, called tidál or terál, a corruption of the
Sp. telar. (cf. átip, purogían).

_antipára_, (Sp. antiparras) Spectacles, eye-glasses,
glasses. (cf. antióhos, tagosílang).

_antipátiko_, (Sp. antipático) Repugnant, repulsive, antipathetic.

_antipatíya_, (Sp. antipatia) Antipathy, repugnance,
aversion. (cf. kalásay, kataká; kasíb-ot, agutílò, gulut-ánon,
aligótgot).

_antípodas_, (Sp. antípodas) Antipodes; persons whose likes and
dislikes, etc. are diametrically opposed, people of contrary
dispositions.

_Antipólo_, A town near Manila famous for a much venerated shrine of
the Blessed Virgin. Sistéma Antipólo. A kind of privy.

_antípona_, (Sp. antífona) Antiphony, antiphon.

_antiyádo_, (Sp. anteado) Buff, buff-coloured.

_ántod_, (H) See antó-os, ángtod.

_ántong_, The smell of burning feathers, bones, paper, or the like;
to emit such a smell. Nagaántong ang búlbul kon irotán. Burning
feathers emit a peculiar smell called ántong. Naantongán akó sang
papél nga nasúnug. I smell (smelt) the smell of burning paper.

_antó-os_, The smell of burning or scorching food; to emit such a
smell. Nagaantó-os ang tiníg-ang. There is a smell of burning coming
from the boiling rice. Ginaanto-osán akó sang tinóla. It seems to
me that the vegetables are being scorched. (cf. ángtod, ánta, ántod,
all having the same meaning).

_antorô_ (B) Timidity, bashfulness, shyness: to be timid, bashful, shy,
afraid. Nagaantorô siá sa paghámbal. She is too shy to speak out. Indì
ka magantorô sa pagsulúd dirí. Don't be afraid to come in. (antulô,
antulâ id.).

_antulâ_ (B) Shy, bashful, etc. See antorô id.

_antuliháw_, A kind of bird. (cf. tuliháw).

_antulô, antulâ_, See antorô id.

_ántus_, To bear, suffer, undergo. Magántus ka siní sing
mapailúbon. Bear this patiently. Hántì kay ginhímò mo iní, antusá
na man ang sílot. Well, as you did it, suffer the punishment now as
well. Dì masáysay ang mga kasakít nga ginántus sang Aton Ginóo. The
sufferings borne by Our Lord cannot be described. (cf. batás, agwánta).

_anúgut_, Torch; fuse; flambeau; light, lantern. (cf. sarísì, sugâ).

_ánum_, Six.

_anunúgba_, A white-winged moth. (cf. subásúba, sugbásúgba).

_anwáng_, Buffalo. (cf. kárbaw, karabáw).

_ányag_, Prettiness, beauty; comeliness; to be or become pretty,
nice, comely, beautiful. Kay nakuháan sing hígkò nagányag na gid
ang hulút. Because the dirt had been removed the room became quite
beautiful. Naanyagán akó sinâ. I consider that nice. (cf. tahúm,
gayón, ayó-áyo, dálig, ámbong).

_anyíl_, (Sp. añil) Indigo, a blue vegetable dye, extensively used
by Filipino women for colouring garments.

_ányo_, (Sp. año) Year. (cf. túig).

_ányò_, Fitting, agreeable, proper, pleasing; to be or become
fitting, etc. Anyò sa íya iníng báyò--or--nagaányò sa íya iníng
báyò--or--ginaanyoán siá siníng báyò. This jacket fits him (or her)
well. (cf. ígò, bágay, ángay).

_anyóan_, Fit, suitable, proper, adapted. Anyóan siá sa pagpangúma
gid lámang, kay walâ siá sing lúyag sa pagtoón. He is only fit for
working on a farm, for he has no liking for study. Anyóan gid siá sa
pagkahokóm. He is qualified to be a judge. Anyóan gid siá sinâ nga
báyò. She looks nice in that dress. (cf. ányò, angayán).

_áo_, (aw), An exclamation denoting surprise, used by people who have
forgotten some important incidents in a story, etc. and then, when
somebody else jogs their memory, suddenly recollect the whole. Almost
involuntarily they will then say: Aw! Ah, yes! Oh, now I remember! Ah,
sure, now I recollect it all! Aw, gái ko man galî. Ah, if that is
so, I am also for it. I was under a wrong impression; I now change
my opinion.

_áo-áo_, (áw-áw), The hoot of an owl. Ang huní sang búkaw "áo-áo". The
cry of the owl is "áo-áo".

_áohang_, (áwhang), To lean or hang out of a window or the like,
so as to be in danger of falling in a moment of forgetfulness. Indì
ka magáohang sa talamwáan. Don't lean out of the window. Indì mo
pag-iáohang ang ímo láwas, kay básì mahúlug ka. Don't lean out too
far, for you might tumble down. Sang paglubás sang kátay gináohang
níya ang íya láwas sa bintánà kag nagtingká-ub kag nahúlug. When the
parade passed by he leant out of the window, lost his balance and
fell. Kon walâ níya pagaohangí ang kátay, walâ man siá mahúlug. If
he had not stretched himself too far out to see the parade, he would
not have tumbled down.

_áohog_, áwhog, To look about searchingly or curiously, stretching
one's neck in order to get a better sight of things. Aohogí kon anó
ang sulúd sang aparadór. Peer into the cupboard to find out what is
in it. Iáohog ang úlo mo, agúd makakítà ka sing maáyo. Stretch your
neck, that you may be able to see well. Indì ka magáohog. Don't look
about curiously.

_áoto_, Automobile, auto, motorcar. Also used as a verb. Nagpaáoto
kamí. We came or travelled by automobile. Ipaáoto ang masakít nga táo
kag dálhon mo sa hospitál. Put the sick man in an automobile and take
him to the hospital.

_aotorisár_, (Sp. autorizar) To authorize, approve, empower,
recognize. Ginaaotorisahán sang gobiérno ang ámon eskwéla. Our school
is recognized by the government. (cf. pakamaáyo, túgut, pahanúgut).

_aotorisasyón_, (Sp. autorización) Authorization, recognition,
approval. (cf. túgut, pahanúgut, pagpakamaáyo).

_apâ_, Mute, dumb; silent, mum, speechless; to be or become
dumb. Nagapâ siá sa hinálî. He was suddenly struck dumb. Ang
mga apâ nagainapâ. The dumb (deaf and dumb) talk by signs and
gestures. Gininapaán akó níya. He talked to me as one deaf and
dumb, (by signs and gestures). Nagainapâ gid lang si Fuláno dirâ
sa higád. N.N. just keeps silent there in the corner. Naginapâ
siá. He talked by signs and gestures. He said nothing. Makahibaló
ikáw mag-inapâ? Do you know how to talk like the deaf and dumb? Can
you converse by signs and gestures? (cf. ágbà).

_apáhan_, To be speechless with wonder or surprise, to be bewildered,
to be at a loss what to do or where to turn on account of so many
things claiming attention. Ginapáhan akó sang madámò nga mga búnga
nga nadágdag sa káhoy. I was at a loss what to do on account of the
great amount of fruit that fell from the tree (wishing to gather
it all up at once). Ginaapáhan siá sang madámò nga pagkáon. He is
quite perplexed by the plentiful supply of food (wishing and unable
to partake of so many dishes at the same time). (cf. apâ).

_ápal_, The handle, haft, grip, hilt of a bolo, knife, sword, etc;
to provide with a handle, etc. Apáli ang ákon binángon. Fit a handle
to my bolo. Mapaápal akó ánay sa pánday sang ákon binángon. I will
first go to the carpenter to have a handle put on my bolo. Iápal akó
ánay sang ákon binángon. Please fit a handle to my bolo.

_apán_, A full-grown locust. (cf. palakúkwan--a young locust beginning
to grow wings, but not yet able to fly; tárik--a young locust with
newly grown wings, able to fly, but not far; lúkso--a young locust
without wings, only capable of hopping along the ground). Also used
as a verb figuratively. Abáw, nagalapán gid lang ang mga dumulúaw
dídto! Why, the visitors there were as numerous as locusts! Dílì
nínyo pagapanán ang pagkáon. Don't fall upon the meal like locusts.

_ápang_, But, on the other hand, yet, still. Maáyo ang kaálam, ápang
labí nga maáyo ang matárung nga pangabúhì. Wisdom or learning is good,
but an honest life is better. Matahúm man kuntánì iní, ápang--This
would be nice, yet--. Ari na ang napát-ud nga ádlaw, ápang walâ sia
magabút. The appointed day is here, but he has not come. Kon sa isá
ka bágay matúod gid man inâ, ápang labí pa gid nga matúod nga--. If,
on the one hand, that is perfectly true, still, on the other, it is
truer yet to say, that--. Siá magatámbong dídto, ápang akó índì. He
will be present there, but not I. (cf. péro).

_áp-ap_, To bite off a piece, to eat by snaps and snatches, to devour
fruit greedily without taking the trouble of peeling it beforehand,
etc. Ap-apá lang ang páhò páti bákal. Just devour the mango together
with its stone by biting off a small bit at a time. Ap-apí sing diótay
ang tinápay. Take a small bite out of the bread. Indì ka magáp-ap
(mangáp-ap) sang ímo ginakáon súbung sang isá ka idô. Don't snap at
your food like a dog. (cf. áb-ab, ikíb, ínkib, kíbkib, etc.).

_apaparí_, A plant often seen growing under mango-trees or other trees.

_aparadór_, (Sp. aparador) Cupboard, wardrobe, chest of drawers,
case or inclosure with shelves, side-board, dresser, show-window.

_apás_, Premature, untimely; to do something prematurely, before
the proper time, too soon. Ginapás níla ang paglígos sang bátà. They
gave the baby a bath too soon. Dílì nínyo pagapasón ang pagtubâ sang
ságing. Don't cut down the banana prematurely i.e. before its fruit
is ripe. (cf. ahát).

_apás_, To cut off near the root or close to the ground. Apasón mo ang
paggúnting sang ákon bohôk. Cut my hair very short. Apasá ang pagtapás
sang káhoy. Cut off the tree near the ground. Tuód nga inapasán. A
stump cut close to the ground i.e. a short stump. (cf. sóop).

_ápas_, (H) To follow, go after. See ábat. Apása, apási, iápas,
etc. abáta, abáti, iábat, etc.

_ápat_, Four. Apat ka táo. Four men. Apatón mo iní. Divide it into
four parts, quarter it.

_apát-apát_, A plant that in its leaves resembles a four-leafed
clover. Hence the name from ápat--four.

_ápdo_, Gall, bile.

_apdohón_, Bilious.

_apelár_, (Sp. apelar) To appeal. (cf. pasákà, dangúp).

_apelyído_, (Sp. apellido) Family-name, surname.

_apéndise_, (Sp. apéndice) Appendix, supplement. (cf. dúgang,
kasúgpon).

_apendisítis_, (Sp. apendicitis) Appendicitis.

_ápgas_, To be difficult of passage, sore of throat, etc. Nagápgas
ang íya tutúnlan. His throat is sore, so that he has difficulty in
swallowing. Naapgasán ang tutúnlan ko sang búnga nga maáplod. My
throat became quite rough from eating an unripe betelnut. (cf. ápgot,
sápnot, pín-ot).

_ápgot_, To be difficult of passage, as wheels over deep loose sand
or through mud, walking through sticky mire, unripe, astringent or
acrid fruit through the throat, and the like. Nagápgot ang dálan. The
road has become quite sticky. Ang káro maápgot nga butóngon sang
karabáw kay nalubúng sa lúnang. It is difficult for the buffalo
to pull the cart for it has stuck in the mud. Naapgotán balá ikáw
sináng búnga?--Walâ akó maapgotí, kóndì natanlasán gid akó. Did you
experience some roughness in the throat from eating that fruit?--No
I did'nt experience any roughness, on the contrary I could swallow
it quite easily. (cf. sápnot, ápgas).

_apián_, Opium. Indì ka magyúpyup sang apián, kay maláin inâ sa
láwas páti kalág. Don't smoke (literally "suck in") opium, for it
is bad for body and soul. Manugsiò sang apián. An opium-smoker,
opium-eater. (cf. apyán id.).

_apíd_, To join, combine, put or fit together; to involve,
implicate. (cf. ímpon, símpon, dápat, ígò; úmid, daláhig).

_apíhis_, Maggot, larva, worm, grub, especially that kind bred in
putrid meat, musty flour and other food-stuffs.

_apíit_, Near--, close--, together, tight, crammed. (cf. ipít, ipíit,
gutúk, gutô).

_apíke_, (Sp. a pique) On the point of, impossible for lack of time
or opportunity, too late, past mending, etc. Indì na akó makahingágaw
sa pagtahî sang ímo báyò, kay apíke na. I cannot finish sewing your
jacket, because there is not time enough. Daw sa dílì na makitáan
sing bulúng ang íya balatían, kay apíke na ang íya pagbátì. It is
now almost impossible to cure him, for his disease is too far gone.

_apílat_, The fatty tissue growing between the head and the belly of
certain kinds of fish and much esteemed as a delicacy.

_ápin_, Help, assistance, backing, aid, support, succour; to take
sides with, support, back up, help, aid, succour, assist. Apíni
akó. Take sides with me. Back me up. Help me. Ang mga ginikánan
masigapináy sa íla mga anák nga nagailináway. The parents, partial
to their own, are siding with their children in their fight with one
another. Walâ siá sing ápin. He has none to back him up. Nakadaúg siá,
kay ginapínan siá sang mga mamumugón, He won, because the workers
supported him. (cf. ámpin).

_apínas_, (Sp. apenas) Trying, difficult; scarce; to be trying,
etc. Apínas ang pangabúhì karón. Life at present is trying. Apínas
ang kwárta. Money is scarce. Naapinásan akó gid sang kwárta sa
karón nga túig. This year I am in great difficulties for lack of
money. (cf. lapígot, íwat, kúlì, lisúd, hínà).

_apipíngig_, The under-jaw. (cf. píngig).

_apirahón_, (B) A cock's comb. (cf. pirahón, padóng, paróng).

_apít-ápit_, Nearly the same, nearly alike, resembling; to
resemble. Apít-ápit ang íla kataasón, panlakát, duág, dágway,
etc.--or--apít-ápit silá sing kataasón, etc. They are nearly the
same in height, in their way of walking, in colour, in figure,
etc. Nagaapít-ápit ang pangórte sang íla guyá. Their features are
nearly alike. (cf. agíd-ágid, anggídánggid, amóámo).

_apítong_, A tree yielding a timber much used for building purposes.

_apláag_, To spread, extend, etc. See alapláag. Nagaapláag ang mga
kánding sa latagón, sa halálbon, etc. The goats are spreading over
the open field, the pasture, etc.

_áplag_, See apláag, alapláag, aláplag id. Aplagí iníng halálbon
sang mga kánding. Scatter the goats over this grass-land. Paaplagá
ang Sántos nga Pagtóo. Spread the Faith.

_áplod_, Sourness, bitterness, acridity, acidity, acerbity,
sharpness; to be or become sour, bitter, acrid, acid, acerb, biting,
etc. Ginaaplodán (--orán) kitá sang kalabánan sang mga búnga nga
línghod. Most unripe fruits are bitter to us. Naaplodán akó siníng
kamúnsil. This camunsel-fruit is too acrid for me or the eating of
this camunsel-fruit has given me an acid taste in my mouth.

_apó_, Grandchild, grandson, grand-daughter;
apó sa túhud--great-grandchild; apó sa
tingáy-tíngay--great-great-grandchild. (cf. kaapohán--grandchildren).

_ápog_, Lime; to be converted into lime. Nagápog na ang mga bató sa
alapogán. The stones in the lime-kiln are now reduced to lime. Apóga
ang mga olokabá. Make lime of the shells. Pintahí ang padér sing
ápog. Whitewash the wall with lime.

_apogán_, A vessel or receptacle containing lime,
particularly the small box or shell in which lime is kept for
betel-nut-chewing. (cf. alapogán--lime-kiln).

_apóhap_, (B) To stroke or touch lightly, to move the hand along with
a light touch. Apohápi ang bátà. Stroke the baby. Batíd siá magapóhap
sa mga táo. He is an expert at stroking men down i.e. at coaxing them,
gaining them over to his side. (cf. hapóhap id.).

_apóhap-apóhap_, (B) To coax, bamboozle, blarney, humbug, persuade,
wheedle, "use soft soap", ingratiate oneself with, treat with sweet
and kind words; to stroke very lightly. Ginapóhap-apohápan níya
ang mga pumilílì sing matám-is nga mga púlong kag makalulúyag nga
mga túg-an. He coaxed the electors by sweet words and attractive
promises. Iapóhap-apóhap sa íya iníng búlbul. Stroke him with this
feather.

_ápok_, To fly or jump off as a chip of wood, stone, etc. Naapókan akó
sang napíngas nga bató. I was struck by a flying piece of stone. Diótay
lang akó apókan sang bató. The flying stone nearly hit me. Nagápok ang
inágsap nga káhoy sa malayô. The chip of wood flew far. Inápok ang
napíngas nga bató. The chip of stone was sent flying off. Inapókan
siá sang isá ka báhin sang rekamará nga naglupók. He was hit by a
piece of the mortar that burst. (cf. ásik, ágsik, ásang, ályas).

_ápok_, Eczema of the face, an eruptive skin disease, often starting
at the corners of the mouth and spreading rapidly.

_apók-apók_, Light, small rain, drizzle, dribble, mizzle, scotch
mist; to rain very lightly in small fine drops, to drizzle,
dribble, mizzle. May apók-apók or nagaapók-apók. It is raining very
lightly. (cf. talíthi, taríthi, dabódabó).

_apokón_, Eczematous, pertaining to--, affected by--, the skin disease
called "ápok".

_ápol_, To swarm, cluster, mass, to be thick, dense, close together,
hang together in clusters. Nagaápol gid lang ang mga lásgà sa
kalámay. The sugar is swarming with red ants. Red ants have invaded
the sugar. A mass of red ants are attacking the sugar. Nagalápol gid
ang mga búnga siníng lúmboy. The fruit of this lumboy-tree grows in
dense clusters.

_ápong_, To gather, collect, come together; roost. (cf. dúguk,
gubúk, hólon).

_apóro_, (Sp. aforro) Lining; the lining of clothes.

_apót_, Dandy, coxcomb; stuck-up, proud, haughty, aping the manners
of high-class folks. (cf. dayáw, bugalón, matinaastaáson).

_ápoy_, Great-grandfather, great-grandmother.

_apritáda_, (Sp. fritada) A dish of meat with sauce thickened with
flour.

_apritádo_, (Sp. apretado) Tight, close; close-fisted, close, stingy,
niggardly, miserly; difficult, hard to bear, miserable. (cf. gutúk,
mapíot; lapígot, malisúd).

_áptan_, ápton, From áput--to arrive, come to.

_apungángo_, Stalk, stem on which a flower or fruit
grows. (cf. pungángo).

_apúnta_, (Sp. apuntar) To aim at, to point out; to baste, tack, sew
provisionally with long stitches. Apuntahá gid ánay kag tahión. Make
a basting first and then sew. Figuratively: Ginaapuntahán siá sang
ános. He is in the first stage of consumption.

_apuntár_, To baste, tack, to sew by hand with wide stitches previous
to sewing by machine. Apuntahá ánay kag makinahón. Baste first and
then machine. (cf. halóthot).

_apurá_, (Sp. apurar) To hasten, make haste, hurry, be quick, do
quickly, push on with. Apurahá ang pagpatíndog sang halígi. Get
the post put up quickly. Magapurá ka sa íya sa pagpaúlì. Urge him
to go home at once. Apurahá silá sa paghalín. Get them to leave
soon. (cf. alipasá; dalî).

_ápus_, (B) To end, finish, complete, bring to a close; ended,
finished, completed, done with, at an end. Apúsa iní. Finish this. Apus
na. Finished. That's the end of that. (cf. tápus id.).

_áput_, To reach the end of a journey, reach the goal, arrive at, make,
gain, come to a stop, come to rest. Walâ siá makaáput sa alapután. He
could not reach the goal. Ang bángkay sang nalumús sa subâ nakaáput
sa baybáyon. The corpse of the one drowned in the river came to rest
on the beach. Maninguhâ ka gid, agúd maapútan mo ang alipokpokán sang
búkid. Try by all means to reach the top of the mountain. (cf. abút,
dángat, lámbut).

_apútan_, A place to--stay,--stop at,--go to,--live in, a settled
abode or residence. Walâ siá sing apútan. He has no settled abode,
he has nowhere to go.

_apyán_, Opium. (cf. apián id.).

_apyanéro_, (Notice the Spanish suffix) An opium-eater, opium-smoker.

_ára_, (Sp. ara) Altar-stone. Usually "sánto ára".

_árà_, (H) There, there is. Arà inâ dirâ. There it is. Arà balá si
Fuláno sa íya hulút? Is N.N. there in his room?

_araasáwa_, See alaasáwa, oloasáwa, id.

_arabál_, (Sp. arrabal) A large village or town, subject to the
municipality of another town. Many places that are "arrabales" now
have had their own municipal government in Spanish times.

_arabón_, A kind of rice. (cf. kalúbad, lúbang, tabáw, ramáy, makán,
kalanáy, pilít, kalúmpit, kanamóg, kotsyám, bisyâ, tapól).

_arabútay_, (B) To be at ease or rest, feel comfortable, etc. Mostly
used with a negative. Indì siá maarabútay túbtub nga matápus iníng
gamó. He cannot rest, will not feel easy, till this trouble is
over. (cf. libútay id.).

_arádo_, (Sp. arado) Plough; to plough. Aradóha ang talámnan. Plough
the field. Buás aradóhi si Fuláno. Tomorrow you will plough
N.N.'s. land. Iníng karabáw iarádo ko sa buás. I will use this
buffalo for ploughing to-morrow. Ipaarádo ko iníng talámnan sa táo
or paaradóhan ko iníng talámnan sa táo. I'll get somebody else to
plough this field for me. (cf. súk-ay, dáro).

_aradohón_, What is to be ploughed. May aradohón pa ikáw? Have you
still some land to be ploughed?

_árag_, To select, choose, seek out and collect, especially applied
to picking out the best or ripest fruit or grain from among the
rest, as beans, monggo, rice, etc. Arága ang balátong. Pluck the
ripe beans. Arági iníng humáy. Gather from this rice-field the ripest
ears. Manuláon pa kamí ánay kag maárag (magaárag) sing kadiós. First we
will look for vegetables and select the best kadiós-peas. (cf. ág-ag,
pílì).

_aragóy_, An exclamation of pain and suffering; to complain loudly
of pain, etc. Indì ka magaragóy--or--magpangaragóy sing támà. Do not
complain excessively by constantly crying out "aragóy". (cf. aróy id.).

_árak_, A sound or noise as of many, pattering, clattering, bickering,
a medley of voices or sounds; to sound, make a noise or movement as
of many at the same time or in quick succession. Ang balás nagaárak
sa sim. The sand is pattering loudly on the zinc. Naarákan gid kamí
sang mga lisó sa géra. During the war bullets constantly whirred about
us. Ginpaarákan ang ámon baláy sing mga bató sang ámon matístis nga
kaáway. Our spiteful enemy made our house resound with the number of
stones he threw. (cf. bárak).

_áram, arámag, aramágon_, (B) See álam, alámag, alamágon id.

_aramidól_, (B) A corruption of almidón, which see.

_aramón_, Contented, at ease, satisfied, (cf. libútay, arabútay,
dalamúnon).

_arandílya_, (Sp. arandela) The socket-pan of a candlestick;
embroidered fringes, ruffles of a shirt and the like.

_aráng_, To let simmer, cook slowly over a low fire; to simmer, boil
or bubble gently; to warm something near or at the fire. Naarangán
na ang tiníg-ang? Has the cooked rice been left simmering for some
time over a low fire? Iaráng mo iní sa kaláyo or paarangí iní sa
kaláyo. Warm this at the fire. Ginpaarangán níya ang tinápay. She
warmed the bread. Magpaaráng ka, kay matúgnaw. Warm yourself, for it is
cold. Nagapaaráng siá sang íya kamót sa kaláyo. He is warming his hands
at the fire. Ipaaráng mo sa sologoón ang báhaw. Let the servant warm
the cold rice. (cf. aríng-ing, bagáng, baáng-báang, alabáab, ínit).

_aranghíran_, (B) See alanghílan.

_arangí-ang_, (B) Playful, frolicsome, sportive, frisky, full of
sprightly humour. (cf. sádya, hinúgyaw; masádya).

_arángo_, To stand, bear, suffer, be able to endure (especially the
smell of bad odours). Indì akó makaarángo sang kabahô sináng patáy
nga idô--or--índì ko maarángo ang kabahô sináng patáy nga idô. I
cannot stand the stench of that dead dog. (cf. batás, ántus, íro).

_araníbal_, (Sp. almibar) Thin, freely-flowing molasses. (cf. arníbal).

_aránka_, (Sp. arrancar) To attack, particularly applied to sudden
or swift aggression. Arankahá siá! Go for him! Attack him. Sang
nagatíndog akó dirâ ginaránka akó níya sa walâ sing bisán kon anó nga
kabangdánan. When I was standing there he rushed at me and attacked me
without any cause whatsoever. Ngáa man nga nagaránka ka sa íya? Why
did you so suddenly attack him? (cf. soróso). In gambling: To take
a card and turn it face up.

_aránya_, (Sp. aráña) Chandelier, a circle of candles or lights
branching out from a common stem and suspended from above.

_aráo_, An exclamation of joy and glad surprise. Aráo, kadámò sang
ságing! Oh, how lovely, what a lot of bananas! Aráo, ári na dirí si
tátay! Oh, how jolly! Father is here!

_aráo-aráo_, Dim. of the foregoing aráo. Si Pédro, kon tigangán mo
sing isá ka gántang nga bugás, maúrut níya sang káon.--Aráo-aráo,
índì akó magpáti. If you boil a ganta of rice for Peter, he will eat
it all up:--Oh! You don't say so! I can't believe it!

_ará-od_, (B) To scrape or scoop out, as coconut meat from the
shell. See uráod, the more usual form. (cf. kugúd, kokód, tilád,
kokót).

_arápal, arapál_, (B) A piece of wood suitable for shaping into the
handle of a bolo or the like; to handle, manage, cope with. Indî akó
makaarapál sang tanán ko nga buluhatón. I cannot cope with all my
work. (cf. ápal; agám, ágap).

_arapátan_, (B) See alapátan id.

_áras_, (Sp. arras) Dowry; coins which the bridegroom gives to the
bride at a marriage ceremony.

_arásal_, (B) Roasting-spit. See arasálan, alasálan, asálan id.

_arasálan_, (B) Roasting-spit. (cf. arásal, asálan, alasálan).

_arasán_, The place where the essential marriage ceremony, viz. the
giving of the consent, is performed. (cf. áras).

_arát_, (B) Untidy, dirty, filthy, grimy, slovenly, slipshod; to
be or become untidy, etc. Sádto maámbong siá, karón nagarát na or
arát na siá. Formerly she used to be neat, now she is or has become
slovenly. (cf. damák, sáprat, rísmò, rigám, hígkò, rígkam).

_árat_, (H) See ádat id.

_arátay_, (B) See alátay.

_aráw_, See aráo.

_aráw-aráw_, See aráo-aráo.

_aráy_, An exclamation of joy, pleasure, surprise, pain. Ah! Oh! How
nice! (cf. aráw, aráw-aráw, abáw, kananáks, aragóy).

_arayágan_, (B) A sieve. See alyágan id.

_aráy-aráy_, Dim. of ráy. Also: To receive or welcome with pleasure, to
show one's pleasure by signs, to ingratiate oneself by manifestations
of affection, as a cat purring on one's lap, a dog fawning on its
master, children desirous of obtaining a favour from their parents,
etc. Ang bátà nagapangaráy-aráy sa íya tátay. The child is welcoming
its father with joy. Nagaaráy-aráy siá sa ákon, segúro, kay buót siá
pahulamón sing kwárta. He is paying me great attention, for the reason,
no doubt, that he wants to borrow money of me. (cf. pangilô-ilô).

_árbol_, (Sp. arbol) Tree. (cf. káhoy).

_árbol de puégo_, (Sp. arbol de fuego) Fire-tree. (cf. kabalyéro).

_ardíl_, (Sp. ardid) Astuteness, cunning, artifice; a ruse, an
astute clever lie, sharp practice, a cunning misleading of others;
to play a trick on, to mislead, to contrive by cunning or by clever
stratagem. Ginardíl lang níya inâ. He did (said) that only to mislead
others. Ardilí siá. Play him a trick, deceive him by a ruse. Iardíl
mo sa íya inâ. Play that trick on him.

_ardilóso_, (From the Sp. ardid) Clever, cunning, astute, tricky,
tricksy, misleading others by an artifice or under plausible and
specious pretexts. (cf. antígo).

_argólya_, (Sp. argolla) Rings, also called "stirrups" suspended by
ropes, for athletic exercise.

_ári_, (H) Here, here is. Ari akó. Here I am. Ari siá dirí. He is
here. (cf. yári, rúgya, doón, dínhi).

_aría_, (Sp. arriar) An expression used frequently by men directing the
lifting of heavy loads. When the latter have been raised sufficiently
for placing them where desired, they shout: "Aria"--"Let loose". "Let
go. Slacken the rope"! Ariáhi ang kalát. Slacken the rope. (cf. tugák,
hugák, labóy, táboy, aríya).

_arí-arí_, Stunted, backward in growth, not growing well, undersized,
short in the straw; to be or become stunted, etc. Nagarí-arí ang maís,
kay walâ maulaní. The corn was backward, did not grow well, for lack
of rain. (cf. agíl-agíl, ari-kotóy).

_arígay_, To woo, to court, be nice to. Si Fuláno nagaarígay sa
kay María--or--ginaarígay si María ni Fuláno. N.N. is courting
Mary. (cf. lígay, paayónáyon).

_arík-ik_, To laugh heartily; a merry, jovial laugh,
merriment. (cf. arók-ok, talángkaw, halák-hak. See also kádlaw--to
laugh, smile, in general).

_arikís_, A skin disease, resembling prickly heat but itching more,
and, consequently, causing much greater discomfort, (cf. kagídkid).

_arikisón_, Pertaining to arikís, one affected by
arikís. (cf. kagidkirón).

_arikotóy_, Under-developed, stunted, injured in growth; to be or
become stunted, etc.; not well made or done. Arikotóy nga táo. A man of
very low stature, below the normal size. Arikotóy nga trabáho. Clumsy
work, a bungling performance. Nagarikotóy ang talóng, kamátis, kamóti,
tabákò, etc., kay lakás ang ínit kag kúlang ang ulán. The egg-plants,
tomatoes, sweet potatoes, tobacco-plants, etc., were injured in growth
by too great heat and lack of rain. (cf. arí-arí, agíl-agíl).

_arímo_, (Sp. arrimar, arrimo) To rely upon, shelter oneself behind,
ask for help or recommendation, be backed up by. Arimóhon mo si
Fuláno, kon malúyag ikáw nga íya ikáw tabángan. Ask N.N.'s assistance,
if you wish to be helped--, backed up--, by him. Iarímo mo akó sa
íya. Please, ask him to back me up. Walâ kamí sing arimóhan. We have
nobody to help us. The Freq. pangarímo is more used in the active
tense. Mangarímo ka sa íya. Get his recommendation. Shelter yourself
behind him. (cf. dangúp, ayóp).

_arimóhan_, Protection, patronage, support, shelter, backing-up,
pull. Kon walâ ka sing arimóhan, índì ka makadángat sang ímo nga
ginahándum. If you are without support, you will be unable to reach
the goal of your desires. (cf. arímo).

_arína_, (Sp. harina) Flour.

_arína_, (Sp. arena) Sand, (cf. balás).

_aríng-ing_, To warm, heat, cook over a low fire, etc. Aríng-ingá
ang tinápay nga dáan. Warm the stale bread. Iaríng-ing akó ánay
sing diótay nga ísdà nga inasál. Warm for me, please, a little baked
fish. Paaring-ingí akó siní. Warm this for me. (cf. aráng).

_aríring_, (B) See alíling--wheel.

_arisgádo_, (Sp. arriesgado--risky, daring) An adept at making money,
accepting profitable contracts, taking part in enterprises that yield a
margin of profit; pushing, enterprising, acute, keen, astute, shrewd,
clever, go-ahead, go-getter. Arisgádo siá nga táo. He is a clever
dealer, a successful, enterprising man. (cf. pumalatíkang, mabákas).

_arísgal_, (Sp. arriesgar) In the Visayan language this term
has almost completely lost its original meaning "to risk, dare,
venture" and now commonly signifies: to gain, make a profit,
derive a pecuniary advantage from various enterprises, to make a
bargain, buy, purchase. Nakaarísgal akó sa ákon punút sing isá ka
gatús ka mángmang. I had a clear profit of one hundred pesos from my
fish-trap. Mangarísgal akó. I am looking out for money, for something
to yield me a profit. Arisgalí akó sing kálò. Get me a hat. Buy me
a hat (at a bargain). (cf. patikáng, pangítà).

_aritmétika_, (Sp. aritmética) Arithmetic.

_arítos_, (Sp. arete) Ear-ring; to use, wear or put on,
ear-rings. Nagaarítos or nagapangarítos siá. She wears
ear-rings. Aritósi ang bátà. Put ear-rings on the girl. Paaritósi
siá. Provide her with ear-rings. Let ear-rings be put in her ears.

_ariwaróng_, To frown, contract the brows, to look cross, to glower,
express displeasure or anger by one's look. Ngáa man nga nagaariwaróng
ikáw? Why are you frowning? Why do you look so cross? Anó ang
ginaariwaróng mo? Why are you frowning? What are you frowning
at? (cf. lárong, kísdong, súngon, súnggud, kolisáw).

_aríya_, See aría.

_árka_, (Sp. arca) Ark--of Noe,--of the covenant; chest, box, coffer,
safe, trunk, casket. (cf. baúl, káha, sulúdlan).

_arkabála_, (B) Excise duty. See alkabála. (cf. buhís).

_arkabalísta_, A collector of excise duty. See
alkabaléro. (cf. magbubúhis),

_arkilón_, (Sp. alquilon) Hirer, one who hires out anything; anything
for hire, as a vehicle, etc. (cf. hinákay, hilinakayán, ágsa, paágsa).

_arkitékto_, (Sp. arquitecto) Architect. (cf. pumalatíndog).

_arkitektúra_, (Sp. arquitectura) Architecture.

_árko_, (Sp. arco) Arch; bow (of a violin, etc.). (cf. balitók,
balikô).

_arlekín_, (Sp. arlequin) Harlequin, clown, buffoon. (cf. alakáyo).

_armáda_, (Sp. armada) Navy, fleet, squadron, warships, (cf. sakayán,
sakayán-áway).

_ármas_, (Sp. arma) Weapon, arms. (cf. hinganíban).

_armasón_, (Sp. armazon) Mounting, frame, framework, skeleton; hull,
hulk (of a ship).

_armidól_, Starch. (cf. amidól, almidón).

_armoníya_, (Sp. armonia) Harmony, concord. (cf. sinántò, ígò, ángay,
bágay, bagáy, hilóong, hilitóhog).

_armónyo, armonyón_, (Sp. armonio) Harmonium.

_arníbal_, (Sp. almibar) Thin, freely-flowing molasses in the initial
stage of the process of sugar-milling. 1.) inutús--the watery juice
squeezed out of the sugar-cane. 2.) arníbal--very thin molasses
containing much water. 3.) lasáw--thickening molasses, syrup of the
consistency of light honey. 4.) pulút--thick molasses nearing the stage
of crystallization or hardening. The pulút, very sticky and viscous,
is taken from the cauldron and put into troughs, where by cooling
and stirring it slowly hardens or crystallizes to the finished,
but unrefined, product of sugar. This last stage of the process of
sugar-milling is called "pagasúkar sang pulút"--"to turn the pulút
into sugar". See under asúkar. 5.) asúkar, kalámay--sugar.

_árnika_, (Sp. árnica) Arnica, a medicinal plant.

_árnis_, Fight, quarrel; to fight, quarrel, come to blows. Si Huán
kag si Pédro nagaarnísay. Peter and John are fighting, have come to
blows, are quarrelling. (cf. híbag, ális).

_arô_, Leprosy. May arô siá or inarô siá. He has leprosy. (cf. aroón).

_aróad_, (B) To stuff, cram in (food), eat much. Ginaroádan námon ang
pagkáon sa ámon píknik. We ate much at our picnic. Indì mo pagiaróad
ang kán-on. Don't stuff in the rice so greedily.

_aró-aro, arô-arò_, (B) To play with, fondle, dandle, pet,
caress. Aroaróha (arôaróa) ang bátà. Play with the baby. Fondle the
child. (cf. álò, dálò, ánggà).

_aróba_, (Sp. arroba) A measure for liquid and dry goods, in weight
about twelve kilograms.

_arogóy_, See aragóy id.

_aróhal_, (B) A joker, jester, one who talks ridiculous nonsense
exciting laughter. Aróhal siá nga táo. He is full of fun. He is
a great joker. The verb is inarohál. Nagainarohál siá sa ákon or
ginainarohalán níya akó. He is telling me funny stories (recounting
some of his jokes to me). (cf. haróhal id.).

_arók-ok_, (B) To laugh heartily, but not boisterously. Anó ang
ginaarók-ok mo? Why are you laughing so merrily? Iníng súgid takús nga
arókokán. This story deserves a good laugh. (cf. aríkik, halák-hak,
talángkaw, kádlaw, yúhum).

_aról_, See aróhal id. The verb is inaról.

_aróma_, (Sp. aroma) Aroma; a kind of fragrant plant.

_árong_, (B) Mole. See álong, álom.

_aróod_, (B) To press or squeeze against something hard. Iaróod siá
sa díngding. Press him against the wall. Aroódi (--óri) ang díngding
sang íya úlo. Squeeze his head against the wall. (cf. oróod id.).

_aroón_, Leprous, affected by leprosy, pertaining to leprosy. (arô).

_aroró_, (Sp. arrurruz) Arrowroot; the flour and starch obtained from
that plant. (aloró, sagó).

_arórong_, A circular protection for young plants made of
coconut-leaves, of the stripped off layers of banana-stems and the
like; to provide such protection for plants. Aroróngi ang ímo mga
tanúm, agúd nga índì magláyà. Protect your plants, or else they
will wither.

_arós_, (Sp. arroz) Rice, especially hulled rice. (cf. humáy, pálay,
páray, bugás).

_aroséra_, (Sp. arroz) Rice-mill. (cf. bulugasán, galingán sang bugás).

_arót_, (B) Voluble, glib, swift of speech; close, near together;
to speak swiftly, volubly, glibly, flippantly, rapidly, to pour
out words, talk fast. Arót nga táo. A rapid talker. Arót ang
íya hámbal. He talks fast. Nagarót siá sang ininglís. He talked
English very fluently. Nagaarót siá sang bisán kon anó ang íya nga
ginasúgid. He talks very quickly no matter what he is saying. Ginarót
níya ang paghámbal. He (purposely) spoke very fast. N.B. For the verb,
inarót is more in use than the simple arót. Nagainarót silá. They
are talking very quickly. Ginainarót níla ang íla sugilánon. They
are holding an animated conversation. (cf. garót).

_aróy_, An exclamation of pain and suffering: Oh, dear me! The verb
is pangaróy--to cry out in pain, etc. to repeat "aróy, aróy", when
in pain or distress. (cf. aragóy, arogóy, haróy, pangharóy).

_árpa_, (Sp. arpa) Harp; lyre.

_arsénico_, (Sp. arsénico) Arsenic: ratsbane.

_artamísa_, (Sp. artemisa, artemisia) A plant much used for medicinal
purposes; wormwood, mugwort.

_árte_, (Sp. arte) Art, skill; artifice.

_artemísa_, See artamísa id.

_artíkulo_, (Sp. artículo) Article. (cf. pangúna).

_artísta_, (Sp. artista) Artist; artisan, dancer. (cf. makiambúngon;
bailarína, sumalaút).

_arukahík_, (B) To volunteer, to do something--of one's own free
will,--of one's own accord, to move, stir, work without being told or
without waiting for orders. Nagarukahík siá sa pagtígang, bisán walâ
pa magabút si nánay níya. She boiled rice without waiting for the
arrival of her mother. Akó lang nga isá ang nagaarukahík sa baláy,
kay tanán silá nagamalasakít. I alone am up and working in the house,
for all the rest are ill. (cf. matómató).

_arúm_, (B) Not easily inflammable, slow burning, difficult to light;
to burn badly, smoulder. See álhom.

_arúm_, Dark; tarnished; to darken, blacken, lose lustre, tarnish. See
alóm id. Ang buláwan walâ pagarúm, ápang ang tumbága nagaarúm. Gold
does not lose its lustre, but pinchbeck does. (cf. itúm).

_árus_, (B) Sufficient, enough; fit, proper; to be sufficient or fit,
etc. Arus na. Enough. That's sufficient. Indì maárus ang íya nga
pamísti. Her way of dressing is not proper. (cf. bastánte, túman,
ígò, ángay; hárus, íro).

_aryágan_, (B) A sieve. (cf. alyágan, ayágan, arayágan id. from
ayág--to sift).

_ásab_, To eat anything and everything that comes one's way, not to
be particular as regards food, to be omnivorous. Sang úna mapidâ siá,
karón nagásab na. She used to be very particular about her food,
now she is ready to eat anything. In a figurative sense, especially
applied to women, it means to follow the manners of prostitutes,
receiving and accepting anybody. (cf. maásab, kaásab).

_asádo_, (Sp. asado) Roast meat, roast beef.

_asahár_, (Sp. azahar) The orange or lemon flower; flowers used to
decorate the head of a bride.

_ásak_, To jump--, fly--, to a distance, as chips of wood or the like;
to bang, patter, clatter, (cf. ásik; bárak).

_asál_, (Sp. asar) To roast, particularly to roast on a spit. Asalá
ang manók. Roast the chicken. Inasál nga manók. Roast chicken. Asalí
ang masakít sing manók. Roast a chicken for the sick person. Iasál
akó ánay siníng manók. Please roast this chicken for me.

_asálan_, (H) Roasting-spit, roasting-jack. Buháti akó sing
asálan. Make me a roasting-jack. (cf. alasálan, arásal, arasálan
id. From asál).

_asál-ásal_, To sew quickly, make long or wide stitches. Indì mo
pagasál-asálon ang pagtahî sang ákon báyò. Do not make long stitches
when you sew my dress. (cf. duláhot)

_ásang_, To jump, dart, fly off (as chips of stone, etc.). Nagásang
ang binókbok nga bató sa malayô. The crushed stone flew
off to a great distance. Naasángan akó sing balás, túbig,
lúnang, etc. I got bespattered with sand, water, mud, etc. Dî mo
pagpaasángon ang bató. Don't send the chips of stone flying in all
directions. (cf. ásik, ápok, ályas).

_ás-as_, Consumption, tuberculosis, phthisis; to cause consumption,
be consumptive, etc. May ás-as siá or ginaás-as siá. He has
consumption. Ginás-as or inás-as siá. He was attacked by--, infected
with--, consumption. (cf. ános).

_as-asón_, Consumptive, phthisical, tubercular,
tuberculed. (cf. anosón).

_asáwa_, Wife, spouse, a married woman whose husband is alive; to take
a wife, marry, wed, espouse. May asáwa siá. He is married or has a
wife. Sín-o ang pangasáw-on mo? Whom are you going to marry? Who is
your wife to be? Si Pédro, konó, mangasáwa sa buás. Peter, they say,
is going to be married tomorrow. Asáwa ko, batóna iníng síngsing kag
iníng áras nga tándà sang áton pagasáwa. My wife, accept this ring and
this dowry in token of our wedlock. (Part of the marriage ceremony),
(cf. pangasáwa; pagbána--to take a husband).

_asawá_, To be husband and wife, have marital relations. Nagaasawá
or nagaasawaháy silá. They are married, are husband and wife. Ang
mga magasawá. Married folks, wedded couples.

_asáw-ásaw_, Drizzle, mizzle, light rain. (cf. dabódabó, talíthi,
apókapók).

_ásdan_, From ásod--to lend a hand, etc.

_aséite_, (Sp. aceite) Oil, olive oil. (cf. lána, súmpa).

_aseitéra_, (Sp. aceitera) Oil-cruet, oil-jar.

_aseitéras_, Oil-casters.

_aseitúnas_, (Sp. aceitunas) Olives.

_asendéro_, (Sp. hacendero) Farmer, land-owner, planter, agriculturist
on a large scale. (cf. mangungúma).

_asendéra_, (Sp. hacendera) A female farmer, etc. (cf. asendéro,
mangungúma).

_aséra_, (Sp. acera) Side-walk, pavement; row of houses along both
sides of a street. (cf. dálan, dalayándayánan; kúbay, kátay).

_aséro_, (Sp. acero) Steel.

_ásgad_, See áskad id.

_así-así_, (Sp. asi, asi) So-so, indifferent, middling, mediocre; of
no special value, ordinary, of the common run; to do light-heartedly,
carelessly, thoughtlessly. Dílì siá así-así nga táo. He is no common
man. He is better than the average. Sa pagpatíndog sing maáyo nga
baláy dílì ígò ang isá ka así-así nga pánday, kóndì kinahánglan ang
isá ka pánday nga sampáton. Not every common carpenter is fit for
the erection of a good house, but an experienced or skilful one is
required. Ginasí-así mo lang ang pagtokád sa matáas nga búkid. You
ascended the high mountain quite light-heartedly, you went up the
high mountain as if it were an everyday-trip.

_así-así_, To decline, refuse apparently. (cf. bisyóbísyo, indîíndì).

_así-ási_, To be aware of, know, understand, comprehend. Walâ ka gánì
kaasí-ási sang kabangdánan; ngáa man nga mangákig ka sa ámon? You do
not even know the reason; why, then, are you angry with us?

_asíbar_, (Sp. acibar) Aloe; aloes used as a purgative; the juice of
the sabila-plant (Sp. zabila, zabida).

_asiénda_, (Sp. hacienda) A farm on an extensive scale, large landed
property, plantation. (cf. palangúmhan).

_asíg_, An exclamation denoting loathing, abhorrence, aversion and
detestation. Asíg! Nasty! Filthy! What a stench! How ugly!

_asíg_, To despise, abhor, insult grievously, abominate. Sín-o
ang nagasíg sa ímo? Who insulted you? Ginaasigán níya ang amó nga
batásan. He abominates such habits. (cf. ngíl-ad, támay, lóod).

_ásik_, See ágsik, ápok, ásang. Naasíkan akó sang túbig. I got splashed
with water.

_asílo_, (Sp. asilo) Asylum, refuge; protection, shelter,
(cf. dalángpan, aláypan, sáp-an).

_asín_, Salt; to salt. Asiní ang ísdà. Salt the fish. Iasín iníng
púdyot nga asín sa manók. Season the chicken with these few grains
of salt.

_asínan_, Place where salt is distilled from sea-water or dug from
a mine; salt-works, rock-salt mine.

_asinón_, Salty, salt, saline, impregnated or mixed with salt.

_asisténsya_, (Sp. asistencia) Attendance, actual presence; assistance,
aid, help, succour. (cf. atúbang, támbong, búylog; búlig, tábang).

_áskad_, Soreness: to be or become sore of throat. Nagáskad ang
tutúnlan ko. My throat became sore. (cf. ásgad id.).

_askwála_, (Sp. escuadra) Square, carpenter's square; knee-tie,
angle-tie, angle-iron; in the form of a square; to form--, resemble--,
a square. (cf. eskwála, kasílo).

_áslang_, The chin. (cf. soláng, ságang).

_áslum_, Sourness, bitterness, sharpness, tartness, acidity; to be or
become sour, to sour, make sour. Nagáslum ang bíno. The wine has gone
sour. Iníng búnga walâ gid sing áslum. This fruit has no tartness at
all. Aslumí ang manók, ápang dílì mo pagaslumón. Mix something sour
with the chicken, but do not make it quite sharp. Pagapaaslumón ko gid
iníng diótay nga tubâ, kay buháton ko nga lebadúra. I will let this
little palm-wine get sour, for I am going to make yeast of it. Iníng
isá ka kutsára nga lánggaw iáslum ko sa ísdà. I will season the fish
with this spoonful of vinegar.

_aslúman_, Sour, of a sour taste, applied especially to some fruit
contrasted with sweet varieties of the same fruit. Aslúman nga súmbag,
kabúgaw, etc. A sour tamarind, a sour pomelo, etc. (cf. maáslum).

_ásno_, (Sp. asno) Ass, donkey; dunce, fool.

_asó_, Smoke, fume, reek; to smoke, emit smoke, to fume, reek; to
fumigate, smoke out. Pasálpa ang pabílo, kay nagaasó. Turn the wick
down, for it is smoking. Dílì mo pagpasablabón ang kaláyo, kóndi
paasohá lang. Don't cause the fire to flare up, but let it simply
smoulder. Paasohí (paáswi) ang baláy. Fumigate the house. Fill the
house with smoke.

_ásod_, To strike in, add a hand to, to do something together with
another in quick turns as one helping another to pound rice, workmen
felling a tree or trimming wood by alternate blows, etc. Asod without
any other qualification mostly means: to help another pound rice
by alternate blows of the pestles. Asdi (asódi) si mánang mo. Help
your elder sister to pound rice. Asdi si mánong mo sa pagtapás sang
káhoy. Help your elder brother to fell the tree (by giving alternate
strokes of the axe, now on this side, now on the other side of the
tree). Ang pagásod sa pagkánta maláin, sa pagbásbas kag pagbayó
maáyo. To strike in after another in singing (out of unison) is bad,
but for dressing timber or pounding rice it is the proper or right
thing to do. Ginásdan níla nga duhá sang ákig si Fuláno. They, both
of them together, vented their anger on N.N.

_ásog_, To make sterile, sterilize, especially applied to sows; to
become sterile. Nagásog ang ámon nayón. Our sow became sterile. Paasóga
ang nayón mo. Sterilize your sow (by fattening, etc.). Paasógan ko
gid iníng tángkal sang ákon nayón. I will sure enough sterilize my sow
(by fattening) in this pigsty.

_asóhas_, (B) To pump in air, to inflate with air. Asohási ang góma
sang bisikléta. Pump air into the bicycle-tyre. Pump up the tyre of
the bicycle. (cf. hasóhas id.).

_asohasán_, (B) Air-pump, pair of bellows. (cf. hasohasán).

_asohasánan_, (B) Stithy, smithy, anvil. (cf. hasohasánan, landasán).

_ásoy_, Explanation, clear statement; to explain, expound, make clear,
relate distinctly. Asóya inâ sing maáyo. Explain that well. Asóyi
akó siní. Explain this to me. Iásoy ko sa ímo ang nahanabô. I am
going to relate to you what happened. Kon ikáw índì makasáyod siní,
saráng ko ikaásoy sa ímo. If you don't understand it, I can explain
it to you. (cf. sáysay).

_ásoy_, Use, usefulness, result, advantage. Anó ang ásoy sang
kinahánglan mo? What is (was) the result or advantage of your
application? A, walâ gid sing ásoy ang ákon pakiló-oy sa íya. Ah,
there is (was) no use my applying to him. (cf. águd, pulús).

_aspálto_, (Sp. asfalto) Asphalt, a kind of bitumen or mineral pitch;
to asphalt, cover with asphalt. Naaspaltohan na iníng dálan. This
road is now asphalted.

_aspirína_, (Sp. aspirína) Aspirin.

_ásta_, (Sp. hasta) Till, until; even, not even. Hulatá akó ásta sa
las díes. Wait for me till ten o'clock. Asta sa katapúsan. Till the
end. To a finish. Ginpúkan sang bágyo ang tanán nga mga tanúm ásta
ang mga dalágkò nga káhoy. The hurricane levelled all plants with
the ground, even large trees. (cf. túbtub).

_ásuang_, A wizard, witch, one that practises witchcraft, a sorcerer,
magician, enchanter, one supposed to be in league with the devil and
capable of doing harm by spells and enchantments; the devil. (áswang
id.).

_asúgi_, (Sp. azogue) Mercury, quick-silver, match-point, match-end,
phosphorus.

_asúkar_, (Sp. azucar) Sugar; to make sugar including all the
operations in the final stage of the process of sugar-milling,
transferring the pulút (the sugar-cane-juice that has become thick
and sticky through evaporation) from the cauldron to a flat-bottomed
trough and stirring it there with special shovels, till ready for
drying and packing. Asukára na lang ang pulút. Turn the pulút into
sugar. Asukári akó sing isá ka káwà nga pulút sa madalì, kay may
kinahánglan akó sinâ. Turn me a cauldronful of pulút into sugar at
once, for I need it. Iasúkar akó ánay siníng pulút. Please turn this
pulút into sugar for me. (cf. arníbal; kalámay).

_asúl_, (Sp. azul) Blue, azure, sky-blue; to colour or dye
blue. Ginasúl níya ang báyò ko. He dyed my jacket blue. Dílì mo
pagasulón ang patádyong. Don't dye the skirt blue. Ipaasúl ko iníng
kolór nga pinúdpud sa ákon báyò. I will use this dye-powder to dye
my jacket blue.

_asúnto_, (Sp. asúnto) Affair, business; case in court, lawsuit;
also adverb: with regard to, concerning. Asúnto sinâ--With regard to
that--. As to that--. (cf. butáng; nahanungúd, nahatungúd).

_asúpre_, (Sp. azufre) Sulphur.

_asuséna_, (Sp. azucena) The white lily.

_áswang_, See ásuang.

_áta_, See ágtà id. Kaáta sa ímo. How black you are.

_atá_, See áta id.

_átà_, Sepia, the black fluid of the--squid,--devil-fish,--cuttle-fish.

_atábay_, Shoring, shoring material, temporary props, supports,
lining; to shore up, to line, to prop, support temporarily. Atabáyi
ang bubón. Line the water-hole. Iatábay ko iníng pánit sang burí sa
áwang námon. I will use this bark of the buri-palm to line our well
with. Atabáyon ko ang pánit siníng burí. I will make shoring or lining
of the bark of this buri-palm.

_atád_, To separate from, set apart, expose. The Dim. atád-atád is
mostly used.

_atád-atád_, Dim. and Freq. of atád. Also: Spread out, spaced, not
close together, not near to each other. (cf. putá-putá, aták-aták).

_atádo_, (Sp. atado) Tied, bound; a bundle or heap; a certain measure,
particularly used in selling small fish. Nakabakál akó sing duhá ka
atádo nga bilóng-bilóng, balingón, etc. I have bought two measures
of bilóng-bilóng, balingón etc. N.B. Fish are often arranged for sale
in little heaps to suit the dealer and his customers. The size of the
heap may range from a handful to a hatful, and the price of each heap
may vary from two centavos to half a peso, according to the quantity
and quality of the fish. (cf. dulún; túmpok).

_atakádo_, (Sp. atacado) Attacked, assailed, assaulted (by robbers,
etc.); infected (by disease, etc.). (cf. dúnggò, dinúnggò; aránka,
soróso, inaránka, sinoróso).

_atakár_, (Sp. atacar) To attack, fall upon, assail, assault, be
aggressive, to affect, infect. Ginatakár akó sang mga buyóng, sang
balaód, etc. I was attacked by the robbers, by dysentery, etc.

_aták-aták_ Spaced, spread out, not joined, not united, not together,
not close to each other; to be or become separate or segregated
from one another, etc. Sádto maíkit ang mga baláy siníng báryo,
karón nagaták-aták na. Formerly the houses in this village were
close together, now they are widely spaced. Ginaták-aták níla
ang mga baláy. They spread the houses out singly with considerable
distances between them. Aták-aták gid lámang dirí ang mga páhò, dílì
gid pinúnsok. Mango-trees here are to be met with only one here and
there, not in groups. Maáyo gid ang pagpaaták-aták sang mga baláy nga
kawáyan kag nípà, kay kon gutúk sa minurô kag may kaláyo maúmid silá
nga tanán. Houses made of bamboo and thatched with nípà should be
spaced far from one another, for if they are close together within
a village and a fire breaks out they will all be involved (in the
calamity). (cf. atád-atád, putá-putá, malakâ, isáísa).

_atáke_, (Sp. ataque) An attack, assault, onset; fit (of a disease);
to fall upon, attack, assault, assail. Atakéha siá. Attack
him. (cf. soróso, dóksol, dámhag).

_átang_, A beam or thick plank cutting across a bamboo-floor in an
ordinary native house. Nearly every main room in houses with bamboo
flooring has an átang in the middle, rising to about one inch above
the floor.

_atáng_, (B) To put, place. Iatáng inâ dirâ. Put it there. Atangí ang
masakit sing túbig. Put some water near the sick person. (cf. butáng).

_atángan_, Having an átang or more than one, as in the case of large
rooms with bamboo-flooring. Ang baláy ni Gabíno atángan, ang íya ni
Andres dílì. Gabino's house has a plank across the middle of the floor,
Andres' has none. (cf. átang, atáng).

_átas_, A method of catching fish by draining off the water; to drain
a river-channel, to strand fish by draining off the water. Ang kanál
ginaátas, ang ísdà ginaatásan. The channel is drained, the fish is
caught by draining off the water. Atási akó sing ísdà. Catch fish
for me by draining off the water. Mangátas kitá. Let us go fishing
by the átas method. Iátas akó ánay. Please take my place at fishing
by the method called átas.

_atás-átas_, Dim. and Freq. of átas. Also: To run after, to follow,
to be constantly behind. Ang ilóy nagaatás-átas sa íya bátà nga
nagakámang. The mother is constantly behind her baby that is crawling
along the floor. (cf. abát-ábat, lagás-lágas, alók-álok).

_át-at_, To be able to stand the taste of something sour, bitter,
pungent or acrid. Indì akó makaát-at sang kaádat siníng búnga sang
kabúgaw. I cannot stand the sourness of this pomelo. Atatá gid ang
kaádat siníng bulúng. Force yourself to stand the bitterness of this
medicine. Indì ka makaát-at sinâ. You cannot stand that taste on
account of its sharpness. (cf. ít-it, íro, batás).

_atatálo_, (H) A caterpillar, worm; particularly a caterpillar that
is very injurious to some plants like dágmay, kadiós, etc. Atatálo
sang sóklà--silkworm.

_atatáro_, (B) See atatálo.

_atatáyog_, Of no use, useless, unprofitable, no good; to be of
no use, etc. Atatáyog nga táo, bátà, etc. A useless man, bad boy,
etc. (cf. walâ sing pulús, walâ sing águd, walâ sing ásoy, waláy
sáyod, etc.).

_atatayóg_, See atatáyog id.

_atáy_, The liver.

_atáyan_, Having a big liver; brave, bold, courageous, unafraid,
fearless, undaunted, intrepid. (cf. maísug, matútum, isganán, makáhas,
etc. in the sense of not being easily scared).

_atáy-átay_, Quagmire. See hatáy-hátay.

_atáy-átay_, The best or central part of a thing; core, marrow;
palm of the hand, sole of the foot, (cf. tungâ, alibútud; ótok;
pálad, dapá-dapá).

_atemóya_, A kind of fruit tree.

_atendér_, (Sp. atender) To attend to, look after, take care of,
pay attention to. Atendehí ang ímo mga katungdánan. Attend to your
duties. Atendehá ang ímò asiénda. Look after your plantation. Iatendér
akó ánay siníng kwárto, kay may kadtoán akó. Please keep an eye
on this room for a while, for I have to go out. (cf. tátap, sapák,
alingá, bántay, baláka, ripára, dipára).

_atensyón_, (Sp. atención) Attention, heed. Atensyón! Attention! Take
care! (cf. talámdan, tagám, ándam, památì).

_áthag_, Clearness, distinctness; to become or make clear,
distinct. Athagí akó sinâ. Make that clear to me. Nagáthag na ang íya
sulát, hámbal, pamítlang, etc. His writing, speech, pronunciation,
etc. has become clear. Athagá ang ímo paghámbal. Speak clearly,
distinctly. Iáthag mo gid sa íya and dakô ko nga kinahánglan. Explain
to him clearly my great need. (cf. sánag, ásoy, sáysay; tígdas;
pasáyod).

_áti_, Negrito, a member of the dark-skinned tribes living in the
mountains; a beggar, mendicant, from the fact that the Negritos often
leave their mountains and come down to the plains to beg alms. Also
used as a verb. Daw áti ikáw. You are like a Negrito. You are an awful
beggar. Nagáti ka galî? Have you become a Negrito? (said of one who
is dark from long exposure to the sun or who is very dirty, etc.).

_atí_, To sack, rob, steal, plunder. Ginatí níla ang bánwa. They
sacked the town. Dílì nínyo pagatión (pagatihón) ang báryo. Don't
plunder the village. Ang mga buyóng nagapangatí. Brigands rob and
steal. Indì kamó magpangatí. Don't rob and steal like brigands. Iníng
bánwa inatián (inatihán) sang mga buyóng sang duhá na ka túig. This
town was partly plundered by robbers two years ago.

_atí-áti_, Dim. of áti. Resembling a Negrito in blackness, etc.;
dark, blackish. Maís nga atí-áti. Dark maize, black corn.

_atíd_, "Pal", friend, chum, mate, constant companion, (cf. akíd,
idól).

_atímon_, A kind of wild melon or cucumber, edible but not very
savoury.

_atingayón_, (B) The little finger. (cf. kumalíngking, tingáy-tíngay,
tingayón).

_atióg_, A pedlar, huckster, hawker, petty dealer, travelling salesman,
chapman, costermonger.

_atiótis_, (Probably from the Spanish achiote, achote) Arnotto,
annatto, a spice-tree and its fruit giving a peculiar taste and
reddish colour to soup or to a sauce; bixa orellana. (cf. estiwítis,
tiwítis id.).

_átip_, See ántip id.

_atipálo_, The earwig. Nasohótan siá sing atipálo. An earwig crawled
into his ear.

_atipán_, Care, attention; to take care of, attend to, manage, look
after. Atipaná ang mga dinápit. Attend to the invited guests. Iatipán
akó ánay siníng mga bátà. Please take these children under your care
for me. Ipaatipán mo ang mga bátà sa kay Fulána. Hand the children
over to N.N.'s care. (cf. tátap, ripára, etc.).

_atipúlong_, Short and twisted, checked in growth, diseased
(of hair). Atipúlong nga bohók. Short and twisted (diseased)
hair. Panggabúta ang atipúlong sa úlo ko. Pull out the stubby hair
of my head.

_atipúyong_, A fainting fit, a light swoon. Also used as a
verb. Ginaatipúyong siá. She has a slight fainting fit. Inatipúyong
siá. She swooned, fainted. (cf. lipóng, lípong, língin, lingín).

_átis_, The custard-apple, tree and fruit. The fruit resembles
a pine-cone.

_atitirís_, (Sp. titerero, titiritero) A puppet-player, puppet-showman,
a clown, a fool. Dáw atitirís siá. He is like a puppet-player or acts
like a fool.

_atléta_, (Sp. atleta) Athlete; acrobat.

_atlétiko_, (Sp. atletico) Athletic.

_atmóspera_, (Sp. atmósfera) Atmosphere, air. (cf. hángin).

_áto_, The key, end, point of a thread, rope, etc. (cf. ótbong,
tángkap).

_áto_, To see the point, to understand, to grasp. Indì siá kaáto
sinâ. He cannot see the point. He does not understand it. Makaáto
ikáw sa pagpangítà sang áto sang bunáng? Can you find the key of the
yarn? (cf. hibaló, sáyod, balintúnod, etc.).

_ató_, That, that there. Indì ató ang baláy ni Fuláno. That is not
N N.'s house. (cf. ádto, yádto).

_ató-áto_, Dim. of áto. To understand a little, etc. Ginpaató-áto silá
nga dáan sang íla mga ginikánan kútub sang magamáy pa silá. When they
were still quite small their parents gave them a hint (that they were
intended for each other).

_atóg_, Glans penis: vesiculæ seminariæ; spermatic chord;
testicles. (cf. ulúd).

_átok_, To dam or dyke (a river); to make a low fence or barrier. Atóki
ang sapâ (sápà). Dam the brook. Build a small dam or dyke across the
channel of the brook. (cf. púnud; kodál).

_atóli_, Glue, gum, mucilage; paste. (cf. kóla).

_átomo_, (Sp. átomo) Atom.

_áton_, Our, ours (including those addressed); sa áton--us; to--,
from--, on--, at--, towards--, etc.--us. (cf. náton, ta; ákon).

_atóp_, Roof; to roof, roof in, cover with a roof, make a roof. Atpi
(atopí) ang baláy. Put a roof on the house. Iatóp iníng kógon. Use
this kogón-grass as roofing-material. Atóp nga sim. An iron
roof. (cf. alátpan, alátpon).

_atotóli_, Ear-wax.

_átoy_, (B) To thicken, condense, coagulate, inspissate (of
liquids). Ang lasáw nagátoy na. The molasses has become thick. Ginátoy
(ginpaátoy) níla ang sabáw. They made the sauce thick. Atóya ang
sópas. Make thick soup. (cf. lapúyot).

_atóy-átoy_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of átoy. Atóyatóya ang sópas. Make
the soup a little thicker. Naatóyatóyan akó siníng gátas nga
kondensáda. This condensed milk is a little too thick for me.

_átpan_, From atóp--roof, etc.

_atráka_, (Sp. atracar) To approach, overtake; overcome, lay low,
break down. Walâ silá makaatráka sang amó nga talútug. They could not
break down that palisade. Atrakáha siá. Lay him low. Knock him down.

_atrás_, (Sp. atras) Backward, backwards, behind; to go behind,
move backwards, leave or go away. Magatrás gid ikáw! Get back! Go
away! (cf. ísol, isdóg, idóg).

_atrasádo_, (Sp. atrasado) Late, too late, behindhand, behind time,
belated, tardy; slow (of a clock, watch). Atrasádo ang pagabút mo. You
are late. You came--, have come--, too late. (cf. kuligót, kulihót,
atrasár).

_atrasár_, (Sp. atrasar) To be--, do--, late, to postpone, put
off. Nagatrasár siá sing duhá ka táknà (óras) sang íya pagpaúlì
sa baláy. He went home two hours too late. Atrasahá sing diótay
ang óras mo. Postpone a little the time you appointed. Indì mo
siá pagpaatrasahón. Don't cause him to be late. Don't retard
him. (cf. atrasádo, kulihót, olíhi, olihí).

_atríl_, (Sp. atril) Lectern, ambo, book-rest,
music-stand. (cf. bulutángan (sang tulún-an), tulungtúngan).

_atsára_, (Probably from the Sp. "echar en escabeche") Pickles.

_átsi_, (H) Sneezing, sternutation; to sneeze. Naatsihán níya ang
íya pányo. Nangátsi (nagátsi) siá sa íya pányo. He sneezed into his
handkerchief. (cf. pangátsi, bahaón).

_átsoy_, Use, usefulness, advantage, benefit. Walâ gid siá sing
átsoy. He is of no use, is a good-for-nothing. (cf. dálpot, águd,
ásoy).

_atúbang_, The position directly before a person or thing, front,
face; to face, stand before, confront. Sa atúbang maáyo siá, ápang
sa likód malibákon. In one's presence he is fair-spoken, but behind
one's back he is given to detracting. Magatúbang ka sa íya. Present
yourself before him. Stand before him. Face him. Atubánga siá. Face
him. Confront him. Paatubánga si Hosé sa ákon. Make José appear
before me. Paatubánga si Hosé sa kay Andres. Tell José to go over
to Andrew (to keep him company, talk to him, etc.). Ipaatúbang
ko siá sa ímo. I'll present him to you or make him appear before
you. (cf. támpad).

_atubáng_, To be--next,--near,--coming. Sa pituádlaw nga
nagaatubáng. The coming week. Sa búlan nga ginaatubáng. Next
month. (cf. atúbang).

_atubángan_, Facing, position in front of, foreground, vis-a-vis. Sa
íya atubángan. In his presence. In front of him. Sa atubángan sang
baláy. Before--, in front of--, the house. (cf. tamparán).

_atubangán_, The sexual organ, especially of the male.

_atubangón_, That will appear or happen soon, the near future. Karón
sa atubangón magapatíndog akó sing bág-o nga baláy. I am about to
erect a new house.

_atúr_, A term of contempt. Fool, ass, idiot. Dáw ikáw ang atúr. You
are (act) like a fool. (cf. búang, úmang, tampuháw, kalúndong,
kolô-kolô, etc.).

_atutúyo_, Small, slight, dwarfish; pygmy, dwarf (of males),
(cf. katitíya--small, undersized (of women).

_atutúyò_, A small mouse, a baby mouse whose eyes are not yet
open. (cf. gitíng).

_áw_, See áo.

_áwà_, A kind of fish.

_áwà_, Mercy, compassion, pity, commiseration, sympathy;
to have compassion, to pity, feel for, have mercy on, be
compassionate. Nagakaáwa, akó sa íya. I pity him. Ginakaawáan
námon ang maláut níya nga kapaláran. We sympathize with him in his
bad luck. Maáwà kitá sa íya! Let us have pity on him! (cf. ló-oy;
mainawáon, maawáon; kaáwà).

_awâ-áwà_, Dim. and Freq. of áwà. Indì mo pagawáawáon ang bátà, kay
magahibî gid lang. Don't speak so very compassionately to the child,
for it is certainly going to cry.

_áwang_, (B) Well, cistern, pithole for bathing or drawing water,
water-hole. Also used as a verb. Ginawángan námon ang apán. We dug
pits for the locusts (to kill and bury them in), (cf. bubón; bubón
and áwang are used promiscuously in some places, but more generally
"bubón" means a water-hole near a river, etc. for bathing purposes, and
"áwang" a well or cistern for drawing water for household purposes).

_áwas_, An overflow; to overflow, escape or spill over the rim,
said chiefly of liquids. Nagaáwas ang túbig sa láta or ang láta
ginaawásan sang túbig. The water is overflowing the can. Awas may
also mean: a pollution. Paáwas sang láwas--Masturbation; to cause
pollution. (cf. káwas).

_awát_, Occupation, business, engagement, work, anything that detains;
to keep busy or engaged, to hinder from doing or attending to something
else. May awát akó. I have some task to perform, some work in hand
(and, consequently, I beg to be excused). Ginawát akó níya. He kept
me occupied, hindered me from attending to something else. Dî mo
akó pagawatón. Don't hinder or interrupt me. Iníng trabáho iawát ko
sa ímo. I'll give you this work as an interruption to your present
engagement. Awatí sing malíp-ot nga tión ang ímong buluhatón. Interrupt
for a moment your present occupation. Allow your time to be encroached
upon for a while. Awát man lang inâ. That was only an interruption,
was of no avail, to no purpose, was a complete failure. Indì ka
magkádto dídto, kay awát man lang ang ímo pagkádto. Don't go there,
for your going there will be only a waste of time. (cf. kaawátan,
mainawáton, libáng).

_áw-áw_, See áo-áo.

_áway_, Fight, battle, struggle, conflict, fray, strife, contention,
tussle, scuffle, scrimmage, encounter, fighting, quarrelling, war,
combat; to fight, quarrel, come to blows, go to war, etc. Nagaáway
silá. They are fighting or quarrelling. Nagakaáway silá. They are
enemies. Dílì kamó mag-ináway or mag-ilináway. Don't fight or quarrel
amongst yourselves. Anó ang ginawáyan nínyo kahápon sang hápon? What
were you quarrelling about yesterday evening? Awáyon ko gid siá. I am
certainly going to fight him. Tápus na ang dakô nga áway sa Orópa. The
great war in Europe is finished. (cf. kaáway, kaawáyan, kaawayón,
mangangawáy, ális, árnis, bagâ, bángig, banggiánay, etc.).

_áwhag_, To be or become wide, spacious, roomy, extensive, (cf. álway,
hanáhay, háw-ag, lápad).

_áwhang, áwhog_, See áohang, áohog.

_awís_, The male of the tamburúkò or tibó-tíbo, a snail with an
elongated spiral shell. The snail is edible and its shell is often
used to make lime for betelnut chewing.

_awó-áwo_, The rope in the form of a sling or loop attached to the
shafts of a cart, rig, etc. and passed under the neck of an ox for
fastening the yoke. (cf. kalambúsay).

_awóg_, A spell or enchantment believed in by the superstitious,
and supposed to make one remain within a rather narrow circle, unable
to go far away; spell-binding. Also used as a verb. Ginbutangán níya
sing awóg ang íya karabáw. He cast a spell on his buffalo (so that the
buffalo should not be able to go far astray). Naawogán ang makáwat. The
thief had a spell put on him (in order that he should be unable to
escape to a place far away). Naawóg siá sang balíkbálik. He is bound
to come back again, he is forced to go to and fro, he is, as it were,
spell-bound and keeps returning to the same place. (cf. lúmay, lumáy).

_áwot_, (B) Toughness, hardness, tightness, immovability; to move
with difficulty, to be hard--, difficult--, to deal with. Nagáwot na
ang tinápay nga dáan. The stale bread has become hard. Gináwot níla
ang súngsung sa botílya. They made the cork fit very tight in the
bottle. Sang tingádlaw mahapús ang pagbukás siníng ganháan, ápang
karón, kay tingulán na, nagáwot. In the dry season it was easy to
open this door, but now in the rainy season it is difficult. Naawótan
akó sa paggábut siníng lánsang. It was a hard job for me to draw out
this nail. Ginawótan akó sináng táo sa pagpaháylosa íya. I had great
difficulty in bringing that man over to my point of view. Iníng kárne
maáwot. This meat is tough. (cf. tíg-a, húnit, hugút, paganót).

_áwto, awtorisár, awtorisasyón_. See áoto, aotorisár, aotorisasyón.

_áy_, An exclamation of surprise, joy, sorrow, or pain. Ah! Oh! Aye!

_ayá-ay_, The neap-tide, lowest tide.

_ayá-ay_, Scarce, rare, uncommon, seldom seen, seldom met with, hard
to get; to be or become scarce, etc. Ayá-ay--or--nagaayá-ay ang ísdà
sa karón nga túig. This year fish is scarce. (cf. íwat, hínà).

_ayád_, (B) Well, good, cured, in good condition; to get well, be
cured, etc. Nagayád 'ron tána?--Hóod, ayád 'ron tána. Has he got
well?--Yes, he is cured now. (cf. Nagáyo na siá?--Hóo maáyo na siá).

_ayádan_, (B) To get on well in life, to prosper, make progress
from a material point of view, to be well off. Nagaayádan 'ron si
Fuláno. N.N. has got on well lately. Sa karón nga túig nagaayádan ang
kahimtángan ni Fuláno. N.N. is better off this year. (cf. kaayohán,
not to be confounded with kaayóhan--benefit, etc.).

_ayád-áyad_, (B) Fine, nice, pretty, beautiful, charming,
handsome, comely, good-looking. Abáw kaayád-áyad ba! By Jove! How
beautiful! (cf. maayó-áyo, matahúm, madálig, magayón, maámbong,
maányag).

_ayág_, Sifting, a shaking movement like that of a hand-sieve in
action; to shake up and down or to and fro like a sieve; to sift,
screen, riddle. Ayagá ang upá. Sift out the rice-chaff. Ayagí ang
ayágan. Shake the sieve. Iayág akó ánay siníng upá. Please, sift out
the chaff for me.

_ayágan_, A sieve, screen, riddle. (cf. alyágan, arayágan, aryágan
id. and all words derived from ayág).

_ayág-áyag_ Dim. and Freq. of ayág. To shake up and down, move to
and fro.

_áyam_, (B) Dog. (cf. idô).

_ayám_, To send a dog after, pursue with a dog. Ayamá ang mga
kánding. Send a dog after the goats. Iayám ko iníng idô sa mga
báboy. I'll pursue the pigs with this dog. Pagpangayám--to hunt
with dogs.

_ayám-ayám_, A kind of large, black ant.

_ayám-áyam_, (B) Dim. of áyam. Also: Gossip, go-between, procurer,
pimp. Also used in depreciation of election-agents and the
like. (cf. búgaw, agwatáto; ilóg-ilóg).

_ayáo_, A prohibitive particle: You must not----. You shall
not----. Don't by any means----. Ayáo, paghimóa inâ. Oh, don't do
that. Beware of doing that. Ayáo, pagbayái ang ímong mga ginikánan. Ah,
you must never forsake your parents. (cf. índì (gid), dílì nga más-a).

_áyao_, Satisfaction, sufficiency, enough; to satisfy, come up to the
mark, fill up what is short, be sufficient or enough. Makaáyao balá
ang isá ka pásong nga humáy sa ánum ka táo sa isá ka búlan?--Abáw, índì
gid, hálus gánì nga makaáyao sa íla ang ápat ka pásong. Will one bushel
of rice be sufficient for six men for one month?--Oh, no, by no means;
four bushels will scarcely be sufficient for them. Kúlang pa ang pitó
ka gántang sa isá ka pásong; ayáoa lang iníng pitó ka gántang. There
are still seven gantas short of one bushel; just add seven gantas to
make the measure complete. Magkúhà ka lang sing diótay nga humáy sa
ákon tambóbo, ápang índì mo pagayáoon nga isá ka pásong. Take a little
rice from my granary, but do not take a whole bushel. Kon magkádto
ikáw sa malayô nga mga báryo maayáoan ka sa paglakát. If you go to
far villages you will get quite enough of walking.

_áyap_, Participation, share, portion; to participate, share in,
have a share in, partake, get a share or part of. Kon buót ka magáyap
sinâ----. If you like to get a share of that----. Paayápa akó siní. Let
me have part of this. Ayápi akó siní. Get me--, provide me with--,
a portion of this. Kon malúyag ka ipaáyap ko sa ímo iníng duhá ka
baríta nga tinápay sang napúlò nga binakál ko. If you like I'll let
you have these two bars of bread of the ten I bought. (cf. ámbit, ámò).

_ayát_, Challenge, provocation, defiance; to defy, challenge,
provoke. Ayatá siá. Defy him. Challenge him. Ayatí siá sang
binángon. Challenge him with the bolo. Balángan ko ang íya baláy sing
mga bató sa pagayát sa íya--or--nga iayát ko sa íya. I'll pelt his
house with stones to provoke him. (cf. ákiat).

_áyaw, ayáw_, See áyao, ayáo.

_áy-ay_, To spread out before, show, display. Ginayayán níya akó sang
íya bág-o nga huégo. She showed me her new dress. (cf. ládlad).

_áyhan_, Perhaps, may be, mayhap, possibly, by chance. Also used as
a verb. Indì ka magayhán-áyhan, kay kon matúod, matúod. Don't say
"perhaps, perhaps", for if it is true, it is true. (cf. dámlag,
básì, kabáy).

_áyî_, Milt, spleen, (cf. áhè).

_áyo_, (H) To be or get well, recover, to get cured or healed; to mend,
emend, amend, improve, make good or better. Ang masakít nga bátà nagáyo
na. The sick child is cured or has recovered. Iníng bulúng nagpaáyo
sang íyang balatían. This medicine cured his sickness. Ayóha ang ímo
mga batásan. Mend your manners. Improve your behaviour. Gináyo siá sang
manogbúlong. The doctor cured him. Kaáyo--to mend, repair. Kaayóha
iní. Repair this. Mend this. Sín-o ang nagkaáyo sang ímo baláy? Who
repaired your house?

_ayô_, Pet name, familiar name, as known amongst friends and
relatives. Ipíng amó ang ayô ni Filípe. Iping is the pet name of
Philip. (cf. hayô id.).

_ayô_, To ask, request. Nagayô siá kay tátay nga malakát
sa Ilóng-ílong. He asked father to be allowed to go to
Iloilo. (cf. pangáyò).

_ayô_, Haggling, higgling, bargaining, beating down the price of; to
haggle, higgle, bargain, beat or knock down the price, ask for less
than charged. Baráto man lang iní; ngáa nga nagaayô pa gid ikáw? This
is really cheap; why then do you still haggle? Ayoá sa íya iníng
hénero, kay masiádo kamahál. Try to beat down his price for this cloth,
for it is too dear. Ayoí siá sing bisán limá ka dakô lámang. Make him
lower the price even if by only five centavos. Walâ sing ayô dirí sa
ámon, kóndì ang tanán nga ámon balalígyà may bilí nga napát-ud. There
is no haggling with us, for all we sell has a fixed price.

_ayó-ayó_, (H) Pretty well, a little improved in health or behaviour,
to be a little improved or better, etc. Ayó-ayó na siá or nagayó-ayó
na siá. She is doing pretty well now. She is a little better now.

_ayó-áyo_, (H) Rather nice or beautiful; to be a little improved in
looks. Ayó-áyo siá or nagaayó-áyo siá. She is pretty. Naayóayóhan
akó sa íya. She appears to me to be rather good-looking.

_áyod_, A very obscene expression denoting the act of
copulation. (cf. iót, iyót).

_ayód-áyod_, Freq. of áyod; also a kind of insect.

_áyon_, Towards, in the direction of, near, in the vicinity of. Diín
áyon ang baláy mo, sa búkid áyon ukón sa báybay áyon? Where about
is your house, near the mountains or near the sea? Tíndog ka dídto
áyon. Stand over there. (cf. náyon, dámpit, dapít).

_ayón_, The principal hand, the hand one works with most; one's
strong point. Anó ang ayón mo? Toó lang?--Toó kag walá. What is your
principal hand? Are you only right handed?--I am both right--and
left--handed. Ayón níla ang búrà. Gossip is their strong point.

_ayóp_, Now and then used instead of paayóp. Ginayóp (ginpaayóp) níya
si Fuláno. He--adopted N.N.,--took care of N.N. See the following ayóp.

_ayóp_, One under the care and protection of another, a ward,
protegé, one who is given shelter and protection; to seek refuge,
look for shelter and protection, seek an asylum, etc., as orphans,
or the like. Ayóp níla siá. He is their ward, protegé. Ang mga ímol
nagaayóp sa mga manggaránon. The poor look for help to the rich. Paáypa
(paayopá) akó, kon mga saráng. Grant me shelter and protection, if
possible. Ipaayóp ko sa íya iníng makaloló-oy nga táo. I will give
this poor man into his care. Yádtong ílo nga bátà nga ginpaayóp níya
ginbílang níya nga sumúod nga anák níya. That orphan boy, whom he had
taken pity upon, he treated as if he were his own son. (cf. aláypan,
dangúp).

_ayopáka_, (B) Very childish, silly, foolish, out of one's wits,
senile, particularly applied to old people in their second
childhood. (cf. tsótso, alogadí, ulianón, urumánon, payaón).

_áypan, áypon_, etc. from ayóp.

_ayúda_, (Sp. ayuda, ayudar) Help, aid, succour, assistance; enema,
clyster; to help, assist; to administer an enema. Ayudahí siá. Help
him. Ginaayudahán níya ang tagumatáyon. She is assisting the dying
person (by saying the prayers for the dying, etc.). Notice the accent
in the following: Ayudáhi siá. Administer him an enema. (cf. búlig,
tábang, agubáy; kalíya, labatíba).

_ayudánte_, (Sp. ayudante) Assistant, adjutant, aide-de-camp; helper,
partner. (cf. kaúbay, kabúlig, katímbang, binangî).

_ayúno_, (Sp. ayuno) Fast, fasting; to fast. (cf. puása;
paúmud--abstinence).

_ayúp_, See ayóp.




B


_b_, The letter "B" in Visayan has the same sound as in English. Being
a labial it has a natural affinity with "M" and if the prefix pan- is
joined to any word beginning with a "b", that "b" is changed into "m",
e.g. búhat becomes pamúhat instead of panbúhat; búnak becomes pamúnak
and the verbal noun and adjective formed from the latter is mamumunák;
báwì--pamáwì--mamamáwì, etc. Very frequently the prefixes ha- and hi-
produce the same change, e.g. bilí--hamilí; búlbul--himúlbul, etc.

_ba_, Placed in the beginning of a sentence or alone as
an exclamation "ba" with a rather long drawn-out "a",
denotes a negation, non-conformity, aversion, contempt or
dislike. Bah! Pshaw! Pooh! Whew! Ba, índì akó magpáti sinâ. Pshaw, I
don't believe that. Ba, dáw sa butíg inâ. Pooh, that sounds like a lie.

_ba_, An exclamation placed usually at the end of a sentence
after an adjective and giving that adjective a superlative value:
Indeed! Really! Very much so! Truly! How----! Abáw, iníng baláy dakô
ba! By Jove, look at this house, how large it is! Iníng balaligyáan
maáka ba. What a lot of people deal at this shop!

_baák_, Crushed, squeezed and broken. (cf. lumâ).

_báak_, To crush, squeeze out of shape, crumple, break by pressure,
said especially of bamboo, tubes, pipes and the like. Nabáak ang
kawáyan. The bamboo has been crushed. Iníng isá ka púnò nga kawáyan
nabaákan sing madámò nga mga layón sang pagbágyo. Many full-grown
bamboos of this clump were crushed and broken by the hurricane. Ipabáak
lang sa alíling iníng kawáyan. Simply crush this bamboo under the
wheel (by letting a cart pass over it, etc.). Dílì mo pagbaákon ang
kawáyan. Don't crush the bamboo. (cf. lumâ).

_baáng-báang_ (B) To warm up, get warm by taking a hot drink, food,
etc. Baáng-baángi ang ímo solóksolók sing diótay nga kán-on sa walâ
pa ikáw magsúgud sang pagpangabúdlay. Warm your stomach with a little
rice, before you start your work. Mainúm akó sing maínit nga tsa
sa pagbaángbáang sang ákon solóksolók. I am going to drink hot tea
to warm my stomach. Imna iníng bíno, kay magapabaángbáang sang ímo
solóksolók. Drink this wine, for it will warm you up. (cf. bagáng).

_báas_, (Sp. bajar) To diminish, lessen; to drop, expel,
remove. (cf. báhas, dágdag, búhin, pahalín).

_bábà, bâbâ_, Mouth. Mapísan siá sing bábà. She is a great
chatterbox. Pamábà, pamâbâ--to talk much, tell stories, let out
secrets. Indì ka magpamábà. Don't talk too much. Don't let out
secrets. Sin-o ang namábà sinâ? Who told that, who blurted it out?

_babá-an_, bâbá-an, Gossip, chatterbox. (cf. bura-án, wakalán,
palahámbal, palasúgid, etc.).

_babáe_, Woman, female. See babáye id. (cf. babayhána).

_babáknit_, Dim. of babáe, but also applied to girls, especially in
contempt. Nalágyo ang babáknit sa tápus na níya mapanghabóy ang mga
hampángan sang íya mga kaúpud. The naughty girl ran off after throwing
away the toys of her companions. (cf. mabáknit id.).

_babaná_, A tropical tree and its edible fruit, soursop, bullock's
heart. (cf. gwabaná id.).

_babaúgon_, Foul, rotten, spoilt (of eggs, etc.; cf. báog).

_bábay_, (B) Used only of, or amongst, females: Friend, playmate,
constant companion, bosom-friend, intimate; to be friends, or constant
companions. Nagabábay or nagababayánay silá. They are very intimate or
constantly together. (The relative term for males is akíd, atíd, idól).

_babáye_, Woman, female. Idô nga babáye. A bitch. Karnéro nga
babáye. Ewe. Kabáyo nga babáye. Mare. Ang mga babáye mapígaw. Women
are weak. Dáw babáye siá. He is like a woman i.e. fickle, unmanly,
etc. (babáe id.).

_babayén-on_, Effeminate, womanish, feminine in a depreciative
sense. Ang mga laláki nga babayén-on sing batásan talamayón. Effeminate
men are contemptible.

_babayhána_, Woman, female (familiar or even contemptuous). (cf. babáe,
babáknit, mabáknit).

_babáylan_, Sorcerer, wizard, magician, one versed in superstitious
practices. Also used as a verb. Ginbabaylanán sang babáylan ang masakít
nga bátà. The sorcerer practised his art or performed his enchantments
over the sick child. Ginpababaylanán sang ilóy ang íya masakít nga
bátà. The mother got a conjurer to perform his superstitious rites
over her sick baby. Ang babáylan kon magbinabáylan maíhaw sing manók
ukón báboy kag mapatíkpátik sa pínggan. When the conjurer performs his
superstitious rites he kills a chicken or pig and repeatedly strikes
a plate. Nakakáon siá sing báboy nga binabaylanán. He ate some pork
that had been subjected to superstitious rites.

_bábha_, A large rent or hole, a gaping wound, gash; to make a gash or
rent. May bábha ang likód níya, kay ginlabô ni Fuláno. He has a gaping
wound on the back, for he received a gash from N.N. Ginbábha níya ang
báyò ko. He tore a large hole in my jacket. Ginbabhaán níya ang íya
likód. He made a gaping wound in his back. Ibábha sa likód níya ang ímo
binángon. Give him a gash on the back with your bolo. (cf. wáng-wang).

_báboy_, Pig, swine, pork. Giníhaw níla ang báboy nga pinatámbok. They
killed the fattened pig. Makaúyon gid siá sang báboy. He likes to
eat pork very much. (cf. bináboy--piggish, swinish).

_babóy-babóy_, A kind of blackish vermin that is often found on trees,
underneath stones and the like; an oniscus, slater, wood-louse,
sow-bug.

_báda_, (Sp. barra) An iron bar, crowbar; an iron dibble. (cf. bára
id.).

_badáho_, (Sp. badajo) The clapper of a bell.

_bádang_, To practise, inure, train, accustom to, make used
to. Nabádang na siá sa pagtabakô, pag-inúm sing bíno, paghámbal
sing ininglés, etc. He is now accustomed to smoke, to drink wine,
to speak English, etc. Nabadángan ko na iníng lugár, iníng mga
buluhatón, etc. I am now used to this place, to this kind of work,
etc. Ipabádang mo siá sa pagsáut sa kay Fulána. Let her learn to
dance under N.N.'s instruction. Nagsutíl ang bátà, kay walâ sing
nabadángan ang pagkastígo sang íya ilóy. The child turned out badly,
because her mother had no method in punishing her. (cf. ánad, hánas).

_badáng_, Accustomed, inured, experienced, trained, used to. (bádang;
cf. anád, batíd).

_bádbad_, To wind up, to put on a reel; to unravel, disentangle, solve,
clear up. Badbará (-adá) ang bunáng. Wind the yarn on a reel. Ibádbad
akó ánay siníng bunáng. Kindly wind up this yarn for me. Makabádbad ka
siní? Can you solve this? Can you translate it or clear it up? Badbarí
(-adí) sing diótay iníng isá ka labág nga bunáng. Unwind a small
part of this hank of yarn. Put a small part of this hank of yarn on
the reeling-machine.

_badbadán,_ Reeling-machine, a wheel for winding up or unwinding yarn,
thread or the like; a reel, spool, bobbin.

_badbarán,_ (H) See badbadán id.

_bádhà,_ (B) Fear, awe, dread; fear mingled with respect or reverence;
to influence by fear, reverence or respect, to awe. Walâ gid siá
sing ginabádhà. He is not afraid of anything or anybody. (cf. hádluk,
sapák, bálhot, banâ, panagubáli).

_badiáng, bádiang,_ A tropical plant with very large leaves. Daw
badiáng ang dulúnggan níya. His ears are as large as badiang leaves,
a saying applied to one who likes to be praised.

_badiáw, bádiaw,_ Light yellow; to be or become light yellow. Ang
íya bestído nga dalág sádto ánay nagbadiáw na. Her dark yellow frock
has turned light yellow. Nabadiawán akó siníng hénero. This cloth
has a too light yellow colour for me. (cf. dalág--a darker yellow,
orange-yellow).

_badiáw,_ A kind of bird; the golden oriole, loriot.

_badiáwkíaw,_ A kind of bird, whose name is suggestive of its colour
and cry. (cf. badiáwtingíg).

_badiáwtingíg,_ A kind of bird, whose name suggests both its yellow
colour and its cry. (cf. badiáwkíaw).

_badíl,_ A fire-arm, musket, rifle; to shoot with a fire-arm; to
beat, drub, thrash, strike, swinge. Badilá siá. Shoot him. Give him
a thrashing. Ibadíl ang búldok mo. Shoot off your revolver. Ginbadíl
níya ang buyóng. He shot the brigand. Dî mo siá pagbadilón sing
támà. Don't beat him too much. (cf. lúthang; lámpus, bálbal, lámba,
bákol; badíl is probably derived from the Spanish "barril").

_bádlak,_ To sparkle, shine, glisten, glitter, flash,
twinkle. (cf. sídlak, sílak, sílì, ínggat, igpát-ígpat, kipát-kípat).

_bádlan_, From balúd for baludán. To be caught--, overrun--,
overtaken--, struck--, washed--, by waves. Nabádlan siá. He was caught
in a storm. He was overtaken--, detained--, delayed--, by a flood
or bad weather. "Daw ginabádlan siá" means: He is in a great hurry,
(as if running for his life before pursuing waves, or the like).

_bádlis_, Anointment, unction; the sacrament of Extreme Unction;
to anoint, salve, treat with an unguent; to administer Extreme
Unction. Badlisí siá. Anoint him. Pabadlisí siá. Have him
anointed. Pabadlisán mo ang masakít nga táo. Have Extreme Unction
administered to the sick man. Ibádlis inâ sa íya. Anoint him with
that. (cf. híso, hídhid, pálhit, háplas, etc.).

_bádlit_, A line, stroke, sign or mark with a pencil, pen or the like;
to line, sign, mark with a stroke of the pen, brush, etc. Badlitá
or badlití ang papél sang ímo plúma. Mark the paper with a stroke
of your pen. Ibádlit ang lápis sa káhoy. Mark the wood with the
pencil. Iníng papél nabadlitán sing tátlo ka kúris. This paper has
been marked with three strokes. Dílì mo pag-ipabádlit ang papél sa
mga bátà. Don't permit the children to make lines on the paper. Indì
mo siá pagpabadlitón sang papél. Do not allow him to make lines on the
paper. Anhon mo kon amó inâ ang bádlit sang pálad mo? What can you do,
if such is the streak in your fate? Ang íya mga kílay dáw binádlit
sang isá ka tigduág. Her eyebrows are (were) like the strokes of a
painter's brush. (cf. kúris, kúrit, kurít, kúdlit, etc.).

_bádlò_, Phlegm. May bádlò siá pírme. He is constantly troubled
with phlegm.

_bádlon_, A kind of fish.

_bádlong_, To point out a fault or mistake, to correct, expostulate
with. Badlongá siá. Correct him. Indì siá magpabádlong. He does not
listen to corrections or admonitions, (cf. túdlò; básol--to reprimand,
etc. is a much stronger term than bádlong).

_badloón_, Pertaining to phlegm, full of phlegm, troubled with phlegm,
phlegmatic.

_bádò_, Banquet, feast, entertainment, social gathering,
celebration. (cf. tábad).

_bádwan_, From the obsolete baló. See nabádwan--inkling, understanding.

_badyáng,_ See badiáng id.

_badyáw,_ See badiáw id.

_bága,_ A live coal, glowing cinder, burning piece of charcoal;
also verb: to light.

_bagâ,_ The lungs.

_bagâ,_ (B) Quarrel, dispute, squabble, words, high words, altercation,
bickering; to quarrel, wrangle, fall out, squabble, have words with,
etc. Ang mga bátà nagabagâ. The boys are quarrelling. May ginbagâ
akó kahápon. I had a quarrel with somebody yesterday. Ngáa man nga
ginbagâ mo si Hosé? Why did you quarrel with José? Ginbagâ ko siá,
kay kinúhà níya ang ákon kasíng. I quarrelled with him, because
he had taken my spinning-top. Indì mo siá pagbagaón tungúd siníng
diótay nga butáng. Don't pick a quarrel with him for this small
matter. Pabagaá si Andrés kag si Hosé. Make Andrew and José quarrel
with each other. Ipabagâ si Hosé sa kay Andrés. Make José pick a
quarrel with Andrew. (cf. súay, baísbáis).

_bagáas,_ A kind of weed, very injurious to rice-crops.

_bagá-bága,_ Dim. of bága. May bagá-bága pa sa idálum sang abó? Are
there still any live coals under the ashes?

_bagá-bagá,_ A dish, particularly of small sun-dried fish, roasted in a
pan containing live coals; to roast fish in live coals. Bagábagahá ang
tabagák. Roast the tabagák-fish in a pan filled with live coals. Ang
ámon súd-an kaína balingón nga binagábagá. The side-dish of our
last meal consisted of sun-dried fish roasted in a pan with live
coals. (cf. bága).

_bagâ-bágà, bagâ-bagâ,_ (B) Dim. and Freq. of bagâ. To quarrel or
fight a little, to have a tiff, to bandy words. Iníng mga magasawá
pírme gid lang nagabagâbágà sa íla baláy. This married pair are always
disagreeing at home. (cf. suáysúay).

_bagahán,_ Brazier, an open pan for burning wood or coal. (bága).

_bagákay,_ A kind of very light bamboo, smaller even than that
called bóloò.

_bagáng,_ To warm, to heat, make red-hot. Ginbagáng sang manugsálsal
ang salsálon. The smith made the iron red-hot. Nabagáng na ang
gánga. The roasting-pot is hot. Bagangá ánay ang gánga sa walâ pa ikáw
magsánlag sang maís. Heat the roasting-pot first before you roast
the corn. Ang gúgma nagabagáng sang íya tagiposóon. Love warms his
heart. Ibagáng akó ánay sing isá ka nahót nga salsálon. Kindly make a
piece of iron red-hot for me. Bagangí akó sing gánga, kay magasánlag
akó sing maís. Heat a roasting-pot for me, for I am going to roast
some corn. Ginabagáng siá. He is getting hot, i.e. he has fever,
as a forerunner of some serious disease like smallpox, measles, etc.

_bagáng_, (B) Five centavos, a five-centavo piece, nickel,
penny. (cf. bakód, sinkóhon).

_bág-ang_, Grinder, molar tooth, double tooth. (cf. ángkod, etc.).

_bagángan_, A kind of rhinoceros beetle that is very injurious to
coconut plantations, etc.; a leaf-miner.

_bagáni_, A heroic deed, heroism.

_baganíhan_, Hero; heroic.

_bág-as_, The scar of a cut; pock-marks, the pits of smallpox; to
trim or dress by cutting off small pieces, to raze mounds. Bag-así
ang káhoy sang dáldag. Dress the wood with the adze. Ibág-as ang
wásay sa káhoy. Use the hatchet to trim the wood. Nagsaláma na ang
plása, kay nabag-asán ang mga boklódbóklod kag natampokán ang mga
limpásong. The public square is level now, for the mounds have been
razed and the holes filled up. May bág-as ang íya nawóng. His face
is marked (pitted) with small-pox. (cf. bás-bas).

_bagáso_, (Sp. bagazo) Fruit-peel pressed dry, especially sugar-cane
crushed and deprived of its juice, bagasse. (cf. siápò).

_bag-asón_, Scarred, marked, pitted, pertaining to smallpox,
pock-marked. (cf. butihón, hanggaón).

_bágat_, A kind of ghost believed in by the superstitious. It is
supposed to appear in various strange shapes.

_bagát_, A long slender pole of bamboo, bólò, bagákay or the like.

_bagát-bagát_, A centipede that is considerably larger than the
ordinary talimbabága.

_bagátnan_, The South. (cf. habagátnan).

_bagatnánon_, Southern, situated in the South. (cf. habagatnánon).

_bágay_, Manner, method, kind, class, way; fit, proper, suitable,
adapted; to fit, adapt, tune, harmonize. Bagáya ang mga kwérdas. Tune
the strings. Ibágay akó sang ákon gitára. Kindly tune my guitar. Dílì
bágay sa ímo iníng kálò. This hat does not fit you. This hat does not
suit you. Duhá ka bágay ang pagpangurús, hímpit kag láktud. There are
two ways of making the sign of the cross, the complete and the short
one. Ang salâ may duhá ka bágay, mortál kag beniál. There are two
kinds of sins, mortal and venial. Himósi siá sing pagkáon nga bágay
sa isá ka dumulúaw nga dunggánon. Prepare some food for him fit to be
placed before an honoured visitor. Bagáyi ang ímo mánggad kag kaálam
sing maáyo nga batásan. Cultivate a demeanour in keeping with your
wealth and knowledge or learning. (cf. ángay, ányò, ígò, síbò).

_bagáy_, Harmony, symmetry, melodiousness; tuned, harmonious. Iníng
sísta dílì bagáy or iníng sísta walâ sing bagáy. This guitar is
not tuned. Ang piáno ni Fuláno dílì na bagáy, kay dúgay na nga walâ
pagbagáya. The piano of N.N. is now out of tune, because it has not
been tuned for a long time. (cf. libágon--out of tune; unharmonious,
flat).

_bagáybay_, The neck-feathers of a cock. (cf. kuyús, láwi, búlbul).

_bagéu_, Spoilt, rotten, decayed, putrid, tainted (of foodstuffs);
to get spoilt, etc. (of food-stuffs). Nagbagéu ang ísdà, kán-on,
tinóla, etc. The fish, rice, vegetable dish, etc. spoiled. Indì mo
pagpabageuón (pagpabagewón) ang ísdà. Do not allow the fish to go
rotten. (cf. pán-os, báng-og).

_bagéw_, See bagéu.

_bághak_, Stupid, silly; dull, backward. (cf. bulúk, pákok, kagúng).

_bághot_, To cut off a piece at a time of the suák, that is, the
coconut flower in order to get tubâ. Baghotí ang suák. Cut off a
piece of the suák. Ibághot akó sang suák. Kindly tap the suák for
me. May lubí ikáw nga saráng mabaghotán? Have you any coconut-palms
that can be tapped for tubâ? Hóo, ápang índì akó magpabághot sinâ,
kay buót ko himúslan ang kópras. Yes, but I will not allow them to
be tapped, for I wish to utilize the copra. Ipabághot mo sa ákon or
pabaghotán mo sa ákon iníng napúlò ka púnò nga lubí mo. Let me tap
for tubâ these ten of your coconut-palms.

_bág-id,_ To rub, strike, as a match, to rub two pieces of
bamboo, etc. together in order to make fire. Bag-irá (--idá) ang
pósporo. Strike the match. Bag-irí ang káha sang pósporo. Strike
the match against the box. Bag-irí ang kawáyan túbtub nga magkaláyo
(magkalayó). Rub the bamboo till it takes fire.

_bag-ídan,_ A match; any contrivance to make fire by
friction. (bág-id).

_bagíing,_ (B) Cheek, the side of the face. (cf. písngi).

_baginás,_ A trail, footpath, track, (cf. bánas, dalán-dálan, alágyan).

_bágio,_ Typhoon, cyclone, tornado, tempest, hurricane,
storm, wind with heavy rain; to be stormy, to blow or rage (of a
typhoon). Nagabágio ang kalibútan. A typhoon is raging or a hurricane
is blowing (over the earth). Nabagiohán kamí sa bapór. We were caught
by a hurricane on board the steamer. Naálsa na ang ikaduhá nga tándà,
kay magabágio, konó. The second storm-signal has been raised, for a
hurricane is approaching, they say.

_bag-íran,_ See bag-ídan id.

_bagís,_ A shark; a greedy, artful fellow, a sharper, shark, cheat,
crook. (cf. kúgtong).

_bagít,_ Uninjured, unscathed, untouched; to escape uninjured, to
be unharmed or unscathed, to come away free or untouched. Indì ka
makabagít. You will not be able to escape unharmed. Diín ka man
makabagít sa ákon? Where can you escape me? Bagít! Missed! Not
hit! Bagít siá. He is untouched. This expression is often used in
games, where the main point consists in an agility or adroitness in
obtaining one's object without being touched or hit by the opposing
party. Dirí lang sa ámon bánwa walâ gid sing makabagít sa íya sa
paghámpang sang ahedrés. Here in our town there is certainly no one
that can beat him at chess. (cf. luás).

_báglot,_ To gnash one's teeth. See bágrot id. Even in Hiligáynon
"bágrot" is more commonly used than báglot.

_bágnas,_ Nearly ripe; to be nearly ripe, approach ripeness,
particularly said of plums and the like. Nagbágnas na or bágnas na
ang serigwélas. The plums are now nearly ripe. Nabagnasán na ang
serigwélas. The fruit is ripening on the plum trees.

_bágnos_, To strip, split, separate fibre (of hemp, etc.). Bagnosí
ang lánot. Strip the hemp. (cf. kigí).

_bagô_, Will, head, soul, brain. Walâ gid inâ sa bagô ko. That
never entered my head. Kaúyon ang bagô níya sa umá, kay nagtámbok siá
dídto. He likes to live at the farm, for he got fat there. (cf. bángog,
bagól).

_bág-o_, New, novel, fresh; recent, late, modern, just out, recently;
to make new, to renew. Bág-o gid iníng kálò ko. This hat of mine is
quite new. Bág-o pa lang siá magabút. He has just arrived. Bág-o pa
lang silá malúmbus. They have left only a short while ago. Bag-ohá
ang kodál. Renew the fence. Iníng kawáyan ibág-o ko sa kodál. This
bamboo I'll utilize in renewing the fence.

_bág-od_, To rub two stones together, to crush or pulverize, between
two stones or against a stone. Ginabag-orán ang bató nga bukáy
sing binókbok nga bukáy túbtub nga magpíno kag ihínis sa ngípon. The
crushed white stone is rubbed between two white stones till it becomes
fine powder, and can be used to clean the teeth with. Ang tayóbong
ginabág-od sa bató kon unawón. The tayobong-root is rubbed against a
stone to rid the pulp of juice. Ibág-od mo ang tayóbong sa bató. Rub
the tayobong-roots against a stone.

_bag-ódan_, (B) Stone against which something is rubbed or crushed
to powder; a millstone, grindstone. (cf. bag-óran).

_bagódbod_, A dish of rice-flour mixed with sugar and coconut
meat. (cf. alopí).

_bag-óhan_, New, novel, fresh, inexperienced, green, green-horn;
modern, new-fangled. (cf. bág-o).

_bag-ohánon_, See bag-óhan. Also: A person of modern times;
a modernist.

_bagók_. Rotten, putrid; old, useless; dull, stupid; to be or become
rotten, etc. (cf. gabúk, garók, dunút; bagót, balót, gubát; pákok,
kagúng, kalóng).

_bagókbok_, A shower of rain; to fall in showers, to rain heavily. Kon
kís-a sa hinálì lang nagabagókbok ang ulán. Now and then there is a
sudden heavy shower of rain. (cf. búnok, bókbok, pókpok).

_bagól_, The skull; any skull-like vessel, as e.g. the rough shell of a
coconut opened slightly at the top and used for cleaning purposes. (If
the coconut-shell is scraped smooth, it is called "hungút"); brain,
mind, head, soul. Butangí sing bagól ang túmba. Place a skull on the
catafalque. Walâ gid inâ sa bagól ko. That never entered my head,
never disturbed my thoughts, never bothered or troubled me. (cf. bagô,
bángog, úlo, panumdúman).

_bágol_, To strike with the head, to strike or knock heads together,
to push head against head. Nagabagoláy silá. They are butting or
striking head against head. Ginabágol níla ang íla úlo. They are
knocking their heads together. (cf. pókol).

_bágol_, A game with stones played by children. The principal object is
to hit certain marked stones with other stones thrown from a distance
or dropped from the hand; to play "bágol".

_bagólbol_, To crowd upon each other, to follow one upon another
in quick succession, applied to persons, undertakings, troubles,
difficulties, etc. Nagabagólbol gid ang mga táo sa simbáhan. The
people in church are very crowded. Nagabagólbol--or--nagabinagólbol
ang ákon mga buluhatón, kalisúd, etc. My duties, troubles, etc. are
following one upon another without interruption. (cf. abák-abák,
abút-abút: surumbálì, lininggóhot, linggóhot, ulúkad (úkad).

_bagón_, (Sp. vagón) Wagon, railway waggon.

_bagónbon_, Alluvial sediment, soft mire, slime, mud deposited by
flowing water. Binagonbonán sang subâ ang binángon. The river buried
the bolo under mud--or--covered the bolo with sand. (cf. búnbun).

_bagóngon_, A kind of sea-snail.

_bag-óran_, (H) See bag-ódan id.

_bagót_, (B) Rotten, foul, spoilt; old, useless, worn out. (cf. balót,
barót).

_bagotálos_, (B) Young and tender leaves of tobacco, bananas, etc.

_bágras_, A scratch, slight injury to the skin. Ang íya guyá may
bágras--or--nabagrasán. His face is scratched. (cf. bág-as).

_bágrong_, A dull, heavy sound, a drone, hum, boom, toll; to emit
a dull or heavy sound, to drone, hum, boom, toll, as a large bell;
to hoot (of a steamer). Nagabágrong ang linggánay. The bell is
tolling. (cf. sigábung, hágung, hagúnghung).

_bágrot_, To gnash one's teeth, to grind the teeth, to strike or dash
the teeth together in anger or pain. Ang yáwà nagabágrot. The devil
gnashes his teeth. Indì mo akó pagbagrotán. Do not gnash your teeth
at me. Bagrotá lang ang ngípon mo. Just grind your teeth. Ang amó nga
balítà nagpabágrot sa íya sa dakô nga kaákig. That news made him gnash
his teeth in great anger. (cf. báglot, which, however, is seldom used).

_bágsang_, To strike edge against edge. Indì nínyo pagbagsangón ang
ínyo mga binángon. Dont strike your boloes together, edge against edge.

_bágsat_, Bug, bed-bug; to be--infested with bugs,--buggy. Binagsatán
iníng kátre. This bed is full of bugs. (cf. báksat id.).

_bagsatón_, Pertaining to bugs, buggy, full of bugs. (cf. baksatón
id.).

_bágtas_, To leave the water, to lie on wet or muddy ground near the
water's edge, said especially of some fishes like the haroán--a sort
of mud-eel. Gindakúp námon ang haroán, kay nagbágtas. We caught the
haroán-fish, for it had left the water.

_bágtì_, To be or get public. The simple bágtì is ordinarily not
used. See pabágtì--to publish, make public or known.

_bágtik_, To harden and get brittle, as dry mud and the like. Nagbágtik
ang lúnang. The mud has hardened. Nabagtikán sía sing lúnang sa íya
mga panápton. Some mud got dry and hard on his clothes. Nagbágtik ang
kalámay sa kaláhà. The sugar in the pan is overdone i.e. has dried
and hardened to the point of emitting a smell of scorching or burning.

_bágting_, Bell, tocsin; the ringing of a bell; to ring a bell, to
sound the tocsin. May kampanáryo silá, ápang waláy bágting. They have a
belfry, but no bells. Waláy bágting kaína sang ága. This morning there
was no ringing of bells. Ibágting or bagtingá ang linggánay. Ring
the bell. Ginbágting níya ang bágting nga dakô. He rang the big
bell. Bagtingí ang bulunyágan. Ring the bell for the baptism or for the
one to be baptized. Ibágting akó ánay sang orasyón. Ring the Angelus
for me, please. Pabagtingán, konó, sang panínoy ang mga kalasálon
sing tátlo ka basál. The godfather, it is rumoured, will have three
peals of bells rung in honour of the marriage couple. (cf. linggánay;
básal, basál, repíke, rimáti, púrut).

_bágtis_, A kind of mud-eel, living in rivers and fields, especially
rice-fields. (cf. haroán).

_bágtol_, To beat, strike a drum or the like. Bagtolá ang bómbo. Strike
or beat the drum. Ibágtol sa bómbo iníng pedáso nga kawáyan. Use this
piece of bamboo to beat the drum with. Bagtolí ang mga músiko sang
bómbo, agúd magtípon. Beat the drum for the musicians to gather.

_bágtong_, (B) To bundle together, to wrap up in one's apron or other
convenient part of one's dress. Bagtongá ang tinápay. Wrap up the
bread (in your apron, the lower part of your skirt, etc.). Bagtongí
ang tampíon mo sang tinápay. Wrap your apron around the bread. Wrap
the bread up in your apron. Binágtong--a bundle. N.B. A binágtong
is always wrapped up in, and somehow fastened to, one's dress, as an
apron, the lower part of the skirt, a loose jacket, etc.; if a bundle
is entirely separate from the body, it is not called a binágtong,
but pinutús; in Hiligáynon, however, binágtong and pinutús are often
used promiscuously. (cf. bántal).

_bagunáw_, A kind of úbi that grows to a great height, if it is kept
covered with earth.

_bágyo_, Typhoon. See bágio.

_bágyo-bágyo_, The month of October, from the fact that destructive
typhoons mostly occur during this month as far as the southern Visayan
islands are concerned. (cf. oktúbre).

_bagyú_, (B) Spoilt, rotten, etc. See bagéu, bagéw.

_bahâ_, A swell on a river, freshet, spait, spate, flood, inundation,
rising of water in a stream; to swell, etc. Nagbahâ ang subâ. The river
was swollen,--was in spate. Nabahaán kamí. We were--overtaken by the
flood,--kept by the flood (so that we could not come, etc.). Walâ
silá magabút, kay binahaán sang subâ nga walá gid makatabók. They
did not come, because the river ran so high that they could not cross.

_bahâ-bahâ_, Dim. and Freq. of bahâ. A small inundation, a
slight--rise,--flood,--swell.

_báhad_, To sharpen a pencil or the like. (cf. táhad).

_bahág_, A loin cloth; to wear only a loin-cloth. Indì ka magbahág,
kóndì magpuróy ka gid. Don't go out in a loin-cloth, but wear at
least short breeches. Bahagá lang yanáng hénero. Simply use that
cloth as a cover for your loins. Pabahagí siá. Have a loin-cloth
put on him. Provide him with a loin-cloth. Ang mga mananggéte
nagabahág. Tuba-gatherers wear loin-cloths.

_bahál_, Stale, flat, sour, of yesterday, applied to palm-wine or
toddy; stale, of yesterday, old, applied to meat and other food-stuffs;
to get stale, etc. Ang tubâ nga nakúhà sa hápon kag naagahán ginatawág
nga bahál. Tuba gathered in the afternoon and left over till next
morning is called "bahál". Dílì mo pagpabahalón ang tubâ. Don't let
the palm-wine go stale or sour. Kárne nga bahál. Yesterday's meat.

_bahándì_, Treasure, valuables. (cf. kamahálan).

_bahandiánon_, Rich in treasures, valuable, precious.

_bahandíon_, Precious, rich, costly, something to be
treasured. Nagapanapút silá sang labíng bahandíon níla nga
mga panápton. They dressed themselves in their costliest
garments. (cf. bahándì; mahál, bilídhon).

_bahaón_, (B) To sneeze. Nagbahaón siá. He sneezed. Indì mo akó
pagpabahaonón. Don't make me sneeze. Indì mo akó pagbahaonán. Don't
sneeze at me. (cf. átsi, pangátsi).

_báhas_, (Sp. baja, bajar) Dropped--, expunged--, from the list,
expelled, removed, separated from. Báhas na siá. He has now been
dropped from the list. Báhas na siá sa buluthóan, sa polisíya, etc. He
has been expelled from the school, dismissed from the police-force,
etc. (cf. dágdag, tángtang; pahalín).

_báhaw_, (H) Cold rice, cold food; to become cold (of food);
to be cold or indifferent (as regards religion, etc.). May báhaw
kamó? Have you any cold rice? Ang kán-on nagbáhaw na. The rice has got
cold. Pamáhaw--to breakfast, eat cold food, from the fact that the rice
taken at breakfast has usually been cooked the day before. (cf. kápog;
táhaw, búgnaw).

_baháw-baháw_, Small red ants that are often to be found on cold rice;
hence the name.

_baháy_, A kind of plant and its fruit used for medicinal purposes.

_bahayón_, Pertaining to baháy, like baháy, said of grains of rice,
etc. that are spotted white and red.

_báhì_, A wooden dibble, a pointed stick or stake used for
digging. Aghò and sibúkaw are the woods mostly used for making
dibbles. (cf. tagád--a dibble with an iron point).

_bahî-báhì_ Dim. of báhì. A small dibble; anything resembling a dibble;
hard, stubborn, brazen, shameless (from the fact that only hard wood
is suitable for a dibble).

_báhin_, Part, division, lot, share, portion; to divide, make parts
of, share out, separate into pieces, lots or parcels. Pilá ang ímo
báhin? How much is your share or part? Bahína iní. Divide this. Bahíni
si Fuláno sing isá ka báhin. Let N. N. have one share. Apportion to
N.N. one share. Ginbáhin níya ang íya mánggad sa ápat ka párte. He
divided his property into four parts. Ibáhin akó ánay siníng
duhá ka pásong nga humáy sa tagápat ka gántang kag isóhol sa mga
mamumugón. Kindly divide these two bushels of rice into heaps of four
gantas each, and pay it out as wages to the workmen.

_bahín-báhin_, Dim. of báhin. To divide into parts of various sizes, to
divide or share out unequally. Malápad kaáyo ang íya mga palangúmhan,
ápang dílì bilóg, kóndì bináhinbáhin. His plantation is very extensive,
though not in one stretch, but distributed in several lots.

_bahít_, (B) To remove from the fire, etc. See bák-it. Bahitá ang
kaláhà. Take the pan off the fire. Bahití siá sing isá ka kaláhà. Take
one pan off the fire for him. Ibahít akó ánay sang kólon nga may
tinóla. Kindly remove (for me) from the fire the pot containing
the side-dish.

_báhò_, Smell, odour, scent, perfume, aroma, whether good or bad. Sá
báhò sang ímo ágwa makilála ko ang ngálan. I know the name of the
scent you use by its smell. (cf. panimáhò--to smell).

_bahô_, A stench, stink, an obnoxious or offensive smell; stinking:
to stink, emit an offensive smell. Anáno nga banhô ang ginabátyag ko
dirí? What sort of stench do I notice here? Banô na iníng ísdà. This
fish smells bad already. Ang binóro nagabahô. Pickled fish has a
strong smell. Nabahoán kamí sang ilagâ nga patáy. We were annoyed by
the stench coming from the dead rat.

_báho_, (Sp. bajo) Bass (voice, score, singer, player and instrument
or chord).

_bahô-bahô_, A kind of plant.

_bahóg_, Mixed food or provender; wash, swill; to eat or give to eat
mixed foods, to mix rice with sauce and vegetables and the like; to
feed dogs, give pigs their swill, etc. Bahogí siá sing ísdà, ulutanón
kag sabáw. Give him a mixture of fish, vegetables and sauce. Binahogán
mo na ang báboy? Have you given the pig its swill? Ibahóg iníng upá sa
báboy. Put this rice-chaff into the pig's wash. Bahogí ang idô. Give
the dog its food. Feed the dog. (cf. damóg, lakót, sakót, sámò).

_bahól_, To be or become thick, stout, plump, large in circumference;
thick, stout, plump; coarse (of cloth). Abáw, nagbahól na si Fuláno! By
Jove, N.N. has grown stout! Nabaholán akó sa íya. I was surprised
at his stoutness--or--he appeared to me to be stout. Bahól nga táo,
bahól nga hénero. A stout man, coarse cloth. Ginabaholán akó siníng
hénero; ipakítà mo sa ákon inâ dirâ. This cloth is too rough or too
coarse for me; show me that one over there. (cf. dakô).

_bahó-oló_, A fish that somewhat resembles the tulíngan.

_bahô-sálong_, Literally: The odour or smell of pitch. Often used
figuratively in the meaning of: relation, connection or influence. Walâ
gid akó bisán bahô-sálong sa íya. I am not at all related to him. I
am not even a connection of his.

_báhot_, Annoyance, disgust, aversion; to get annoyed,
disgusted or dissatisfied. Nagabáhot ang ginháwa ko. I am a little
disgusted. Nabahótan akó siníng pangabúhì. I have an aversion to this
kind of life. I dislike this manner of life. (cf. taká, súm-od).

_bahót-oló_, A kind of fish. See bahó-oló id.

_báhoy_, A witch, hag, sorceress, enchantress; a ghost; to haunt,
put a spell of fear upon somebody. Si Fuláno nagapáti gid nga kagáb-i
ginbáhoy siá. N.N. really believes that last night he was visited
by a ghost. Bahóya si Fuláno. Do something secretly and suddenly to
frighten N.N. (cf. pamáhoy--a scarecrow).

_bahúlay_, Cold sweat or perspiration. Also used as a verb. Ginabahúlay
ang masakít. The sick person--is wet with cold perspiration,--has
broken out into a cold perspiration.

_bahunísta_, (Sp. bajonista) One who plays, or performs on, the
bassoon, a bassoonist, bassoon-player.

_baí-bái_, A dish of ground rice mixed with sugar and
coconut-meat. (cf. bayé-báye).

_báid_, (B) Corner, angle, nook, back-yard, ground at the side and
back of a building. Ibutáng mo ang síya sa báid or pabaída (--ira)
ang síya. Place the chair in the corner. Sa báid sang subâ. At the
bend of the river, in the angle formed by the bend of the river. Ang
báid sang baláy. The grounds immediately attached to a house, except
those in front of it. (cf. higád, pamúsud, doók, soók, binít).

_báid_, To sharpen, grind, hone, whet. Baíra (baída) ang
kotsílyo. Sharpen the knife. Ibáid akó sang ákon binángon. Kindly
whet my bolo for me. (cf. patalúm, balít, táhad, báhad).

_baidán_, (B) Hone, whetstone, grind-stone, oil-stone. (cf. bairán,
balalítan).

_báil_, Hard, sharp, dry clods of mud, painful to walk over with
bare feet.

_bailarína_, (Sp. bailarina) Dancer. (cf. sumalaút; sáut).

_báile_, (Sp. baile) A dance, a ball; to dance. Indì ka magbáile. Don't
dance. Nagbáile siá kagáb-i He danced last night. Bailehá siá. Dance
with him (her). Indì nínyo pagbailehán ang buluthóan. Don't dance
in the school-house. Indì nínyo pagpabailehán ang buluthóan. Don't
organize balls in the school-house. (cf. báyle, sáut).

_báilo_, Change, barter, exchange; to change, exchange, interchange,
barter, swap. Ginbailohán níya ang íya karabáw sang báka ni Fuláno. He
exchanged his buffalo for N.N.'s cow. Ibáilo akó ánay siníng lápis sa
lápis ni Fuláno. Kindly exchange this pencil for N.N.'s pencil. Ibáilo
ko iníng lápis sa plúma ni Fuláno. I will exchange this pencil for
N.N.'s pen. Bailohá ang duhá ka kabáyo sa karwáhe. Change the places
of the two horses on the carriage i.e. put the near horse on the
off side. Bailohí iníng duhá ka púlò ka mángmang nga papél. Give
me change for this twenty peso note. Ang tanán nga mga kahuól kag
kasubô sang mga matárung mabáilo kunína sa kalípay kag himáyà. All
the trials and sorrows of the just will later on be changed into joy
and glory. (cf. báylo).

_báine_, A friend, companion, intimate (among females; cf. bábay
id.). The correlative term for males is: idól, akíd, atíd.

_bairán_, (H) Hone, whetstone, grind-stone, oil-stone. (cf. baidán).

_báis_, Dispute, argument, discussion, altercation; to argue, dispute,
discuss, quarrel. Indì kamó magbáis. Don't dispute. Ginabaísan níla
ang pagpatíndog sang bág-o nga baláy. They are discussing the erection
of the new building. Baísa si Fuláno. Argue with N.N. Ibáis akó ánay
sa íya. Please, argue with him for me. (cf. súay, bagâ).

_baís-báis_, Dim. of báis. To talk over, examine, discuss a question,
etc. Sa karón ginabaísbaísan níla sa palatukán-pagbulút-an ang hágnà
ni Fuláno. At present they are discussing in the legislative assembly
N.N.'s proposition or motion. Sa walâ na sing pagbaísbáis ginpakamaáyo
níla ang amó nga pagbulút-an. Without any further discussion they
approved that law. (cf. suáy-súay).

_báka_, (Sp. vaca) Cow, ox, cattle. Báka nga gatasán. A milch
cow. (cf. tóro--bull, steer; tínday--calf).

_baká_, Hemp. (cf. abaká id.).

_bakâ_, Straddling, sitting astride, walking with legs wide apart.

_bákà_, To straddle, to sit or walk or stand with the feet wide apart,
to sit astride. Si Fuláno nagabákà. N.N. straddles in his walk or
walks with his legs wide apart. Ang mga bakâ nagabákà. Those that
straddle walk with their legs wide apart. (cf. bakáng).

_baká-báka_, A footstool.

_baká-báka_, A game played by children. One goes down on all fours and
another rides on his back. Also used as a verb. Baká-bakáha siá. Make
him walk on hands and knees and ride on his back.

_bakábáka_, Dim. of báka. Anything resembling a cow; also: a kind
of vermin.

_baká-báka_, To treat or punish someone, as if he were an ox. Kon
magbúhat ka sinâ, bakábakáhon ka ni tátay. If you do that you will
be soundly thrashed by Father. (cf. tarítári, búnal, etc.).

_bakág_, A kind of bamboo basket used by porters or carriers.

_bakág_, To get annoyed, lose one's patience, chafe and fret at
delays. Nagabakág ang íya buót, kay si Fuláno walâ pa magabút. He
is annoyed, because N.N. has not come yet. Ginabakág ko silá. I am
annoyed with them for keeping me waiting so long.

_bakáhan_, Rich in cattle, having or possessing many head of
cattle. (cf. báka).

_bákak_, A lie, a story, an untruth, a fib, prevarication; to lie,
tell stories or untruths, prevaricate. Ginbákak lang níya inâ. That
was a story invented by him. Dî mo siá pagbakákan. Don't tell him
lies. Indì mo pag-ibákak inâ sa ibán. Don't tell those lies to
others. (cf. butíg; N.B. bákak and bakákon seem to have been taken
over from the Cebuano dialect).

_bakákon_, A Liar, fibber, story-teller; lying, telling stories
or untruths, untruthful, unreliable. Bakákon siá nga táo. He is a
liar. (cf. bákak, butigón).

_bákal_, Being much in demand, selling well; to be much resorted to
or much in demand, to sell well. (cf. áka).

_bákal_, The stone of the mango fruit. (cf. líso).

_bákal_, Sap-wood, alburnum, the outer and softer layer of wood in
timber, easily recognized by its lighter colour. (N.B. Heart-wood,
the inner and harder part is called "tugás". "Bákal" and "tugás"
together, without the bark, are called "súpat".

_bakál_, To buy, purchase. Báklon ko iní. I am going to buy this. Bákli
siá sing isá ka kasíng. Buy him a top. Batóna iníng kwárta nga
ibakál mo sing kálò. Take this money to buy a hat with. Nakabakál
akó sing duhá ka báka nga tagkapitoán ka písos. I bought two cows
for seventy pesos each. Ibakál mo akó sing diótay nga bugás. Kindly
buy me some rice.

_bakalán_, A door-post, an upright post, especially one in a partition
wall; studding. Also used as a verb. Bakalaní ang díngding sing limá
ka bakalán. Put five uprights into the partition. (cf. pagtúod).

_bakaláw_, (Sp. bacalao, bacallao) Codfish.

_bakáng_, To straddle a little, to walk with steps or legs rather
far apart, but not so much as bákà.

_bakarát_, A game of cards, baccarat.

_bakáris_, Scratch, abrasion; to scratch, abrade, chafe. (cf. báklis,
bákris, pák-ad, gádras).

_bákas_, Energy, industriousness; to be active, industrious, assiduous,
diligent. Nagabákas siá sa tanán níya nga trabáho. He is diligent
in the performance of all his tasks. Bakási ang ímo trabáho, kay
kon dílì magútum ikáw. Be industrious at your work or you will go
hungry. (cf. písan, úkud).

_bákas_, To join or associate with in trade, be a partner in
business,--in games, etc. Nagabákas siá sa kay Fuláno sa sugál,
sa komérsyo, etc. He is N. N.'s partner in gambling, in commerce,
etc. Bakásan ko ikáw sa ímo palangitán-an. I'll join you in your
business. Bakási akó. Associate with me. Join me.

_bakatín_, The wild pig. (cf. talunón; báktin).

_bakayáw_, A kind of rice.

_bák-bak_, To strip off (as bark etc.). Bakbaká ang pánit sang
káhoy. Strip off the bark of the tree. Bakbaká siá sa lungón. Force
her away from clinging to the coffin. Bakbakí ang káhoy. Bark the
tree. Ibákbak mo iníng binángon sa káhoy. Use this bolo for barking
the tree. (cf. ák-ak).

_bákhaw_, A kind of mangrove, often seen in swamps along the beach.

_bákhay_, To dig, to dig out, make holes in the ground with any pointed
instrument, as a báhì, tagád, sadól, etc. Bakhayá ang dútà, banáyan,
etc. Dig the earth, dig out the banáyan-root, etc. Bakhayí akó sing
banáyan. Dig out a banáyan-root for me. Iníng tagád ibákhay mo sa
dútà. Use this iron-pointed dibble to dig up the earth with. (cf. káli,
sadól, tubúng).

_bákhò_, Grief, sorrow, lament, lamentation, wail, complaint,
plaint, groan, moan, sigh; to sigh, groan, moan, lament, grieve,
wail, complain, mourn, weep. Ginabakhoán níya ang kamatáyon sang
íya anák. She grieves over the death of her child. Nagapanángis
kag nagabákhò silá, kay napatáy ang íla ilóy. They are weeping and
sighing, because their mother has died. Dî mo pagpabakhoón ang ímo
mga ginikánan. Do not grieve your parents. Yádto dídto ang pagbákhò
kag pagbinágrot sang mga ngípon. There is (was, will be) weeping and
gnashing of teeth. (cf. subô, tángis, hibî, háyà, hibubún-ot).

_bákhon_, (B) Swaddling-cloth, swaddling-band,
swathing-clothes. (cf. lámpin, bák-ong).

_bakía_, To agree, pull well together, get along with, understand one
another. Kon ang asáwa magbolobakía sa bána, dílì kúntà mapíot ang
íla pagkahímtang. If the wife would live in harmony with her husband,
their life would not be a hard one. (cf. hilitóhog, hiliúgyon).

_bakía_, (From the Sp. vaquilla) Young of cattle; calf, heifer,
bullock.

_bakiâ, bákià_, Clog, patten; to use or
wear--clogs,--pattens. Nagabakiâ siá. He wears clogs. (cf. kórtso,
kótso).

_bákiaw, bakiáw_, To raise, lift, hold up. Ibákiaw or bakiawá ang kamót
mo. Hold up--, raise--, your hand. Binákiaw níya ang íya kamót. She
lifted her hand. (cf. báyaw, bayáw).

_bakî-bákì_, To divide into shares or portions, to portion out,
(particularly said of meat or fish for sale); to ponder or weigh
well, think it over. Bakìbakíon mo ang ímo buót agúd índì ka matám-an
sang kalisúd. Ponder or consider everything well that you may not be
overwhelmed with difficulties. Bakîbakía ang kárne, ísdà, etc. Divide
the meat, fish, etc. into portions (of about equal size), (cf. báhin,
huláy, párti; timbángtímbang, sibôsíbò, binágbínag, katákáta).

_bákid_, A rough basket usually made of buri-palm leaves and used in
the collection of the rice-harvest. An ordinary bákid contains about
two bushels.

_bákid_, To stow, to make all snug, to arrange compactly, so that the
objects arranged may occupy little space, to pack closely. Bakíra
(--ída) ang mga ságing, páhò, etc. Pack the bananas, mangoes,
etc. close. Bakíri ang tabungós sang mga ságing. Arrange the bananas
well in the tabungós-basket. Binákid nga páhò. Well packed, or closely
packed, mangoes.

_bakíd-bakíd_, Dim. of bákid. Also: Dry earwax; a wasp's
nest. (cf. atotolí).

_bakilí_, Sloping, slanting, downhill, falling, said of fields or parts
of them, where water will flow off readily. Bakilí nga talámnan. A
sloping rice-field. (cf. bánglid, bánhay).

_bakíng_, A small sea-shell often used by children at play, similar
to búskay; somewhat yellow, yellowish (of eyes, etc.).

_bakíntol_, (B) To carry, bear on one's shoulders or on the
hip. Bakintolá iníng bayóong nga kalámay. Carry this sack of
sugar. (cf. dalá, pás-an, tíbong; abága).

_bakíras_, See bakáris.

_bakíro_, (Sp. vaquero) Cattle-driver, cowherd, herdsman.

_bákit_, A fern whose fronds (leaves) resemble the tail of a
cat. (cf. bákwit).

_bák-it_, (H) The removal of cooked food from the hearth or fire-place;
to take off the fire, remove cooked food from the fire-place. Bak-itá
ang tiníg-ang. Take the boiled rice off the fire. Ibák-it ang
kólon. Take the pot off the fire. Bak-itán mo silá sing isá ka
kólon. Take one pot off the fire for them. (cf. bahít id.).

_bakíta_, (Sp. baqueta) Ramrod, rammer; full, crammed, stuffed,
filled to bursting, (of baskets, trunks, cases, stomach, etc.).

_bakíya_, Calf, heifer, bullock. See bakía.

_bakíya_, To agree, pull well together, etc. See bakía.

_bakláw_, See bakaláw--codfish.

_bakláw_, A kind of rice. (cf. arabón).

_báklay_, The wandering or crossing over mountains, hills, etc.; to
cross, pass over heights. Ginbáklay níla ang matáas nga búkid. They
crossed the high mountain. Baklayá ang bakólod. Cross the hill. Ibáklay
akó siníng mga patádyong sa Hámtik. Kindly take these skirts along
over the hills to Antique.

_báklid_, Fetter, shackle; to bind, tie, fetter, shackle,
secure. (cf. gápus, gapús).

_báklis_, A slight scratch, laceration, as of a thorn, briar, etc.;
to scratch, lacerate, injure the skin, etc. Nabáklis akó. I got a
little scratched. Nabaklisán akó sang símsim sa ákon bútkon. The
bamboo-branches scratched my arm. Dílì mo akó pagbaklisón sang
sibít. Don't scratch me with the pin. (cf. bákris, páklis, baríkas).

_báklon, báklan_, etc. See bakál.

_báklos_, Belt, girdle, cincture. (cf. wáklos id.).

_báknal_, To swell out, be protuberant, bulge, protrude, (as a
full pocket or the like). Nagabáknal ang íya bólsa. His pocket
bulges. Nabaknalán ang íya bólsa sang kamúnsil. His pocket is stuffed
with kamunsel-fruit. Dî mo pagpabaknalón ang ímo bólsa sing lakás,
kay básì magísì. Don't stuff your pocket too tight, for it might be
torn. Kon mga saráng, tanawá kon may púling ang ákon matá, kay may
nagabáknal sa sulúd. Kindly have a look whether there is a speck in
my eye, for something is stirring or swelling within it.

_báknit_. To nudge, pinch, pluck, pull or touch lightly with thumb
and forefinger. Baknitá siá. Pinch him. Baknití ang bútkon níya. Pluck
his arm. (cf. píknit, kúhit, káblit).

_báknot_, To strike, beat, thrash, cudgel, drub, trounce, flog,
castigate, cane, give one the stick. (cf. bákol, hánot, lámpus, lámba,
pókpok, hámpak).

_bakód_, (B) A five-centavo piece, a nickel. (cf. bagáng).

_bákog_, The backbone of a fish. (cf. bakóg, bokóg; síkag--small
fish bones).

_bakóg_, See bákog. (cf. bokóg id. and the more usual form).

_bakokáng_, A kind of malignant ulcer, a carbuncle that frequently
attacks the legs of children and heals but slowly.

_bakóko_, An insect with a very obnoxious smell, a sort of large bug
varying in size and colour. Some are as large as a cockroach.

_bákol_, (B) To cudgel, cane, thrash, beat, trounce, whip, flog, strike
with a rod, whip or the like. Bakóla siá. Give him a beating. Ibákol sa
íya iníng bilogón. Strike him with this cane, rod. Kon índì ka magpáti
sa ákon, ipabákol ko ikáw sa kay tátay mo. If you don't listen to me,
I'll hand you over to your father for a thrashing. (cf. búnal, hánot,
lámpus, etc.).

_bakól_, To stew, to cook in a bamboo-joint, especially poultry,
with various ingredients. Bakolá ang manók. Stew the chicken in a
bamboo-joint. Bakolí akó sing manók. Stew a chicken or me. Ibakól
akó ánay siníng manók. Please, stew this chicken for me. Kinawátan
siá níla sang íya bálon nga binakól. They stole his stewed chicken,
which he had brought with him as provision on his trip.

_bakólod_, Hill, mound, rise, hillock, down, any small eminence or
elevation. Ang ákon karón nga pinamáhaw saráng makapabáklay sa ákon
sa pitó ka bakólod. With the breakfast I have taken I can walk over
seven hills. (cf. búkid--mountain; bánglid--slope).

_bák-ong_, Shroud, winding-sheet; swaddling-cloth, swathing-clothes;
to enshroud. (cf. bákhon).

_bakóng, bákong_, A kind of lily.

_bákris_, To scratch, lacerate, etc. See báklis id.

_báksat_, (H) Bug, bedbug. (cf. bágsat id. N.B. This term seems to
have been introduced by the Chinese).

_baksatón_, (H) Pertaining to bugs; buggy, full of bugs. (cf. báksat).

_baksiwâ, baksíwà_, Awkward, clumsy, ungainly, gawky. (cf. bikwálon).

_báktin_, (H) A small or young pig. (cf. idík, udók, urók).

_bákud_, Strength, firmness, stability, stoutness; to be or become
strong, firm, stout, sturdy. Nagbákud na ang ámon baláy, kay ginkaáyo
sang pánday. Our house is now strong, because the carpenter has
repaired it. Bakúron (--údon) mo ang pagpatíndog sang baláy. Build
the house strong. Ipabákud sa pánday ang ímo baláy, agúd índì mapúkan
sang bágyo. Get a carpenter to strengthen your house, or it will be
blown down by a hurricane. (cf. líg-on, pág-on).

_bákud_, An artificial canal in a river narrowing towards the end
and provided there with a fish-trap. (cf. pailíg id.).

_bákuna_, (Sp. vacuna) Cowpox, vaccine virus; to vaccinate. Sín-o
ang nagbakúna sa imo? Who vaccinated you? Ginabakunáhan karón ang
mga kabatáan sa mga buluthóan, kay nagapamutí. The children at
school are being vaccinated at present, for there is an epidemic
of smallpox. Ipabakúna ang ímo mga anák sa manugbúlung, agúd índì
malátnan sang butí. Get your children vaccinated by the doctor,
lest they should be infected with smallpox. Kalití ang pagpabakúna,
kay ang mga nabakunáhan tumalágsa gid lámang madunggoán sang butí. Get
vaccinated in time, for those that are vaccinated are rarely attacked
by smallpox. (cf. sibít, pasibít).

_bakunáwa_, A fabulous large snake or dragon believed to devour the
moon at the time of an eclipse; eclipse of sun or moon. Ang búlan
ginalámon, konó, sang bakunáwa. The moon, they say, is swallowed by
the bakunáwa. (cf. eklípse).

_bákwa_, A kind of raven. (cf. uwák).

_bákwit_, A kind of evergreen decorative plant. (cf. bákit).

_bakyâ, bákyà_, See bakiâ, bákià.

_bákyas_, Rock, stone; rocky, stony, barren (of soil).

_bákyaw_, See bákiaw.

_bála_, (Sp. bala) A bullet, shot, ball, cartridge. (cf. lisó).

_balá_, An interrogative particle. Sín-o balá? Who? Anó balá iní? What
is this? Ambót kon matúod balá iní ukón butíg. I don't know whether
it is true or not.

_bálà_, Fortune, good luck. Pabálà--to risk, trust to one's good luck,
venture. Nagapabálà gid lámang siá. He has confidence in his good
luck. (N.B. Bálà is now obsolete, but occurs in the following baláan).

_baláan_, Blessed, happy, glorious, beatific. (cf. buláhan).

_balábà, balabá_, A kind of rattan. (cf. uwáy).

_balábad_, (H) To brandish, wave, flourish, to shake to and
fro. Ibalábad mo ang binángon. Brandish the bolo. Balabádan
(--áran) ko silá sang lipák. I will shake the piece of bamboo at
them. (cf. labáy-lábay; barumbáda).

_balábag_, Athwart, across, in the way; to lie or lay across,
to thwart, stand--in the way,--in one's path. Balabági ang dálan
sing kawáyan. Put a bamboo across the road. Ibalábag iníng káhoy sa
ganháan. Place this piece of wood athwart the door. Indì ka magbalábag
sang maáyo nga paninguhâ sang ibán or índì mo pagbalabágan ang maáyo
nga paninguhâ sang ibán. Do not thwart or impede the good that others
try to do. (cf. pamalábag).

_balabagô_, An angler's line. (cf. palapagô id.).

_balá-bála_, Anything resembling a ball; rolling; to roll. Ihabóy
ang bóla sa íla sing balábála. Send them up a ground ball.

_balábalá_, To marvel, wonder, be amazed, be struck with wonder,
be surprised or astonished. Nagabalábalá gid akó sang kadásig sang
ímo kabáyo, sang kadúgay sang ímo óbra, etc. I am surprised at
the swiftness of your horse, at the length of time you are at your
work, etc. Indì ka magbalábalá kon índì kamí magabút sa gilayón,
kay mabúdlay man ang dálan. Don't be astonished, if we do not come
at once, for the road is difficult. Daw nabalábalá akó sang íya nga
pangáon. I marvelled at the way he attacked the food. He surprised
me with the amount he ate.

_balâ-balâ_, (B) A small basket without handles.

_balábaw_, Mouse, rat. (cf. ilagâ).

_balabáwan_, (B) Full of rats, infested with rats. Lugár nga
balabáwan. A place infested with rats.

_balabáwon_, (B) Pertaining to rats; infested with, or full of,
rats. (cf. balabáwan).

_baláding_, A small tub or bucket to carry toddy or palm-wine
in. Usually two are carried, slung at the ends of a pole.

_baladlísan_, One sufficiently ill to be given the Sacrament of Extreme
Unction (bádlis). May duhá ka baladlísan (baradlísan) dirâ sináng
minurô. There are two persons to be anointed there in that village.

_bálag_, To bar, block the way, stop, interrupt, lay obstacles in the
way, etc. Balági siá. Block his way. Indì ka magbálag sa ákon. Don't
put any obstacles in my way. Ibálag sa íya iníng síya. Put this
chair in his way. Dílì nínyo pagbalágan ang ákon sugilánon. Don't
disturb or interrupt my conversation. (cf. upág, balábag, pamalábag,
dúpag, lúpag).

_bál-ag_, A file; to file. Bal-agí ang lagárì. File the saw. Ibál-ag
akó ánay sang ákon lagárì. Please file my saw.

_balagahán_, (H) Live coals, furnace, brazier. (cf. bága).

_balagáhay, balagaháy_, To flow, stream, pour, issue (of blood,
perspiration, etc.). (cf. ílig, ágay, sagáhay).

_balagáy_, A vegetable creeper whose young fruit is edible.

_balágbag_, Across, athwart, in the way. See balábag id.

_balághan_, A trough (for feeding pigs, dogs, etc.). (cf. bahóg,
balahogán, balúghan, dalamugán).

_balágon_, A long, pliable, tough--root,--stem,--tendon of a creeper
or other plants, used as a rope.

_balagtásan_, A discussion, disputation, debate, a literary
entertainment, poetical competition, meeting, where the conversational
language is preferably a native dialect. (cf. bágtas).

_balagtíngon_, Anything that can be rung or is to be rung, as a
bell. (cf. bágting).

_balagúbay_, The fruit-stalk of the coconut palm. (cf. balayóbay).

_balahíbo_, Small fine hairs or feathers, down. (cf. búlbul).

_balahogán_, A trough, especially a feeding trough for pigs and
dogs. (cf. bahóg; dalamugán).

_baláhos_, Wrapping; to wrap up. Balahósi sing papél ang líbro. Wrap
the paper round the book. Ibaláhos akó siníng líbro. Kindly wrap up
this book for me. (cf. baráhus, putús).

_balahúbà_, Known, public, notorious, spread, rumoured (said of news,
etc.); to get known, become public, etc. Nabalahúbà inâ sa bánwa. That
became known in town, they got wind of it--or--it was rumoured in
town. Indì ka makatágo sinâ, kóndì mabalahúbà gid sa olíhi. You
cannot hide that, for finally it will get known--or--the news of it
will spread.

_balailéhan_, Dancing-hall, dancing-room, dance-hall,
ball-room. (báile).

_baláka_, Care, concern, solicitude, great interest; to take care of,
be concerned for or about something, to look well after, be solicitous
for. Nagakabaláka siá sing maáyo sang tanán nga mga butáng sa sulúd
sang baláy. She attends with great care to everything within the
house. Indì mo pagkabalák-an ang nahanungúd sa ákon. Don't concern
yourself about what belongs to me--or--is my business. Igkabaláka
akó ánay siníng mga bátà. Please take care of these children for a
while. (cf. álingá, tátap; ripára, bántay, etc.).

_baláka_, The leaf-like sheath at the bottom of a bamboo branch where
it springs from the stem.

_balakáng_, To spread the feet and legs wide apart in standing,
sitting or lying. Nagabalakáng siá sa ganháan. He is standing at
the door with his feet wide apart. Ibalakáng or balakangá ang tiíl
mo. Straddle your legs. Aláng-álang man nga balakangán ko ang tanán
nga buluhatón. It is impossible for me to do all the work. (Literally:
it is impossible for me to stretch my legs astride all the work,
to bestride all the work. (cf. bakâ, bakáng, barakáng).

_balakhóon_, (H) Lamentable, grievous, deplorable, to be grieved at;
grief, sorrow, weeping. (cf. bákhò, hilibíon).

_balákì_, To poise, to weigh in the hand, to judge or guess the
weight of an object by holding it and moving it up and down. Balakía
ang búgsò sang kárne. Weigh the piece of meat in your hand. Ginbalákì
níya ang kabug-atón sang bombáy. He tried the weight of the onions in
his hand. Figuratively: to balance, match. Ang bána nga mapíntas kag
ang asáwa nga mahínay nagabalákì. The rough husband and the gentle
wife compensate for each other. Ginabalákì sang Diós ang mga batásan
sang magasawá. God balances the qualities of married folk.

_baláking_, (H) To raise, or lift up a little, clothes such as
the skirt, the cassock or the like. Balakínga ang patádyong mo,
kay madálum ang subâ. Raise your skirt a little, for the river is
deep. Magbaláking ka sang sotána mo, agúd índì mabasâ. Lift your
cassock a little, lest it should get wet. (cf. kalókos, kolókos--to
tuck up the trousers or the like; baráking).

_baláklan_, (H) Shop, store, emporium, stall, booth, place where
things are sold. Kon may baláklon ikáw magkádto ka sing úna sa kay
N.N., kay maáyo gid inâ nga baláklan. When you have to buy anything go
first to N.N., because that is a very good place to buy. (cf. bakál,
baláklon, balaligyáan).

_baláklon_, (H) That is to be or can be bought, things to be
purchased. (cf. bakál).

_balakolón_, (H) One who deserves or is to be beaten. (bákol;
cf. halanotón, bulunalón).

_balakolón_, (H) To be stewed or fit for stewing. Manók
nga balakolón. A chicken to be stewed (usually in a
bamboo-joint). (cf. bakól).

_balálang_, See barárang, balálaw.

_balálaw_, A cover or lid made of palm-leaves. It is chiefly used
on tuba-containers (baláding) to prevent the tuba from spilling when
being carried to the market.

_balaláyan_, (H) Place or site where a house is to be built. Dútà nga
balaláyan. Residential area, building ground. (cf. baláy, balaláyon).

_balaláyon_, (H) Material for building a house, building
material. (cf. baláy, baláyan, balayán, balaláyan, balayón,
tagbalayón).

_balálbal_, (H) Cane, stick, rod, cudgel, (cf. bálbal, barálbal).

_balalhágon_, (H) Printing, that is to be printed. (bálhag).

_balalígyà_, (H) Things for sale, merchandise, wares, goods,
commodities. (cf. balígyà).

_balaligyáan_, (H) Place where things are sold, shop, store, emporium,
stall, booth. (balígyà).

_balaligyáon_, (H) Merchandise, etc. See balalígyà.

_balalítan_, (H) Hone, whetstone; stimulant, incitement, instigation,
(balít).

_balálkan_, (H) A receptacle for powdered mangrove-bark (tungúg)
called balók, which see. Also: Toddy or palm-wine fresh from the
palm and still unmixed with balók. Diín ang balálkan? Where is the
receptacle containing the tungúg (mangrove-bark)? Iníng tubâ balálkan
pa. This palm-wine is to be mixed still with balók. (cf. balalokán).

_balalokán_, (H) See balálkan, balokán).

_balámbud_, (H) String, cord, twine, rope, etc. used to wind around an
object; to wind or twist round. Diín ang písì nga balalámbud? Where is
the cord for winding or coiling round? Nagabalámbud silá sang písì sa
halígi. They are winding the cord around the post. Balamburí (--udí)
ang halígi sing pís-i. Coil a rope around the post. Ibalámbud ang
písì sa halígi. Wind the cord round the post. (cf. barámbud, sabúd,
sámbud, salámbud, sámbad, kámbad).

_balanâ_, (H) A crack, chink, split, fissure; to crack, form a chink
or fissure. May balanâ or nagbalanâ ang túbo sang kínke, ang kristál
sang bintánà, ang kólon, etc. The lamp-chimney, the window-pane,
the cooking pot, etc. is cracked. (cf. litík, hirás).

_balának_, A kind of fish.

_balanáw_, (H) Pool, puddle, waterhole, depression (in roads, fields,
etc.). (cf. danáw).

_balán-ay_, A kitchen-ledge for pots, pans, etc.; a kitchen-shelf.

_balándra_, To practise, drill, apply oneself to, be diligent. Kon
mabalándra siá, magamaáyo siá nga manugtahî, manugkánta, etc. If
she applies herself, she will become a good seamstress, singer,
etc. (cf. hanáshánas, bánggad, ságad).

_bálang_, To throw, fling, hurl, cast, pitch, chuck, toss,
send at, pelt, stone. Balánga siá sing bató. Throw a stone at
him. Ginbálang níla ang haló sing mga bató. They pelted the iguana
with stones. Balángi ang amô sing tinápay. Toss some bread to
the monkey. Ibálang iníng bató sa báboy. Throw this stone at the
pig. (cf. habóy, pilák).

_balangáw_, The rainbow, iris.

_balangáyo_, An insect with a painful sting. (cf. kamaláyo, alingáyo,
mangaláyo).


_baláng-baláng_, The pin that passes through the kaw-ít (a small rope)
and connects the traces with the plough. (cf. paláy, tunúng).

_balangisí_, (H) A grin, leer; to grin, leer. (cf. lángsì, rángsì).

_balángit_, (H) The span of the outstretched thumb and forefinger,
the distance between the tip of the extended thumb and that of
the extended forefinger; to measure with the thumb-and-forefinger
span. Sókla ang kalaparón sang hénero sang ímo balángit or balangíta
ang kalaparón sang hénero. Measure the breadth of the cloth with
your thumb-and-forefinger-span. Balangíti pa sing isá. Measure an
additional--, add one--, thumb-and-forefinger span. (cf. dángaw--the
span or space from the point of the middle-finger to that of the thumb,
when both are stretched apart).

_balangítaw_, A small crocodile, alligator.

_balángkà_, To cut open, cleave, cut in two, lay bare with a strong
blow from an edged tool, to split with a sharp instrument. Balangkaá
ang lubí. Split the coconut. Ginbalángkà níya sang binángon ang úlo
ni Fuláno. With his bolo he cleft N.N.'s head. Ibalángkà akó ánay
siníng duhá ka bílog nga lubí. Kindly split--, cut open--, these two
coconuts for me. (cf. bukâ, píhak).

_balángon_, (H) A kind of very savoury banana. (cf. barángon,
manghúdan).

_balángtan_, (H) Pasture, ground where animals, tied to a long tether,
may graze. Iníng dútà walâ námon pagaúmha, kóndì ginagámit lang
nga balángtan sang háyup. We are not tilling this piece of ground;
we are using it as pasture only. (cf. bángot).

_balánì_, Magnetism; magnet. (cf. batóbalánì--loadstone, lodestone).

_balaníon_, Magnetic; attractive, alluring.

_balanságon_, (H) Praiseworthy, laudable, commendable. (cf. bánsag,
dalayáwon, balantúgon).

_balánse_, (Sp. balance) Balance; equilibrium, symmetry, equipoise;
to balance, poise; to shift, change, transfer from place to place,
arrange methodically, so as to have symmetry or equilibrium, to keep in
equipoise. Ginabalánse na liwán ang mga Párì sang diósesis sa Háro. The
priests of the diocese of Jaro are again being shifted or transferred
from one place to another. Indì mo pagbalansehón ang mga galamitón
sa sála. Do not shift the furniture in the drawing-room. Ginbalánse
níla ang mga balalígyà. They shifted their wares or removed them
from their customary places and put them up somewhere else in the
shop. (cf. tímbang, timbángtímbang).

_balántak_, Bamboo, bolo, or the like, woven into the walls
or partitions of a building. The bamboo is flattened into broad
strips and the weaving is done (usually) not upright and across, but
diagonally. Also verb: to make or apply balántak. Ang balántak, kon
maáyo ang trabáho, matahúm nga tulúkon. Balántak weaving, if well done,
is beautiful to look upon. Balantakí ang idálum sang talamwáan. Place
balántak-work under the window. Balantaká ang pagdíngding. Weave
the partitions in balántak-fashion. Díngding nga binalántak. Sides
or partitions woven in the manner of balántak. (cf. rára--to
weave baskets, mats, etc.; tádtad--to flatten bamboo, etc. for
balántak-work).

_balántang_, Symmetry; balance; proportion; to be symmetrical,
harmonious, well proportioned, well set-up, balanced. Nagakabalántang
ang íya dágway. His figure is well proportioned. (cf. kamalántang).

_balántik_, An insect often found in sweet potatoes, etc. It causes
the infected part to become very bitter and unpalatable. Kamóti nga
binalántik. Sweet potatoes infested with the insect balántik.

_balantikí_, A kind of grass used against tooth-ache, etc.

_balantikón_, Pertaining to balántik, infected or spoilt by balántik.

_balantúgon_, (H) Deserving to be known or celebrated, to be
proclaimed, worthy of fame and recognition, praiseworthy. (cf. bántug,
balanságon).

_balántyong_, A kind of small fish, whitish in colour.

_balányos_, (H) Ointment, salve, unguent, anything used for rubbing
into the skin to ease pain. (cf. bányos).

_balaód_, (H) Dysentery. May balaód siá or ginabalaód siá. He has
dysentery.

_balá-on_, (B) A small basket without handles. (cf. balâ-balâ).

_baláraw_, Dagger, poniard, stiletto, knife. (cf. dága, punyál).

_balás_, (H) Sand. (cf. barás).

_balása_, (Sp. barajar) To mix or shuttle cards. Balasáha ang
baráha. Shuffle the cards. Balasáhi akó sing baráha. Shuffle a pack
of cards for me. Ibalása akó ánay. Please, shuffle for me.

_balasahón_, Reading matter, periodical, magazine, newspaper, paper,
etc. (bása); cards to be shuffled. (cf. balása).

_balásan_, To bespeak, speak to, warn, forewarn, inform beforehand
of a secret plan, a hidden scheme and the like. Ginbalasánan níya
silá nga----. He told them beforehand that----. Balasáni siá
sinâ. Warn him of that. Give him a hint of that or inform him
of it beforehand. Binalasánan níla ang pagháwid kag pagbukás
sang íya nga mga sulát. They agreed or conspired to retain
and open his correspondence. Ibalásan mo akó sa íya siníng áton
ginkasugtánan. Kindly inform him of this our agreement. Ipahibaló mo sa
íya iní, agúd mabalasánan siá sang tanán nga takús níya buháton. Report
this to him, that he may know what he should do or that he may be
aware of everything and can make his arrangements accordingly.

_balás-baláson_, (H) Sandy, not fertile, barren (of soil).

_balásbas_, Oblique, diagonal, not vertical or horizontal, slanting;
to be, become or make diagonal, etc. Ang balásbas dílì tíndog. What
is oblique is not vertical. Balasbasón mo ang pagtakúd sang láso
sa ákon báyò. Fasten the ribbon obliquely across my jacket. Walâ
níya pagtadlungá ang pagarádo, kóndì ginbalásbas níya. He did not
plough straight across the field, but diagonally, from corner to
corner. Ibalásbas iníng láso sa pakô sang ákon báyò. Put this ribbon
aslant across the sleeve of my jacket.

_balasolón_, (H) Blameworthy, reprehensible, (básol).

_balasón_, (H) Sandy, full of, or mixed with, sand. Balasón nga
tinápay, ísdà, kárne, mónggo, etc. Bread, fish, meat, monggo, etc. full
of, or mixed with, sand. Balasón nga dútà. Sandy soil.

_balás-on_, (H) That is to be wetted or soaked in water. Balás on sa
palígos. Bathing-dress, costume for a bath or swim. (cf. basâ).

_balasúbas_, Out of pocket, without ready cash, short of cash for the
present; to be or become short of cash, etc. Balasúbas or ginabalasúbas
akó karón. At present I am out of pocket or I have no ready cash for
the moment. Nabalasúbas akó, kay madámò ang ákon gingastohán. I ran
short of cash, for I had to spend a great deal. Nagbalasúbas siá sa
sugálan. He ran out of cash at the gambling table.

_balasúbas_, Careless, desultory, botched, bungled, not well done or
made, scamped. Balasúbas ang pagbúhat sang pánday sang ákon lamésa. The
joiner botched my table. (cf. bástos, manól, balotanóg).

_balatáan_, (H) Uterus, womb. (cf. bátà; tián, tiyán, taguángkan).

_balatán-an_, (H) Uterus, womb. (cf. balatáan).

_balatángan_, Day-bed, couch, sofa, anything suitable for lying
upon. (cf. batáng; higdáan, higdaanán).

_balátas_, Galaxy, Milky Way.

_balatásan_, Place of suffering; the purpose or object, for which
one suffers. (batás).

_balatasón, balatáson_, (H) Bearable, tolerable; sufferable; endurable;
to be suffered or borne with. (batás).

_baláti_, A kind of tree believed by the superstitious to be haunted
by ghosts.

_balatiágon_, (H) Feeling, sensation, sentiment, emotion. (cf. bátiag).

_balatían_. Disease, illness, sickness, infirmity, ailment, complaint,
disorder, malady, distemper, morbid condition. (cf. bátì).

_balatián_, To have a disease,
be--sick,--ill,--infirm,--unwell,--indisposed. Ang mga
nagabalatián. Those that are sick, the infirm, sick people.

_balatibát_, A lattice, lattice-work, net-work in bamboo, wood,
stone, iron, etc.; to make lattice-work, to lattice, interlace,
interweave. Ibalatibát iníng kawáyan. Make lattice-work of this
bamboo. Balatibatí ang ibábaw sang hágdan. Surround the landing at the
top of the stairs with lattice-work. Balatibatá ang ímo pagrára. Make
lattices in your wicker-work.

_balátik_, The constellation Orion.

_balátik_, A covered pit set with sharp spikes; a kind of trap with
a spring attached to a sharp-pointed spike which pierces the victim
that steps on the trap. Naglikáw sa súyak kag sa balátik kaámbak. He
avoided the sharp pegs and jumped down into the spiked pit, i.e. he
fell out of the frying pan into the fire. Gindakúp níla ang talunón
sa balátik. They caught the wild pig in the spring-trap.

_balatikál_, Anything that jams, squeezes or wedges an object so that
it can be drawn out or removed only with great difficulty. Indì ka
makahúnus sináng kawáyan, kay may balatikál. You cannot pull out this
bamboo, for it is wedged in. (batikál).

_balatonán_, (H) Reception-room, place where visitors, etc. are
received. (báton).

_balátong_, (H) Vegetables, especially peas and beans. (cf. hántak).

_balaúd_, (H) See balaód--dysentery.

_baláw_, (B) An interrogative particle having the meaning of: How can
you think so? Do you imagine that----, unless----? Would one do this
or act in such a way, if it were not----? Baláw makádto akó dídto,
kon walâ akó sing kinahánglan? Do you imagine I would go there, unless
I had a good reason? Baláw tagóon ko iní kón índì ákon? Can you think
that I would hide or keep this, unless it were mine? (cf. balá).

_baláw_, Pitch, tar, bitumen, resin, rosin, asphalt; the pitch of
the apítong tree; to pitch, tar, asphalt. Balawí ang kílid sang
paráw. Cover the sides of the outrigger with pitch. (cf. sálong,
alkitrán, aspálto).

_baláw_, Spotted, variegated; a fowl spotted black and
white. (cf. baráw).

_baláy_, House, home; building, dwelling, abode; nest, breeding place,
shell of a snail, of a turtle, etc. Diín ang baláy mo? Where is your
home? Anó nga baláy ang ginadayónan mo dirí? What house are you staying
at here? Ang baláy sang ánay. The nest of termites, a white ants'
nest. Ang baláy sang pawíkan. The shell of a tortoise, tortoise-shell.

_bálay_, To start building a house, commence the erection of a
building; in baseball: to make a home-run. Nagabálay silá. They are
starting to build a house. Baláya ang baláy. Commence building the
house. Nagbálay na silá sing makaduhá. They have made two home-runs
already.

_balayád_, (H) Cash in hand for payment, ready money. (cf. báyad).

_balayán_, Bedstead; the frame of a bed, of a picture, etc. Nabutangán
na ang kátre sing balayán, ápang walâ pa sing salúg. The bedstead
has been set up, but as yet is without the bed itself. (cf. baláy,
baláyan, etc.).

_baláyan_, A large piece of wood, a rafter, especially the length
of timber that rests on the wall and reaches to the roof-tree or
ridge. The laths or stringers (hawák, anamán) are nailed horizontally
across the rafters.

_baláy-bálay_, Dim. of baláy. Hut, hovel, shack, tent, any small
dwelling or living quarters; anything resembling a house.

_baláybay_, Parable, simile, similitude, figure of speech, comparison,
discourse in figures and comparisons; poetry; poem. Also used
as a verb: to liken to. Binaláybay nga hámbal. Poetical speech, a
discourse in figures or parables. Binaláybay. What has been expressed
in parables, figures, etc.; a poem.

_baláydan_, (H) Debt, liability, account, score, what one owes or
what is to be paid for. (báyad, baláyran).

_baláye_, Relation between the parents of married people, the parents
of the husband being "ang mga baláye" to the parents of the wife and
vice versa; to be related in that way. Nagabaláye silá. They are the
parents of husband and wife respectively.

_baláyhan_, (H) A small mortar. (cf. almirés, lubakán; bayó).

_baláyhan_, (H) Obligation--, duty--, to pound rice. Iníng táo may
baláyhan pa sa ákon. This man is under an obligation to pound rice
for me. (cf. bayó, baláyhon).

_baláyhon_, (H) To be pounded, set apart or allotted as food, said
of rice in contra-distinction to bilinhíon--rice to be preserved as
seed-grain. (cf. bayó, baráywon).


_baláynon_, (H) Domestic. See balayón.

_baláyo_, (H) A pestle, especially one for a small mortar like
almirés. (bayó; baráyo id.; cf. hál-o--the large pestle for pounding
rice).

_balayóbay_, (H) The fruit-stalk of the coconut-palm, betelnut,
etc. (cf. barayóbay id.).

_balayón_, Domestic, domesticated, accustomed to live in a house,
applied to domestic animals like cats, dogs, poultry, etc. Applied
to persons it means one who is much attached to the house, living
nearly always within and going out but rarely, home-loving,
stay-at-home. (baláy).

_baláyong_, A tree valued for the timber it yields.

_balayoón_, (H) Cloth fit, suitable, or specially chosen, for making
jackets or outer dresses. (báyò).

_baláyran_, (H) See baláydan id.

_balayránan_, (H) See baláyran. Madámò ang íya balayránan. There are
many things he has to pay for.

_bálbag_, To shatter, splinter, crush, fracture, break an
arm,--bone,--bamboo, or the like. Balbagá ang kawáyan. Crush the
bamboo. Nabálbag ang túl-an sang batíis níya, kay naágyan sang ruéda
sang isá ka mabúg-at nga káro. His shin-bone was shattered, for the
wheel of a heavy wagon passed over it. Ginbálbag sang mga soldádo
nga románhon ang mga túl-an sang duhá ka makáwat. The Roman soldiers
broke the bones of the two thieves.

_bálbal_, To cane, drub, flog, thrash, give one the stick, cudgel,
club, beat with a stick or cudgel. Balbalá siá. Club him. Ibálbal mo
sa íya iníng bastón. Beat him with this stick. Indì ka magbálbal sa
íya sing lakás. Don't beat him too much. (cf. bákol, lámpus, hánot,
búnal, etc.).

_bálda_, (Sp. baldar) A physical defect remaining after an illness
or accident, a permanent injury, impairment. (cf. samád).

_baldádo_, (Sp. baldado) Crippled, maimed, permanently injured,
impaired, physically defective after an illness or in consequence of
an accident.

_bálde_, (Sp. balde) Pail, bucket.

_baldokín_, (Sp. baldaquin, baldaquino) Baldachin, baldaquin, a canopy
over a throne, altar, etc.

_baldósa_, (Sp. baldosa) A fine, square tile, especially for flooring;
flag-stone, flat paving-stone.

_bále_, (Sp. vale) A credit-note, chit; to be worth, to cost. Ang
kusúg ni Pédro bále tátlo ni Huán. Peter is three times as strong as
John. Iníng baláy bále isá ka líbo ka mángmang. This house is worth a
thousand pesos. Baléhi lang ang baláklon mo. Just sign a credit-note
for the goods you wish to buy. Buy on tick.

_balensyána_, (Sp. valenciana) Rice mixed with sausages, meat,
vegetables, etc. and various spices, prepared in many different
styles. Also: point-lace, i.e. lace wrought with a needle; a kind of
sewing or stitching.

_baléu, báleu_, To transform, change into something else, turn into,
transmogrify. Ang káhoy nabaléu nga bató. The wood was changed into
stone. Ang asáwa ni Lot nabaléu nga asín. Lot's wife was turned into
salt. (cf. bályo, bálhin, baléw).

_baléw, bálew_, See baléu.

_bálhag_. To print, impress. Balhagí akó sing isá ka gatús nga
pangágda. Print for me one hundred invitation-cards. Nabálhag na ang
líbro nga íya sinulát. The book he wrote is now in print. Ipabálhag
mo sa ákon balhágan ang ímo mga balalhágon, kay balhagón ko ang
tanán nga kinahánglan mo sing mahípid kag sa kubús nga bilí. Let my
printing-press do all your printing, for I will print everything you
need in good taste and at low cost. (cf. imprénta).

_balhágan_, Printing-press, printing-office. (cf. bálhag;
balalhágon--what is to be printed, printing).

_bálhas_, Sweat, perspiration; to sweat, perspire, make to
perspire. Ginabálhas akó. I am perspiring. Anó na man inâ, walâ ka
gánì pagbalhasá sang ímo pangabúdlay kag buót ka magpahúay na? What
is the meaning of this. The work you have done has not caused you
any perspiration and you wish to take a rest already? Binálhas
(ginbálhas) siá sang madásig nga paglakát. Walking fast made him
perspire. Nagatalabirís gid lámang ang bálhas sa íya nawóng. The
perspiration is streaming down his face. (cf. bahúlay--cold
perspiration, as in some fevers, in death-agony, etc.

_bálhin_, Change, alteration, transformation, transfiguration,
transmutation; to change, alter, become different from what one
was before, transform, transfigure, transmute, metamorphose,
transmogrify. Nagbálhin ang íya dágway. His form or figure
changed. Magabálhin gid ang duág sang ímo báyò kon maulanán. The
colour of your jacket will change, if it gets wet with rain. Indì mo
pag-ibutáng iníng bíno sa ínit, kay básì mabálhin kag matáhaw. Don't
place this wine in the heat, for it might change its flavour and lose
strength. Dílì nínyo pagbalhinón ang amó nga pagbulút-an. Don't change
that law. Don't alter or modify the provisions of that law. (cf. baléu,
báylo).

_bálhog_, Immature, half-ripe, unripe, green, not yet properly
developed, said especially of rice and corn. Bálhog pa ang mais, humáy,
etc. The corn, rice, etc. is not ripe yet. (cf. línghod, mánghud).

_bálhong_, (H) To swell a little, be slightly swollen. Nagabálhong
ang ákon túdlò. My finger is slightly swollen.

_bálhot_, To regard, have consideration for. This term seems to be
used almost exclusively in the following or similar phrases: Indì
mo na akó ikabálhot or walâ na ikáw pagbálhot sa ákon. You don't
respect me any longer, you have no regard or consideration for me
any more. (cf. bárhot, banâ, tahâ, panagubáli).

_bálì_, To fracture, rupture, break without severing, to bend or
twist so as to break, but without tearing off entirely. Nabálì ang íya
bútkon. He broke his arm. Ginbálì níya ang alobaybayán sang hágdan. He
broke the handrail of the ladder or stair. Balía ang sangá sang káhoy
nga nagabálag (sang) sa dálan. Bend back and twist the branch that
obstructs the road.

_balî_, (H) Broken, fractured, ruptured, bent or twisted so as to
be unable to return to the former position. Utúd gid ang íya nga
bútkon?--Dílì, kóndì balî lang. Is his arm entirely cut off?--No,
only broken so as to hang down loosely.

_balíbad_, (H) Pretext, explanation, excuse, pretence, false plea,
subterfuge, often just a story got up for the occasion; to find an
excuse, to explain away, to have a pretext or story ready, to tell lies
in order to get out of a scrape and the like. Indì ka magbalíbad sang
ímo salâ. Don't try to excuse your fault. Anó ang balíbad mo? What
excuse or pretext have you got? Indì mo akó pagbalibáran. Don't
try to find excuses with me. Don't tell me stories. Don't try to
explain. Nagabút siá sa baláy sa pagpakigkítà sa ímo; búsà walâ
na ikáw sing ikabalíbad sa íya. He came to the house to see you;
consequently you cannot excuse yourself any longer. Pabalibára
akó. Excuse me. Ibalíbad mo akó. Kindly excuse me, find an excuse for
me. Ginbalíbad níya ang ulán. He put it down to the rain. (cf. butíg,
malí, pasúni).

_balibód_, To wind, roll, twine, twist round, encircle, enwreath,
wreath round. Ang kalát nabalibód sa súngay sang karabáw. The rope is
twisted round the buffalo's horn. Ibalibód ang písì sa halígi. Twine
the string round the post. (cf. sabúd, balámbud, etc.).

_bálid_, A kind of melon. (cf. sandíya, melón).

_balíghot_, To bind, fasten, lash, knot, tie with a knot. Balighotá
ang písì, dílì mo pagbaloón. Fasten the cord with a knot, not with
a loop or bow. Ibalíghot iníng písì sa pinutús. Tie the parcel
with this string. Ibalíghot mo akó siní. Bind this for me. Ang
pílak íya binalighotán sang íya pányo. He tied the money in his
handkerchief. (cf. higót, balô).

_balighotán_, A knot, especially a knot in a handkerchief containing
coins, material for betelnut chewing, or the like.

_balígyà_, Selling, sale; to sell, dispose of by sale. Nagabalígyà
ka siní? Are you selling this? Tagpilá ang pagbalígyà mo siníng mga
lápis? For how much each do you sell these pencils? Ginabalígyà mo
inâ? Do you sell that? Ibalígyà mo sa ákon iníng mga sapátos. Sell me
these boots. Ibalígyà mo akó sinâ. Kindly sell that for me. Nabaligyaán
kamí dídto siníng báka. This cow was sold to us there. Ginbaligyaán
níla kamí siní. They sold it to us. (cf. patábà--to sell land:
bakál--to buy).

_baliháwog_, Bolt, bar, cross-bar: latch. (cf. pintál).

_bálik_, To come back, return, go back to the place one came
from. Nagbálik siá sa Ilóng-ílong. He went back to Iloilo. Balíkon
mo ang maléta nga nalipatán ko. Go back and fetch the handbag I
forgot. Balíki si Hosé. Return to José. Ginbálik níya ang pílak nga íya
ginhulám. He returned the money he had borrowed. Ibálik mo na ang líbro
ko. Now at last give me back my book. Ipabálik lang inâ sa íya. Just
send that back to him. Binalíkan níya ang ámon baláy, kay bangúd sang
bahâ walâ siá makatabók sa subâ. He came back again to our house, for
on account of the freshet he could not cross the river. Binalíkan pa
gid sang idô ang diótay nga kárne nga íya nabilín. The dog went back
again to the little meat he had left. (cf. úlì, buélta, panumbalík).

_balikákà_, To spread the legs apart, straddle, stand
astride. (cf. balakáng).

_balíkas_, (H) Scratch, excoriation, abrasion; to excoriate, scratch,
lacerate, tear, chafe, wound the skin. Nabalíkas ang ákon bútkon sang
símsim. My arm got scratched by the bamboo-branches. Ginbalíkas
níya ang ákon guyá sang sibít. He scratched my face with the
pin. Nabalikásan ang ákon písngi; ambót kon anó ang nakabalíkas. My
cheek got scratched; I don't know what caused the scratches. Andam
ka dirâ, kay básì mabalikásan ka sang tunúk (dúgi). Be on the lookout
there, for you may get injured by the thorns. (cf. báklis, lísgis).

_balikáw_, A very slender bamboo. Its stem is non-hollow or solid
like rattan, and climbs trees, etc. like a vine.

_balikawáng_, Loins, haunch.

_balik-awót_, Clumsy, awkward, gawky, without grace or skill; to
be clumsy, etc. Nabalik-awotán akó sa íya. To me he appears very
clumsy. I consider him awkward. (cf. baksiwâ, bikwálon).

_balík-bálik_, To go or pass to and fro, backwards and forwards, back
and forth, to return again and again. Anó man ang ginabalík-bálik mo
dirâ? Why do you go there so often? Ginbalíkbalíkan ko na ang íya
baláy sing makalimá, ápang walâ siá gihápon dirâ. I have been five
times to his house; but he was not there.

_balíkda, balíkdan, balíkdi_, etc. See balikíd--to look back, etc.

_balíkdò_, To go aside, turn away, change one's direction, go out
of one's way in order to avoid meeting somebody one does not like
to confront. Nagbalikdò siá sa ákon. He turned off the road to avoid
me. Ginbalikdoán níya si Fuláno. He changed his direction so as not
to meet N.N. Ginpabalíkdò níya si Fuláno. He caused N.N. to turn off
in another direction. (cf. likáw, aklihís).

_balíkdò_, To abstract, take off, hide, appropriate, carry off. See
salíkdò.

_balikíd_, To turn one's head and look back, to look behind; to revert
to, be concerned about, have one's mind engrossed. Balíkda siá. Look
back at him. Indì ka magbalikíd sa simbáhan. Don't look behind you in
church. May ginabalíkdan akó sa baláy. I have something at home that
engrosses my mind, that turns my thoughts towards home. Ibalikíd akó
ánay sang ákon mga bátà. Kindly look after my children for me. Anó ang
ginabalíkdan mo? What makes you thoughtful? What is on your mind? What
are you concerned about? Anó ang ginabalikíd mo? What are you looking
back for? Why are you turning your head and looking back?

_balíkò_, To curve, bend, form into the shape of an arch. (cf. tikô,
likô, balikókò).

_balikô_, An arch; a curved stick or wire, anything formed into the
shape of an arch. (cf. balitók, balikókò; árko).

_balikókò_, A circular bend or curve an arch; to be bent in a
circle, to form--an arch,--a ring,--coil,--hoop,--wreath, to
curl or be rolled up. Nagabalikókò ang mga mán-og, lalágo, búnga
sang kamúnsil, etc. Snakes, dew-worms, kamúnsil--pods, etc. coil
themselves up. Ginapabalikókò níla ang bátà. They are bending the
baby in a circle, i.e. grasping the baby by the ankles and shoulders
and bringing its feet in contact with its head, as often done in
play. (cf. balíkò, balikô).

_balikótot, balikotót_, Contortion, twisting of the limbs; to
writhe, to twist the limbs, as when suffering from cramp, cold,
great fear and the like. Nagabalikótot siá. He is contorting his
limbs. Ginabalikótot níla ang íla mga láwas sa dakô nga katúgnaw. They
are writhing on account of the great cold. Pasilónga ang báka, dì mo
siá pagpabalikototón sa ulán. Put the cow under shelter, don't let
her shiver with cold out in the rain.

_balikwâ, balíkwà_, (B) Upside down, inverted, overturned; to overturn,
to turn upside down, invert. Balikwaá ang bató. Turn the stone upside
down. Iníng lugár ginabalikwaán níla sang mga bató. They overturned
the stones in this place. Ibalikwâ akó siníng tápì. Kindly turn this
plank over for me. (cf. balíkwat, balískad, sulî).


_balikwáng, balíkwang_, (B) See balikawáng.

_balíkwat_, See balikwâ id. Balikwatá--balikwaá.

_balilá_, (H) A kind of fish.

_balíla_, (H) A kind of reed (súlud) in a weaving loom similar in
shape to the backbone of the balilá--fish.

_balíli_, A kind of tobacco, so named after the town of Barili, Cebu,
where it is extensively grown.

_balíling_, To flap the hand, shake the hand loosely to and fro or
up and down. Balilínga ang kamót mo. Flap your hand. Pabalilínga ang
kamót sang bátà. Cause the baby's hand to flap (in play). Balilíngi
si tátay mo. Wave your hand to your father. (cf. pamáypay).

_balíndò_, To move, roll, or turn in all directions; to bewilder
with questions, etc. Ginbalindoán sang masakít ang íya nga
kátre. The sick person is constantly moving or turning on the
bed. Dî mo siá pagbalindoón. Do not keep turning him. Ginbalíndò
ang testígos sang abogádo. The lawyer plied the witness with many
questions. (cf. pasibúdsíbud).

_balingá_, Stupid, dull, daft, simple, deranged, half-witted; to be or
become stupid, etc. Balingá nga táo. A half-wit, one not quite right
in his mind. Sádto maáyo man siá, ápang karón nagbalingá. Formerly
he used to be quite normal, but now he has become deranged,
half-witted. Nabalingahán akó sa íya. I got the impression that he
was not quite normal. (cf. balingág.)

_balingág_, See balingá. Sán-o pa ikáw magbalingág? When did you go
daft? When did you have your head (brain) turned? (cf. tipangág).

_balingasó_, To have bloodshot eyes, to look fierce, have fiery or
glaring eyes, to be half-blinded by passion, heat or excitement. Ang
panúluk siníng táo nagabalingasó. The eyes of this man are fiery,
glaring, blazing. Sang pagkasáyod níya siní, nangákig siá kag dáyon
nagbalingasó ang íya mga matá. When he heard this, he got angry and
his eyes immediately became inflamed with fury or rage.

_balingáy_, A kind of river-crab. (cf. baringáy).

_balínghoy_, The cassava plant from which tapioca is
obtained. (cf. kamotingkáhoy).

_balingíg_, Not quite vertical, leaning-inclined, slanting; to lean
a little, be inclined, etc. Kaína matádlung pa ang halígi, karón
nagbalingíg na. A while ago the post was straight, now it has inclined
a little. Pabalingigá ang halígi. Slant the post a little. (cf. hiláy,
talingî, talingíg, tingíg).

_balíngkat_, See balikwâ, balíkwat.

_balingkókok_, A kind of tree-snail with a beautifully coloured shell.

_balingón_, (H) Small (sun-dried) fish. Also used as a verb. Ang gunô,
balinô kag tabagák ginabalingón sing masamí. Gunô--, balinô--and
tabagák-fish are often dried in the sun. (cf. báog).

_balinô_, A kind of small fish often dried in the sun.

_balinónas_, (B) Water in which rice has been washed before being
boiled. (cf. kinilís, binalónas).

_balinsasayáw_, A small bird living in almost inaccessible rocks. Its
nest is much sought after for medicinal purposes. Ang mga áti
nagabalígyà sing mga púgad sang balinsasayáw. The Negritos sell nests
of the bird called balinsasayáw.

_balínsay_, To roll over and over, turn somersaults, as in falling
down-stairs, etc. to play with stones, marbles, etc., as children
do. Nagbalínsay siá sa hágdan. He turned a somersault down the
stairs. Pabalinsayá siá sa pángpang. Roll him down the river-bank. Ang
mga bátà nagahámpang sang balínsay. The boys are playing at turning
somersaults--or--are playing (with stones, búskay, etc.) the game
called balínsay. (cf. balíntong, balintotók, bansúlì).

_balintawák_, (From Balintawák, a town near Manila). A kind of coloured
cloth, chiefly used as head-dress for women or as a neck-tie for
men. Kúdong nga balintawák. A woman's head-dress of such cloth.

_balíntong_, To turn a somersault; a somersault. Makahibaló ikáw
magbalíntong? Do you know how to turn a somersault? Sagád siá
magbalíntong. He is an expert tumbler, acrobat, an adept at turning
somersaults. (cf. balínsay).

_balintotók_, To turn a somersault. See balíntong, etc.


_balintúad_, To turn several successive somersaults; to gallop fast (of
horses). Ang kabáyo nagabalintúad. The horse is galloping. Pabalintuará
(--adá) ang kabáyo. Gallop the horse. Make the horse run fast. Maáyo
gid siá magbalintúad. He is a fine tumbler, acrobat. (cf. balínsay,
etc.).

_balintúnod_, To grasp, understand, comprehend, know. Walâ akó
makabalintúnod sang íya nga hámbal. I could not understand what he
said. (cf. hibaló, áto, sáyod, hántup, hangúp).

_balintúwad_, See balintúad.

_bálio_, (B) To barter, exchange, swap, swop. Ginbaliohán ko ang ákon
karabáw sang isá ka báka. I exchanged my buffalo for a cow. Baliohán ko
ang ákon kálò sang ímo líbro or Ibálio ko ang ákon kálò sa ímo líbro. I
will exchange my hat for your book. Ginbálio níya ang íya báboy sa
ákon tínday. He swapped his pig for my calf. (cf. báilo, báylo, bályo).

_balióg_, A kind of neckcloth or collar worn by Philippine women; to
wear or use such a neckcloth. Iníng babáe nagabalióg. This woman wears
a neckcloth. Baliogá lang iníng hénero. Just make a neckcloth of this
stuff. Baliogí siá. Put a neckcloth on her. Pabaliogí siá. Provide her
with a neckcloth. Ginbalióg níya ang ákon balióg. She wore my collar.

_balióng_, Confinement, restraint; to confine, restrain one's liberty,
drive into a corner, shut up, fetter, shackle, secure, etc., so as
to prevent an escape. (cf. bánsok, húnong, líkup, balún-ok, bókot,
síod, siód, gápus, etc.).

_balísa_, (Sp. baliza) A buoy; a piece of bamboo, a branch of a
coconut palm, or the like, stuck in the sand in shallow water as a
guide for fishing smacks, etc. (cf. bóya; tóytoy).

_balisbísan_, The eaves of a roof.

_balisíng_, Squinting; cross-eyed; to squint, look askance. Balisíng
or nagabalisíng siá. He squints (cf. libát).

_balískad_, Upside down, inverted; to turn upside down, invert,
turn topsy-turvy. Balískad iní. This is upside down. This is putting
the cart before the horse. Baliskará (--adá) ang pínggan. Turn the
plate upside down. Baliskarí akó sing isá ka tápa nga nagatúngtung sa
bága. Turn over for me a slice of dried meat lying on the coals. Dî
mo pagbaliskarón ang ímo mga buluhatón. Keep order in your work or
in the performance of your duties. Don't do first what should be done
last or vice versa.

_balískog_, Vertebra, spine, backbone, vertebral column: anything
that stiffens or strengthens. Butangí iníng hénero sing balískog. Sew
or add some stiffening to this cloth, (lest it should flap or hang
loosely). (cf. báskug, tískug).

_balíswà_, Upside down, topsy-turvy; to turn over,--upside
down,--round,--up. (cf. balískad, sulî).

_balít_, To whet, grind, sharpen, hone, put an edge on; to incite,
urge, set on. Balitá ang labáha (nabáha). Sharpen the razor. Ibalít
akó ánay sang ákon nabáha. Please, sharpen my razor for me. Indì mo
siá pagbalitón sa pagpakigáway. Don't incite him to fight. (cf. báid).

_balítà_, News, information, notice, communication; to notify,
inform, report, communicate. Anó ang mga balítà nga bág-o? What is the
latest news? May balítà balá? Is there any news? Nabalitáan kamí sang
kamatáyon ni Fuláno. We were informed of N.N.'s death. Ginbalitáan kamí
níla sang maáyo nga pagabút níla dídto. They notified us of their safe
arrival there. Ibalítà mo sa íla ang kamatáyon ni Fuláno or ibalítà
mo sa íla nga napatáy si Fuláno. Inform them of the death of N.N. or
that N.N. is dead. Ginpabalitáan sang Diós ang mga manugbántay sang
mga háyop sing isá ka ánhel. God sent a message to the shepherds
through an Angel. Pinabalitáan níya kamí sa isá ka hatud-dulús sang
maáyo níya nga kapaláran. He sent us word by telegram of his good
luck. (cf. pahibaló, pasáyod, pamáan).

_balít-ad_, (B) Stubborn, disobedient, unheeding, refractory,
unruly, wilful, perverse, self-willed; to be or become stubborn,
etc. Balít-ad nga táo, bátà, etc. A stubborn person, child, etc. Indì
ka magbalít-ad. Don't be stubborn. Indì mo akó pagbalit-arán. Don't be
stubborn with me. Iníng bátà maáyo sádto, ápang karón nagbalít-ad. This
child used to be good before, but now it has become refractory or
wilful. Indì ko siá pagbatónon, kay nabalit-arán akó sa íya. I will
not receive him, for he is too unruly for me. (cf. batinggílan,
dî manínggol, kabalán).

_balít-ad_, (H) To fall on one's back, tumble down, tilt--, go--,
turn--, topple--, over. (cf. tikháyà, tingkáyà, kayâ).

_balitádhan_, A vine, whose fruit is used as a remedy against
intestinal worms.

_balítan_, Hone, strop, razor-strop. See balalítan id.

_balitáng_, Anything that tightens, stiffens, clasps, holds something
together: brace, clamp, clasp, manacle, shackles; the piece of wood
on either side of a hammock. (cf. balískog; bánting; pángkog).

_balítaw_, An action-song, singing and dancing combined,
a song accompanied by expressive gesticulations; to sing an
action-song, etc. Nagakánta silá sing balítaw. The are singing an
action-song. Nagasáut silá sing balítaw. They are dancing to a song.

_balítaw_, An exclamation of surprise or wonder. Balítaw, pagkatahúm,
pagkatáas kag pagkadakô siníng baláy! Look, how beautiful, how high
and how large this house is!

_balitók_, A stick, rod, piece of iron, etc. bent to form an arch;
an arch. (cf. balikô, árko).

_balítwà_, To raise, lift; to turn over. (cf. balíswà; hákwat, álsa).

_balkón_, (Sp. balcon) Balcony. (cf. pántaw, paláyas).

_bálo_, Widow, widower. Also used as a verb. Bálo siá. She (he) is a
widow (a widower). Nabálo siá or nahímò siá nga bálo. She (he)--became
a widow (widower),--was bereaved of her husband (of his wife). Ang
pagkabálo. Widowhood.

_bálò_, Alarm, warning, signal or notice of danger from fire, thieves,
water, etc.; to give a danger-signal or warning. May bálò nga----. The
alarm is given that----. Ipabálò (ibálò) mo sa bánwa nga dirí siníng
minurô nagakalamátay ang mga háyop. Send warning (give warning)
to the town, that here in this village the domestic animals are
dying off. Binalóan or ginbalóan sang búg-os nga bánwa ang amó nga
nahatabô. The whole town was alarmed over that event. (cf. paándam,
paálam).

_balô_, A slip-knot, running knot, noose, a bow; to tie in a loop or
bow, so as to make it easy to open. Baloá ang paghigót. Tie with a
slip-knot. Ibalô akó ánay siníng pinutús. Kindly tie up this parcel
for me in a noose.

_baló_, To know, etc. Now obsolete. See hibaló. (cf. nabádwan).

_balók_, Powdered mangrove bark, put into toddy to make it
ferment. Also used as a verb. Ang tungúg ginabalók sa tubâ. Powdered
mangrove-bark is put into palm-wine.

_balokán_, A vessel or receptacle for containing powdered
mangrove-bark. (balók; cf. balalokán).

_balók-an_, The bladder. See balókhan id.

_balók-han, balókhan_, (H) The bladder. (cf. barók-an id.).

_balókoy_, A severe cough resembling croup. Also used as a verb. May
balókoy ang bátà or ginabalókoy ang bátà. The child has a bad
cough. (cf. barókoy id.).

_balólon_, (H) A roll; to roll up. Balolóna ang baníg. Roll up
the mat. Ibalólon akó ánay siníng amákan. Kindly roll up this
bamboo-mat. Balolóni akó sing isá ka sigarílyo. Please roll me a
cigarette. (cf. lolón, álas--to coil or wind a rope, etc.).

_balón_, (Sp. balon) A bale of paper (24 reams); foot-ball. Bákli
akó sing isá ka balón nga papél. Buy me a bale of paper. (cf. bulús).

_bálon_, Provisions or food-supplies for a journey; to take provisions
along. Nagbálon akó sing tápa. I took dried meat along for the
trip. Balóna iníng kán-on. Take this cooked rice with you for the
journey. Balóni siá sing pinákas. Give him dried salt fish along as
a provision for the journey. Pabalóni siá sing pinákas. Provide him
with dried salt fish for the trip. Ipabálon ko sa íla iníng búgsò
nga kárne. I will give them this piece of meat along for the trip.

_balónas_, (B) To wash rice (bugás) previous to boiling it. Balonási
ang bugás. Wash the hulled rice. Ibalónas akó siníng bugás. Please
wash this rice for me. (cf. balinónas--the water in which rice has
been washed; kilís id.).

_balón-balonán_, The craw or crop of a fowl. (cf. bútse).

_balónos_, A creeper, whose juice is used like the juice from the
bark of salangkúgi to oil the hair and clean the scalp. Its fruit
looks like an apple or orange, but is uneatable and only employed by
children to play ball with.


_balót_, Vapid, stale, bad, rotten; ugly, nasty. Itlog nga balót. A
rotten egg. Tabákò nga balót. Bad tobacco. (cf. barót).

_bál-ot_, An insertion; a stripe or streak, something put in between;
to stripe or streak, to put in between. Ang pugáwa nga maitúm bal-otí
sing madalág. Put some yellow stripes into the black woof. Bal-otón
mo ang pulá, putî, kag dalág sa ímo paghabúl. Weave into the cloth
at regular intervals red, white and yellow stripes. Ibál-ot ang itúm
sa putî. Put black streaks into the white cloth or put in alternate
stripes of black and white. (cf. gúray sámay).

_balóta_, (Sp. balota) Ballot, vote; ballot-form.

_balotanóg_, Not well done, underdone, parboiled, not sufficiently
cooked (of food); healing slowly (of ulcers, etc); desultory,
unsatisfactory (of schooling, education, etc.). Also used as
a verb. Iníng kán-on balotanóg. This rice is not sufficiently
cooked. Ang bakokáng balotanóg. The carbuncle called "bakokáng" is
slow in healing. Balotanóg gid lámang ang íya panoón. His schooling
was very desultory or quite insufficient. Dílì mo pagpabalotanogón
ang pagtíg-ang. Don't only half-cook the rice. (cf. angól-angól,
akúl-akúl).

_bal-ót-bál-ot_, Striped, streaky, showing various lines
of colours. Bal-ót-bál-ot ang sámay sang íya báyò. His
jacket is striped. His jacket shows lines of various
colours. (cf. labólabó--variegated, dyed in different colours; to
alternate (of colours).

_balótbot_, To pull up, raise or lift out of water, mud or the
like. Balotbotá ang bátà sa lúnang. Pull the child out of the
mud. Ibalótbot akó sa madalî sang bátà sa subâ. Please, pull the
child out of the river at once. (cf. bátak).

_bálsa_, (Sp. balsa) Raft, ferry-boat; to make or use a raft,
ferry-boat. Nakatabók kamí sang subâ sa isá ka bálsa. We were able to
cross the river on a raft. Balsahá ang mga kawáyan nga pulúnton. Make
a raft of the bamboos for making fish-traps, and float them down the
river. Balsahí si Fuláno sing kawáyan. Float some bamboo raft-wise
down the river for N.N. Ibálsa akó siníng mga bólò. Float these
bolo-canes raft-wise down the river for me.

_bálsamo_, (Sp. balsamo) Balsam, balm.

_balséro_, (Sp. balsero) One who works a raft or float; one who floats
bamboo, etc. down a river; a ferry-man.

_balúd_, A wave, billow, surge, swell, surf, breaker, comber,
beach-comber, ripple; to be ruffled, be a little rough (of the sea);
to rise and roll (of waves). Karón dalágkò ang mga balúd. Now there
are heavy waves (white horses) on the sea. Nagabalúd ang dágat. The
sea is rather rough,--is choppy. Nabádlan silá sa dágat. They had
rough weather on the sea. (cf. bádlan, hanúl).

_bálud_, A kind of bird of the size of a pigeon.

_bálud_, To be wavy, corrugated, show wavy lines, be bent in the form
of a wave. Nagabálud ang íya kamót, iníng talámnan, etc. His hand,
this field, etc. has wavy lines on it.

_bálud_, Field near a river, plantation in the immediate neighbourhood
of a stream. (cf. doróg).

_bálud_, A kind of shrub or decorative plant with beautiful large
leaves.

_balúd-bálud_, Dim. and Freq. of balúd. Also: Wavy, shaking to
and fro, oscillating, waddling; to waddle, rock, toddle or totter
along. Nagabalúd-bálud siá sa dálan. She is toddling along the
road. Balúd-bálud ang íya paglakát. He walks unsteadily,--sways to
and fro.

_balúdnon_, Wavy, undulating, rising and swelling or rolling, as waves;
of the colour--of waves,--of the sea, sea-green.

_balúghan_, (H) A receptacle used for carrying food to pigs,
etc. It usually consists of a piece of bamboo from two to three feet
long. (cf. bahóg, balahogán, balághan, dalamogán).

_balúkag_, The long bristles on the neck of a pig.

_balúkhay_, To rummage, ransack, turn over in search of, to look for
something amongst a number of other things. Indì mo pagbalúk-hayón ang
ákon mga ulús. Do not rummage amongst my clothes. Balúk-hayí gid ang
íya nga maléta, kay básì ang ímong báyò yárà sa sulúd sinâ. Ransack
his handbag, for maybe, your jacket is in there. Ibalúk-hay akó ánay
siníng mga panápton, kay ginamáyom ko nga yárà man dirâ ang ákon pányo
nga nadúlà. Kindly search these garments thoroughly, for I guess that
my missing handkerchief will be found amongst them.

_balúndò_, Change, transmutation, transformation, metamorphosis;
to transform--, change--, turn--, fish into meat, cats into birds,
wood into stone, etc. A superstitious belief has it, that the "áswang"
can do such things. Ang ísdà nabalúndò sa kárne. The fish was changed
into meat. Nabalundoán siá sing kárne. He had some transformed, or
mysterious meat placed before him. Binalundoán siá sing ísdà. He was
given mysterious fish (something transformed into fish). Ang kuríng
ginbalúndò sang manogbalúndò sa píspis. The wizard turned the cat
into a bird. (cf. bálhin, bályo, báylo).

_balúng_, (B) Tipsy, drunk, fuddled, boozed, intoxicated: to become or
make drunk, etc. Nabalúng siá. He got drunk. Indì mo siá pagpaímnon
sing lakás nga bíno, kay mabalúng siá. Don't give him too much wine
to drink, for he will get tipsy. Ginbalúng níla siá. They made him
drunk. Iníng bíno matáb-ang; índì makabalúng sa ímo. This wine is
light: it will not intoxicate you. (cf. hubúg, lingín).

_balúnggay_, A kind of tree whose leaves are boiled and eaten. Many
Philippine homes have one or more of those trees planted
near. (cf. kamalúnggay id.).

_balún-ok_, (B) To shove, thrust, impel; to drive into a corner, keep
at bay. Ibalún-ok siá sa díngding. Push him against the wall. Amó iní
ang padér nga ginbalun-okán níya sa kay Fuláno, kag pinalítkan sang
íya úlo. This is the wall against which he thrust N.N. and cracked
his skull. (cf. tulúd; bánsok, balióng).

_bálus_, Answer, reply, rejoinder, response, retort, return, reward,
recompense, remuneration, requital, guerdon; to answer, return,
pay back, reward, recompense, requite. Balúsi ang íya sulát. Answer
his letter. Balúsi (básli) ang íya kaló-oy sa ímo sa maáyo nga
pagtábang sa íya mga kalisúd. Return his mercy to you by assisting
him whole-heartedly in his difficulties. Ibálus mo sa íya iníng isá
ka búlig nga ságing sa duhá ka sandíya nga íya ginpadalá sa ákon. Give
him this bunch of bananas in return for the two melons he sent me. Anó
ang saráng ko ikabálus sa ímo? What return can I make you? How or
wherewith can I repay you? Kon akó índì makabálus sa ímo ang Diós
amó ang magabálus sa ímo. If I cannot make you a fitting return,
God will do so. Balúsan kamó sang Mahál nga Diós. May God reward
you. Binalúsan (ginbáslan, bináslan) akó níya sing maláin. He made
me a bad return. Ibálus mo akó ánay síning sulát ni Fuláno. Please
answer this letter of N.N. for me. Ginbalúsan (Ginbálus) níya sing
pilô ang pagtámpà sa íya ni Fuláno. He paid back twofold the slap he
received from N.N. (cf. timalús).

_balúskay_, To rummage, etc. See balúkhay id. Baluskayá ang ímo korbáta
sa baúl. Search for your tie in the trunk. Sín-o ang nagbalúskay
sangákon pinutús?--Ang ímo pinutús ginbaluskayán (binaluskayán) sang
mánghud mo sa pagusísà kon may binakál ikáw nga dólse. Who rummaged
my parcel?--Your parcel was searched by your younger brother to find
out whether you had bought some sweets.

_balutá-i_, (B) The dregs of coconut oil. (cf. latík).

_balúyot_, Sack, bag, pouch, wallet. (cf. pálhuk, bayóong, púyo, sáko).

_bályo_, To change; transform. (cf. báilo, báylo, baléu; bálhin).

_bályog, balyóg_, Collar. See balióg. id.

_bámos_, (Sp. vamos) Let us go. Bámos na kitá. Let us go now. Bámos
na sa pagpangabúdlay, sa punsyón, sa báile, sa baláy, sa pagpangísdà,
etc. Let us go to work, to the banquet, to the ball, home, fishing,
etc. (cf. kádto, lakát, pánaw).

_bána_, Husband, a married man, whose wife is alive; to take a husband,
to join a man in wedlock. Sín-o man ang banáhon mo? Whom then are
you going to marry? Ayáw pagbanáha ang isá ka laláki nga walâ sing
pagtóo. Beware of marrying a man without faith. Kon magbána ka,
pilíon mo ang isá ka laláki nga maáyo sing pamatásan. If you marry,
choose a man of good behaviour. Indì ka magpabána sang ímo anák sa
isá ka laláki nga matámad. Don't give your daughter in marriage to
a lazy fellow. (cf. pamána, pangasáwa; asáwa--wife).

_bánà_, (B) Opinion, guess, surmise, thought; to think, guess, opine,
surmise. Ginabánà ko nga magaulán karón sa hápon. I guess it will
rain this afternoon. Sa ákon bánà índì siá makatabók sa subâ, kay
may bahâ. In my opinion he cannot cross the river, because it is in
flood. (cf. bántà).

_banâ_, (B) To respect, revere, reverence, venerate, defer to, honour,
show consideration or regard for. Banaá ang ímo mga ginikánan. Honour
your parents. Ginabanâ níya iníng táo. He respects this man. Indì
mo na akó ikabanâ. You have no consideration or respect for me any
more. Tungúd sa anó man nga walâ na ikáw pagbanâ sa ákon? Why do
you no longer show any consideration for me? (cf. bálhot, táhud,
tahâ, panagubáli).

_banáag_, Daybreak, morning-light, aurora; to dawn, to get
light. Walâ na kinahánglan sing sugâ, kay may banáag na or nagabanáag
na. There is no need any longer to burn a lamp, for daylight is
appearing. (cf. banágbánag, sanáaw).

_banabá_, A beautiful flowering tree.

_banâ-bánà_, Dim. and Freq. of bánà. Guinabanâbánà ko nga ----. I
rather think that ----. Sa ákon banâbánà ----. In my opinion ----. Indì
ka magbanâbánà sináng mga butáng, kon índì ka kahibaló. Don't express
an opinion on such things, unless you know or are sure.

_baná-bána_, A paramour, lover, one who, without being entitled to it,
assumes the rights of a husband. (cf. laláki, kalólot).

_banád_, (B) Accustomed, practised, experienced, expert. (cf. batíd,
anád, badáng, sagád).

_banág_, A small shell-fish.

_banagán_, A kind of lobster, crayfish, crawfish; a vine. Its roots
are boiled, and the resulting concoction is taken as a remedy against
stomach-ache, skin diseases, etc.

_banág-bánag_, See banáag, aliwánag. Nagabanágbánag na--or--may
banág-bánag na. Day is now breaking. The morning light is glimmering.

_banál_, To lift up and fling down, to take or raise up and throw to
the ground, to take hold of and hurl to the floor. Ibanál mo siá sa
kalóg. Take hold of him and fling him into the ditch. Sa dakô nga
kaákig ginbanál níya si Fuláno sa salúg. In great exasperation he
seized N.N. and threw him to the floor. Iníng búhò amó ang ginbanalán
(binanalán) níya sa kay Fuláno. This is the hole into which he flung
N.N. (cf. pilák, habóy, tulúd, tíklod).

_banaól_, A bird of prey that resembles a hawk owl. (cf. manaól).

_bánas_, A trail, path, foot-path, track; to be worn into a trail
or path. May bánas dirâ? Is there a trail or foot-path? Iníng lugár
nagbánas sa daláyon nga ági sang táo. This place has been worn into
a track by the constant passing of men. (cf. baginás).

_banása_, A kind of shrub with small rose-coloured flowers.

_banáta_, A panel, the portion of a partition contained between two
uprights. Ang díngding nga sa ginútlan sang duhá ka bakalán ginatawág
nga banáta. The partition between two upright posts is called "banáta".

_banátad_, A bird much esteemed for its savoury meat; in size it is
about equal to a pigeon.

_banát-bánat_, (B) To take physical exercise, to set one's limbs in
motion. Ibanátbánat ang láwas mo. Exercise your body. Banátbanáta ang
láwas kag kaugatán mo. Give exercise to your body and muscles. Ang
táo nga walâ pagbanátbánat magabalatián sa madalî. A man that does not
take any physical exercise will soon fall sick. (cf. bayátbáyat id.).

_banáte_, A kind of shrub whose beautiful branches and leaves, when
separated from the stem, keep their green colour for a long time
without fading. Consequently they are well adapted for decoration.

_banaúl_, See banaól.

_bán-aw_, Crystal gazing, crystal vision, divination by means of
a magic mirror called ban-áwan; to practise crystal gazing, look
(superstitiously) into the ban-áwan. Ang babáylan nagabán-aw sa
íya nga ban-áwan. The wizard or sorcerer is--looking into his magic
mirror,--practising crystal gazing. (cf. ban-áwan).

_ban-áwan_, A magic mirror used for crystal gazing or crystal vision;
a piece of mirror, crystal, glass, any reflecting substance into
which the wizard looks in order to discover the thief, whereabouts
of a lost article, etc. (cf. bán-aw).

_banáwog_, A high-priced black coral; it is found in various shapes,
often resembling a walking stick.

_banáyan_, A vegetable creeper with edible root.

_banayáw_, A spider with a jet-black body and marked with a red
spot. It has a very severe and poisonous sting that is even more
painful than the sting of a scorpion.


_banayón_, (B) Shivering, quivering, shaky, trembling; to shiver,
quiver, shake, tremble, etc. Banayón ang íya nga kamót. His hand is
trembling. Kon mabúdlay ang ímo kamót kag dáyon mo itúsmug sa matúgnaw
nga túbig, magabanayón. If your hand is tired and you plunge it at
once into cold water, it will shake. (cf. píri).

_bánban_, A kind of shrub used for medicinal purposes.

_bánbin_, To pull out--, pluck out--, hairs by means of a thread or
string, to beautify the hair or eyebrows by removing a few straggling
hairs. May bág-o na man nga pamatásan nga ang mga laláki magpabánbin
sang íla nga ágtang kag kílay. There is now a modern fad that men
should beautify their foreheads and eyebrows by removing straggling
hairs. Maálam ka magbánbin? Do you know how to pull out hairs by
means of a thread?

_bánda_, (Sp. banda) Band; a belt or scarf worn diagonally across
the chest by high-placed military or civil officers and the like;
a music-band, a brass-band.

_bandéha_, (Sp. bandeja) Waiter, tray, plate or small dish for serving
biscuits, sweetmeats, materials for smoking and the like.

_bandehádo_, (A Philippine derivative from bandéha). A large plate
or dish for serving food to several persons.

_bandéra_, (Sp. bandera) Banner, flag, pennon. (cf. hayáhay).

_bandéra espanyóla_, (Sp. bandera española) A kind of plant that
somewhat resembles maguey or agave.

_bándi_, A kind of candy (sweet) made of unrefined sugar and shreds of
coconut meat or peanuts. Also called "bukáyo", especially if peanuts
are not used, but only sugar and coconut meat.

_bándì_, A small, wide-meshed basket, a fish-basket; a
fruit-basket. (cf. alát; kupitón; dawín).

_bándo_, (Sp. bando) Notice, edict, public announcement; to announce,
publish, make public or inform the public by means of a town-crier
called bandoléro. Ginbandohán kamí sang bandoléro. We were informed
by the town-crier.

_bándog_, (B) To stir, move, make an impression upon. Indì siá
mabándog. He is not to be moved, one cannot move him or change his
mind. Awát lang ang tanán nga mga láygay sa íya, kay índì ka makabándog
sa íya. All admonitions given to him are in vain, for you cannot move
him. (cf. ínkà, íngkà, lígid, língkang).

_bandoléro_, (Sp. bandolero--highwayman) Town-crier, a menial officer,
who announces various orders and regulations by going from street to
street and shouting out aloud what he has got to say.

_banduríya_, (Sp. bandurria) Bandurria, bandore, a musical instrument
somewhat like a lute.

_bangâ_, An earthen water-pot, water-jar, water-cooler.

_bangá_, To like, be pleased with, enjoy; to entertain,
amuse. Nagakabangá silá sang sugilánon. They enjoy
conversation. Ginbangahán níla ang pagtámbong sa ámon beláda. They
enjoyed being present at our theatrical entertainment. Bangahá ang
mga bisíta sang sugilánon túbtub nga malútò ang pagkáon. Entertain
the visitors with conversation till dinner (food) is ready. (cf. wíli,
lúyag; lípay, lingáw).

_bangâ_, An idiot, fool, simple, one that is very forgetful,
absent-minded, easily cheated or imposed upon by others. (cf. kolôkolô,
etc.).

_bángag_, To crack, form fissures (said of the soil). Nagbángag ang
ámon talámnan. Our field has cracks in it. Nabangágan ang humáy
sa talámnan, kay dúgay na nga walâ magulán. There are cracks in
the ground under the rice in the field, because it has not rained
for a long time. Patubigán mo dáyon ang talámnan, agúd nga índì
magbángag. Keep the field constantly under water or water the field
constantly, lest it should form cracks. (cf. litík, balanâ, hirás).

_bangág_, Cracked, full of fissures, (said of the soil).

_bangál_, A handful; to take a handful, eat by handfuls. Ibangál ang
kán-on. Eat the rice by handfuls. Bangalí (bangalá) ang bábà níya
sing kán-on. Put a handful of rice into his mouth. (cf. hamál, dapál).

_bángan_, To ambush, lie secretly in wait for. Nagbángan siá sa
ákon. He lay in wait for me. Nabangánan or binangánan siá. He was
ambushed. Nakabatî siá nga may nagabángan sa íya; tungúd sinâ índì
siá magpaúlì. He heard that somebody was lying in wait for him;
therefore he would not go home. (cf. bánggà).

_báng-aw_, To become stale, tasteless, insipid, to rot, spoil, go bad
(applied especially to food), (cf. pán-os, bagéu).

_bángbang_, To widen by digging, to dig away earth, etc. Bangbangán
mo ang lúblub, agúd magsángkad ang dálan. Widen the hollow or
narrow passage by digging, in order that the road may become
broader. Ginbangbangán níla ang búhò, kay makitíd. They widened the
hole in the ground, for it was too narrow. Ibángbang iníng tagád sa
pángpang sang subâ. Make use of this iron-pointed dibble to dig away
the earth from the river-bank. Ipabángbang iníng búhò. Get this hole
widened. Ang mga kaminéro nagabángbang sang bakólod sa higád sang
dálan. The road-menders are digging away the side of the hill near
the road. (cf. bákhay, káli).

_bángdan_, Cause, reason, motive, pretext, ground, foundation. Madámò
siá sing mga bángdan. He has many motives or pretexts. Ang sakít sa
úlo amó ang íya bángdan nga índì siá makaóbra. His headache is the
cause of his not being able to work. (bangúd).

_bángday_, To lie one above or across another in irregular
fashion. To place one above or across another. Ibángday iníng halígi
sa kawáyan. Lay this post on the bamboo. Bangdayá ang kawáyan kag
ang halígi. Lay the bamboo and the post one upon the other. Ayóha ang
pagbángday sang gatóng, agúd índì maglunga-óg ang tiníg-ang. Don't lay
the fire anyhow, lest the rice should be badly cooked. (cf. tángday).

_bánggà_, The part between the kitchen and house in Philippine houses,
a passage on the level of the floors of two houses, making one large
house of the two; a cross-road.

_bánggà_, To ambush, lie in wait for. Banggaí siá. Ambush
him. Ginbanggaán or binanggaán siá sang mga buyóng. He was waylaid
or beset by robbers in hiding. (cf. bángan id.).

_bánggad_, to accustom, to train, practise, break in. Banggará (--adá)
ang ákon toréte nga karabáw sa paggúyud sang karósa. Train my young
buffalo to draw the sled. Ibánggad akó ánay siníng kabáyo sa pagbútong
sang kalésa. Kindly train for me this horse to pull the rig. Nabánggad
na siá siníng pangabúdlay. He is now accustomed to, or practised in,
this kind of work. (cf. ánad, nánas, gálit).

_bánggan_, For banogán from banóg--to swell, etc.

_bánggì_, To break or tear off a branch at its juncture with the main
stem or tree. Ginbánggì sang mga bátà ang sangá nga iní. This branch
was torn off by the children. Dílì nínyo pagbanggián sing sangá iníng
káhoy, kay básì maglúmpaw. Don't break off whole branches from this
tree; it might wither. Ibánggì akó ánay sináng sangá. Kindly break
off that branch for me. (cf. sánggì id.).

_banggiánay_, To quarrel, dispute, wrangle, have words,
altercate, bandy words. (Literally: to tear branches off each
other). Nagabanggiánay silá. They are bandying words, are quarrelling
amongst themselves. (cf. bagâ, súay).

_bánggit_, To disagree, differ with, bicker, bandy words, have words
with, wrangle, have a difference with, quarrel, altercate. (cf. bagâ,
báis, súay, áway, bángig).

_bánggos_, To rub rather hard with a stone or the like. Ibánggos
sa ákon likód iníng bató. Rub my back with this stone. Banggosí
akó sang lugúd. Rub me down with the rubbing-stone. Binanggosán
níya ang ákon likód sing bukáy. He rubbed my back with a bit of
limestone. (cf. bányos, hílot; kískis--to scrape).

_bangî_, The other--, opposite--, further--, side of something
obstructing the view, as the further side of a screen, partition,
house, mountain, lake, sea, etc. Sa bangî sang----. On the other side
of (the house, mountain, etc., according to the context). Ang íya
baláy ádto dídto sa bangî sináng bakólod. His home is there behind
that hill. (cf. likód, pihák, tabók).

_bangî_, To do a thing with only one hand, do a thing one-handed,
carry with one hand. Ginbangî lang níya ang maléta. He just carried
the handbag with one hand (without changing over to the other). Dúmug
kitá, bangî lang ang ákon. Let us wrestle, I to fight with only one
arm. Bangiá siá. Fight him one-handed.

_banngî, -bángì_, To change from side to side, do or carry something
alternately in the right and the left hand, behind or in front,
on this side or that side, and the like. Ginbangî-bángì níya ang
maléta. He carried the handbag now in his right hand and now in his
left. Bangî-bangión mo ang paghalúk sa bátà or bangî-bangián mo ang
bátà sang halúk. Give the baby a kiss on both cheeks.

_bangî, -bangî_ The fiddler-crab, a kind of crab remarkable for its
unequal claws, one being much larger than the other, especially in
the male.

_bángig_, Quarrelling, quarrel, wrangle, dispute, altercation,
bickering, high words; to quarrel, etc. Nagabángig or nagabangígay
silá. They are quarrelling. May gínbángig akó. I had a quarrel with
someone. A, pabangíga lang silá. Well, just let them quarrel or fight
it out amongst themselves. (cf. bánggit, súay, banggiánay, bagâ, etc.).

_bangíg-bángig_, Dim. and Freq. of bángig. To differ, disagree,
have a slight difference.

_bángil_, To prop, support, put in, or under, something a prop or
wedge of wood, stone, etc. in order to heighten, tighten or steady
things. Bangíli ang tiíl (kahíg) sang lamésa, agád magtádlong. Prop up
the foot of the table, that it may stand straight. Ibángil ko iníng
káhoy sa lamésa. I'll prop up the table with this piece of wood,
(in order to steady it, raise it on one side). Dílì mo pagbangílan
ang aparadór sing isá ka bangíl nga madámol, ang isá ka manipís túman
na. Don't put a thick wedge under the cupboard; a thin one is quite
sufficient. (cf. písak, piíl--wedge).

_bangíl_, A prop or wedge for the operation called "bángil".

_bangilíd, bangílid_, Slope, hill. (cf. bánglid, bakólod, bánhay).

_bangirít_, To grin, show one's teeth. Indì ka magbangirít. Don't
grin. Ginbangiritán (binangiritán) níya akó. He grinned at
me. Pabangiritá siá. Make (let) him grin. A, pabangiritá lang dâ
siá. Well, just let him stand grinning there. (cf. ngirít, lángsì,
rángsì, balangisí, ngurîngúrì).

_bangís_, Fierceness, ruffianism, brutality, truculence, ferocity,
cruelty, violence, inhumanity; to be or become ferocious, inhuman,
ruthless, brutal, fierce, cruel, to act fiercely, etc. Nagbangís
siá. He got fierce. Nabangisán akó sa íya. I consider him violent. He
is too violent for me. Indì ka magbangís sa ákon or índì mo akó
pagbangisán. Don't act the ruffian with me. Don't talk fiercely to
me. Don't treat me so cruelly. (cf. barís, píntas).

_bángka_, Satiety, surfeit, disgust; to do as one pleases, do to one's
heart's content; to surfeit, glut. Ginabangkahán gid lang níla ang
báboy. They are glutting themselves with pork. (cf. ángka, kánkan;
taká, súm-od, sumó, tíbal).

_bángkag_, Bulky, cumbersome: to be awkward to carry on account
of size or shape, though light in weight. Nagbáng-kag ang pinutús,
kay naghugák ang íya nga higót. The parcel became awkward to carry,
because its string came loose.

_bángkal_, A kind of tree and its timber of a yellowish colour.

_bángkat_, A kind of open-work basket used for stowing away table-ware,
clothes, etc.

_bángkaw_, A lance, spear. Ang kílid sang Aton Ginóo hinandusán sang
bángkaw ni Longíno. The side of Our Lord was pierced by the lance
of Longinus.

_bangkáw-bángkaw_, A kind of dragon-fly,
damsel-fly. (cf. tumbáktúmbak).

_bángkay_, A corpse, dead body, cadaver.

_bángkil_, Eye-tooth, tusk of a boar, elephant, walrus, etc. (bánkil
id.).

_bangkílan_, Possessing tusks, having large tusks; wealthy,
influential, rich. (cf. manggáran, aligianán).

_bangkilíng_, A kind of tree with edible fruit.

_bángkit_, To nibble, gnaw, bite off; to diminish, take from;
cut off. Sa sugálan binangkitán siá níla sing ápat ka mángmang. At
the gaming table they took four pesos from him, i.e. won them from
him. (cf. háng-it, kíbkib, búhin).

_bángkò, bángko_, See bánkò, bánko--bench; bank.

_bángkong_, Curved, bent, crooked, said especially of a carrier's pole;
to be or make curved, to curve, bend. Hilókhilóka ang tuangtuangán
túbtub nga magbángkong. Bend the carrier's pole till it stays
curved. Ginbángkong níya ang íya tuangtuangán. He curved his
carrying-pole. (cf. tikô, likô, balikô, balitók).

_bánglad_, A kind of shrub.


_bánglid_, A slope, rise, gently rising ground, incline, aclivity,
declivity; sloping, slanting, not level (of ground). (cf. bánhay,
bangilíd.

_bánglò_, The fibre of buri-leaves used for making mats, hats,
etc. (cf. bánlò id.).

_bángog_, Head, will, thought, mind, soul, inclination. Walâ gid inâ sa
bángog ko. That never entered my head, is not or was not to my liking,
etc. Walâ gid sa bángog ko ináng mga kalipáyan. Such amusements do
not appeal to me--or--I would not even think of assisting at such
diversions. (cf. bagô, bagól, úlo, kálag).

_báng-og_, Decomposition, putrefaction, rottenness: to decompose,
putrify, rot, spoil, go bad so as to be unpalatable or unfit, said
of food. Nagbáng-og ang kán-on. The rice spoiled. Nabáng-og ang íla
punsyón, kay walâ magabút ang mga inágda. Their banquet got spoilt,
because the invited guests did not put in an appearance. Nabang-ogán
kamí sing isá ka búgsò nga kárne. One of our pieces of meat became
putrid. Indì mo pagpabang-ogón ang ísdà. Don't allow the fish to go
bad. (cf. bagéu, pán-os).

_bángol_, Very tall, large, big, gigantic, huge, towering,
immense. Bángol nga táo, káhoy, karabáw, bató, etc. A very tall man,
a very large tree, a very big buffalo, a very bulky or large stone,
etc. (cf. dakô, hánggud, bahól).

_bángon_, To rise, get up from a lying position. Bángon kamó, kay ádlaw
na. Get up, for it is bright daylight. Bumángon ka na. Now then, get
up. Bangóna ang masakít. Raise or lift up the sick person. Pabangóna
siá. Make him rise. Order him to get up. (cf. tíndog--to stand,
stand up, rise from a sitting position; búnkras).

_bangón_, The principal external abdominal blood-vessels, the right
and left epigastric artery.

_bangón-bángon_, A cart-pole, carriage-shaft, thill.

_bángot_, To tie, bind, lash, fasten with a rope or string. Ibángot
ang karabáw sa halígi sing serádo. Tie the buffalo close to the
post. Bángti (bangóti) ang halígi sang kabáyo. Tie the horse to the
post. Ibángot akó sang karabáw sa halígi. Please tie the buffalo to
the post for me. Ang karabáw nga nabángot sa búgsok nakabúhì. The
buffalo that was tied to the stake got loose. (cf. higót).

_bangót_, Any rope or string-like material used for binding or
tying. Anó ang pagbángot mo kon walâ ka sing bangót? How can you tie,
if you have nothing to tie with?

_bángrus_, A kind of fish growing to about a foot in length and much
esteemed as food.

_bángrus_, To rub, knead, massage. Ibángrus akó ánay sang ákon
likód. Kindly rub my back. (cf. bánggos).

_bángtan_, etc. See bángot, bangót.

_bángtò_, A kind of bamboo without thorns.

_bángto_, A small piece, as a grain of sand, rice, corn, etc.; to
roast corn. (cf. binángto, bántuk, binántuk).

_bangúd_, Reason, motive, cause; used in the passive voice with the
meaning: to place the responsibility upon, to put forward as a pretext
or reason, to lay the blame upon and the like. May tungúd kag bangúd
siá sa pagbúhat sinâ. He had the right and sufficient cause to do
that. Ginabángdan níya akó, nga akó amó ang may salâ. He makes me
responsible by saying that the fault was mine. Ginbángdan níya si
Hosé sang pagkabúung sang pínggan. He laid the blame for the broken
plate on José. Indì mo pagipabangúd sa ibán ang mga salâ nga ímo gid
ginbúhat. Don't make others answer for the sins you have committed
yourself. (cf. bángdan, kabangdánan).

_bangúd_, On account of, by reason of, due to, because. Bangúd sinâ
----. Therefore ----. Bangúd sang íya katámad sa pagpangabúdlay
napúto siá. On account of his being too lazy to work he became a
bankrupt. Walâ akó makakarí sang simána nga tinalíkdan, bangúd nga
nahilántan akó. I was unable to come here last week, because I had a
cold or influenza. Bangúd sang madámol nga ulán índì kamí makapaúlì
karón. Due to the heavy rain we cannot go home now. (cf. tungúd, kay).

_bánhaw_, To rise from the dead, to raise to life again. Si
Hesukrísto nabánhaw sing mahimayáon. Jesus Christ rose glorious from
the dead. Ginbánhaw sang Diós si Lásaro. Lazarus was raised by God
from the dead. Pagabanhawón gid sang Diós ang tanán nga mga táo sa
katapúsan sang kalibútan. God will certainly raise all men from the
dead at the end of the world. Indì ka makapabánhaw sing karabáw
nga patáy na. You cannot raise to life again a dead buffalo. Ang
kaadláwan sang pagkabánhaw. The day of the Resurrection. Ang Domíngo
sang Pagkabánhaw. Easter Sunday, the Sunday of the Resurrection.

_bánhay_, A rise in the ground, a very moderate slope, incline;
sloping slightly, not steep; to slope, become or make sloping. Banhayá
ang pángpang nga hándog. Cut the steep river-bank into a gentle
slope. (cf. bánglid; pánhay).

_bánhog_, To get loose or lose connection with, to fall or slip
off; become separate from, as a thread from a needle, a rope from
a pulley, and the like. Nabánhog ang hílo sa dágum. The thread slid
from the needle. Dílì mo pagpabanhogón ang kalát sa mutón. Don't let
the rope slip off the pulley. Nabanhogán ang síngsing sang písì. The
cord slipped out of the ring. (cf. palús, pádlus--to slip out of the
hand, etc.).

_bánhot_, A kind of shrub whose strong-fibred bark is much employed
in the making of ropes.

_baníg_, A mat for a bed, carpet for a floor, etc.; to carpet, use,
place, or put down a mat or carpet. Magbaníg ka kon magtúlug ikáw. If
you go to sleep, lie on a mat. Banigí ang salúg. Put a mat on the
floor. Ibaníg lang iníng hábulsa kátre. Just use this blanket as a
mat for the bed. Pagabanigón ko gid iníng mga dáhon sang burí. I am
going to make a mat of these buri-palm leaves. Ibaníg akó ánay siníng
kátre. Kindly put a mat for me on this bed. Ang isá ka dakô nga báhin
sang dálan nabanigán. A great part of the road was covered with mats.

_baníg_, To be plentiful, abound, cover the ground, etc., as with
a carpet. Ang katúl nagabaníg gid lang sa likód sang bátà. The
skin-disease called "katúl" has spread all over the child's back.

_banihót_, Careless and negligent in the execution of orders, lazy,
indolent; to be unmindful of orders, to be lazy or careless. Indì
ka magbanihót kon sogóon. Don't be careless in carrying out an
order, if you receive one. Don't be lazy, if you are ordered
to do something. Banihót nga táo. A careless, lazy, negligent
fellow. Nabanihotán akó sa íya. He seems to me to be very
negligent. (cf. amád, támad, ágol, agohós, ligóy, tamarán, etc.).

_baníklan_, (B) A piece of split bamboo or wood, a
splinter. (cf. biníklan, baníslak, liníyas, lipák).

_banílad_, To spread, open, unfold. (cf. bulád, ládlad).

_bani-ól_, (B) To jam, press, squeeze or pin against something or
between something. Nabani-ól ang ákon tiíl sang gamót sang káhoy. My
foot got jammed in between the roots of the tree. Ginbani-ól níya
ang ákon tiíl sa salúg. He pressed my foot firmly against the
floor. Bani-olá ang báboy sa púsud sang kodál. Pin the pig into
the corner of the fence. Ginbani-ól níya ang báboy sa díngding sang
íya bagát. He pressed the pig against the partition-wall with his
pole. (cf. ipít, lígpit, bánsok; aróod, oróod).

_baníslak_, (B) Splint, splinter, lath, split piece of wood, of bamboo,
etc. See baníklan id.

_bánka_, (Sp. banca) A kind of boat, larger than a paráw, and without
outriggers. Also: A game of cards; the keeper of the bank, banker
(in gaming).

_bánkil_, Tusk, eye-tooth. See bángkil id.

_bankíte_, (Sp. banquete) Banquet, feast, repast, celebration,
festivity. (cf. tábad, bádò, punsyón, pagkáon).

_bankíya_, (Probably from the Sp. banca). To help or join another
in any work or undertaking, to contribute part of the expenses or
capital involved in any scheme. Bankiyáhi akó sa paggásto siníng
baláy nga ákon ginapatíndog. Help me to defray the expenses for the
house I am having built. Ibankíya sa ákon ang ímong báka, agúd nga
índì matám-an sang trabáho ang ákon karabáw. Assist me with your ox,
lest my buffalo should be overworked. Ginbankíya níya sa ákon ang isá
ka gatús ka mángmang sa ákon komérsyo. He helped me in my business with
a contribution of one hundred pesos. (cf. búlig, tábang, ámot, búylog).

_bánkò, bánko_, (Sp. banco) Form, bench; bank. Bánko Postál. Postal
Savings Bank. (cf. bángkò, bángko).

_bankolít_, The fine covering of a grain of rice, usually of a dark
or reddish colour.

_bankolitón_, Pertaining to, or affected with, bankolít, said of
rice-kernels with the bankolít, or part of it, still adhering to them,
as often happens, unless the rice is pounded very thoroughly.


_bánlas_, Desert, sand. (cf. balás).

_bánlò_, The fibre of buri-palm leaves. See bánlò id.

_banóg_, Hawk. (cf. salagyáwan).

_banóg_, (B) A swelling, tumour, ulcer; boil; to swell,
etc. Nagbanóg ang íya nga púgsa. The boil on his back has increased
in size. Nabánggan (nabanogán) ang kamót ko. My hand is swollen or
has become swollen. Binánggan ang batíis ko sing bakokáng. My calf
became swollen on account of the carbuncle called "bakokáng". Iníng
hubág mo magabanóg pa túbtub nga magbúswang. This boil of yours will
swell more before it bursts. (cf. hubág, bukálong, bálhong).

_bánok_, (B) To be quiet, silent, not to stir or move. Mostly used with
pa--. Nagapabánok gid lang siá bisan ánhon mo sang ákig. He just keeps
silent, though you are angry with him, scold him, etc. (cf. bánol).

_bánol_, (B) To keep quiet, silent, make no stir. Like bánok mostly
used with pa--. (cf. bánok, pabánok, pabánol),

_bansáda_, (Sp. avanzada) Exposed to the wind, etc. Índì mo pagabrihán
ang bintánà, kay bansáda sa hángin. Don't open the window, for the
wind will blow in. (cf. ábong, abansáda).

_bánsag_, Nickname, sobriquet; to nickname, call by a nickname. Ang
bánsag níya "bóktot". His nickname is "hunchback". Indì ka magbánsag sa
íya or índì mo siá pagbansagán. Don't call him by a nickname. Bansagí
siá sing "piáng". Give him as nickname "the lame". Ibánsag mo sa íya
"bakéro". Nickname him "cowherd". (cf. pádià, pádyà).

_bánsag_, Praise, exaltation, commendation, encomium, eulogy,
panegyric, approbation, a tribute of gratitude or homage; to praise,
extol, exalt, commend, laud, belaud, eulogize, panegyrize, magnify,
glorify, think highly of. Nagbánsag siá sa kay Fuláno, sang íya baláy,
sang íya batásan, etc. He praised N.N., his house, his character,
etc. Ginbánsag níya ang íla nga pagpuní sang simbáhan. He praised--,
lauded--, highly approved of--, their decoration of the church. Bansagá
ang íla nga pagpangabúdlay, kapisanón, kaábtik, etc. Glorify their
work, commend their zeal, praise their dexterity, etc. Nabansagán
siá bangúd sang íya nga kinaálam (kinaádman). He became famous for
his learning. On account of his learning he was--well-known, --highly
appreciated. (cf. dáyaw, saólog, bántug, hangád, kilála).

_banságon_, Highly esteemed or appreciated, thought highly of,
commendable, laudable, worthy of praise, famous. (cf. balanságon).

_bansálan_, Rudder. (cf. timón).

_bánsi_, A kind of small fish.

_bánsil_, A cog, tooth, sprocket, in a wheel; a false tooth; to insert
a tooth or cog, to fill a tooth, make an artificial tooth. A lángálang
na iníng galingán, kay napíngas ang madámò nga bánsil. This mill or
machine does not work well any longer, because many cogs are broken
off. Bansilán mo ang ákon ngípon. Fill my tooth. Make me an artificial
tooth. Ang dentísta nagbánsil sang ákon ngípon. The dentist filled
my tooth or made me an artificial tooth. Buláwan ang ibánsil mo sa
ákon ngípon. Fill my tooth with gold or make me a gold tooth.

_bánsok_, To drive into a corner, drive to the wall, surround, keep
at bay. Ginbánsok námon ang usá sa lúblub. We surrounded the deer in
the narrow defile. Bansoká ang báboy nga talunón sa gíab. Drive the
wild boar into the hole and surround him. Bansokí ang lúblub sang
báboy. Try to get the pig into the narrow passage. Ibánsok ang báboy
sa lúblub. Drive the pig into the narrow defile. (cf. líkup, balióng).

_bansúlì_, To turn head over heels, fall down headlong or head
foremost, turn upside down, invert. Nagbansúlì siá sa hágdan. He
fell headlong down the stairs. Ginbansúlì níya ang bátà. He turned
the baby upside down (in play). Bansulía ang kawáyan, halígi, bastón,
etc. Turn the bamboo, the post, the stick, etc. upside down. (cf. sulî,
balískad, balíntong, balintotók, balínsay, etc.).

_bántà_, Opinion, guess, surmise, conjecture; to opine, think, guess,
surmise, conjecture. Sa ákon bántà or bolobántà ----. In my opinion
----. Ginabántà níya nga ang duhá ka gántang nga bugás ígò sa panyága
sang napúlò kag ápat ka táo. He thinks that two gantas of hulled rice
are sufficient for fourteen persons to eat at dinner--or--are enough
to feed fourteen persons at dinner. Bantaá sing maáyo ang túbig sang
ginatíg-ang. Guess well the quantity of water required for the rice
you are going to boil. Binántà níla nga kon sumakáy silá sa áuto,
makadángat silá sa Ilóng-ílong sa sulúd sang isá ka táknà. They thought
that, if they rode in an automobile, they would reach Iloilo within
an hour. (cf. bánà, banâbánà, hunâhúnà).

_bantâ-bántà_, Dim of bántà. Indì ka magbantâbántà kóndì usisáon mo
ánay ang matúod. Don't venture a guess, but first find out the truth.

_bántal_, (H) To bundle or wrap up, tuck in. Bantalá ang tinápay,
ang mga búlak, ang kapáyas, etc. Tie up the bread, the flowers,
the papayas, etc. in a bundle. Bantalá (ibántal) ang tinápay sa ímo
patádyong. Wrap up the bread in your skirt. Bantalí ang ímo tampíon
sing tinápay. Tuck some bread in your apron. (cf. bágtong, putús).

_bantálà_, Announcement, information, news, publication, promulgation,
notification; to announce, publish, give out, inform, promulgate,
advise. Ibantálà (Ipabantálà) sa bánwa ang nahanabô. Announce (have
announced) in the town what happened. Binantaláan kamí sang pagabút
sang pangúlo-puód. We were informed of the arrival of the Provincial
Governor. Bantalái silá sang bág-o nga kasuguán. Promulgate amongst
them the new regulations. Announce to them the latest orders. Indì
ka magbantálà sing butíg. Don't publish lies. (cf. abíso, pahibaló,
láwag, pabalahúbà, palánog, etc.).

_bantaláan_, A kind of large fish growing to about two metres in
length. It is much used as food, though it is not very savoury. This
fish has several names according to its growth and size. "pák-an and
panít" are used for the same fish, when quite small, and when nearing
its full size, respectively. "Bantaláan" is the full-grown specimen.

_bántang_, (B) Level, flat, smooth, even, plane, plain, having no
mounds or hills; to be level, etc. Bántang nga lugár iní dirí nga walâ
sing bakólod. This is a level place here without hills. (cf. tápan,
saláma).

_bántay_, Watch, guard, observer; to watch, guard, observe, supervise,
take care of, look after, keep an eye on. Bantayí ang ákon baláy. Guard
my house. Take good care of my house. Bantayán mo lang akó dídto sa
únhan. Just keep on the look-out for me there further ahead. Binantayán
níya ang íla mga gího. He observed, watched their movements. Ibántay
akó dídto sang ákon karabáw, maís, humáy, etc. Watch for me there my
buffalo, maize, rice, etc. Manugbántay siá sang mga háyop, sang mga
karnéro, etc. He is a herdsman or cowherd, a shepherd, etc. Anhél
nga manugbántay. Guardian Angel. (cf. panílag, tíid, paníid).

_bantáyan_, Guard-house, observation post, look-out, station. Anó man
ang pulús sang isá ka bantáyan kon walâ sing bántay? What is the use
of an observation post without look-out. (bántay).

_bántil_, To squeeze and twist, to compress and contort, to knead
between the knuckles of the fore--and middle-finger; anything that
contracts, compresses by twisting. Bantilí ang íya bútkon--or--bantilí
siá sa íya bútkon. Squeeze and twist his arm. Binantilán níla ang
kabáyo sa bibíg, kay pagamarkahán níla. They have twisted the horse's
lip, for they are going to brand it. Ibántil iníng písì sa bibíg
sang kabáyo. Use this string to twist the horse's lip with. Markahí
na lang ang kabáyo, kay may bántil na ang íya bibíg. Now then mark
or brand the horse, for the twisting cord is on its lip. Bantilí ang
ákon likód, kay ginasíkmat akó. Knead--or--massage my back thoroughly,
for I suffer from rheumatic pains there. (cf. láknit).

_bantíling_, A kind of very hard stone, usually of a blackish or brown
colour, a sort of flint; very hard, difficult to make an impression
upon. Iníng táo bantíling gid sing tagiposóon. This man is truly
flint-hearted.

_bantilíngon_, Pertaining to--, as hard as--, bantíling.

_bánting_, To tie down, brace, fasten together by means of ropes,
chains, etc. Bantingí ang atóp sing kalát. Tie down the roof with a
rope. Ang kalát ginabánting. The rope is used for bracing. Ibánting
ang kalát sa mga kawáyan. Bind the bamboos together with the rope or
use the rope for binding the bamboos. (cf. angót, higót, bángot).

_bantólid_, To tumble or roll down headlong or head foremost, to roll
or turn over several times, to fall down head over heels. Andam ka,
kay básì magbantólid ka sa hágdan. Take care not to fall headlong down
the stairs. Nagbantólid siá sa pángpang, sa dululhúgan nga píl-as,
etc. He tumbled head over heels down the river-bank, the steep incline,
etc. (cf. bansúlì, balínsay, búlid, bulídbulíd, ligídligíd).

_bantolínaw_, Ebony.

_bántot_, Slow, sluggish; to be slow. (cf. búndul, hínay, pákok,
ágday).


_bántud_, A field or enclosure on high or raised ground: a clearing,
piece of land cleared of wood for cultivation.

_bantúdan_, A small, harmless snake.

_bántug_, Famous, well-known, public, prominent; to become or be
well known; to be or make public, to blazon. Nabántug sa bánwa
ang madámò nga pinatubás níya. His rich harvest became well known
in town. Nabantugán silá tungúd sang íla pagtabanáy. They became a
topic for conversation for having run away together. Nabantugán iníng
lugár tungúd sang madámò nga páhò. This place is famous for its many
mango-trees. Ipabántug mo sa bánwa nga ----. Make it known in town
that ----. Nagbántug dídto ang íya ngálan. His name there became
famous. (cf. bánsag).

_bántuk_, A small roundish piece of anything, as a grain, seed,
kernel or the like. (cf. bángto, binángto, binántuk, bináto).

_bantútut_, A toy-whistle, made of the leaflets of the coconut palm,
or the like. (cf. tarútut, turútud, turútuk).

_banúyo_, A tree and its valuable timber.

_bánwa_, Town, city, municipality, state, common-wealth, public
weal; citizens, electors, inhabitants; to become a town. Ang
bánwa nga nataóhan níya ----. The town in which he was born
----. His native town ----. Ang bánwa amó ang magahukóm sinâ. The
citizens will sit in judgment over that. Ang kaayóhan sang bánwa
walâ pagakabalák-i sang ibán nga mga polítiko. Some politicians
do not bestow any thought on what is for the good of the state or
common-wealth. Pangólo-bánwa. Municipal President. Ulo-bánwa. Principal
city, capital. Iníng arabál nagbánwa na. This large village has now
become a township or municipality. (cf. púngsud, puód, puók, arabál,
báryo, minurô).

_banwahánon_, Pertaining or belonging to a town, civic, etc. (bánwa;
cf. binanwahánon).

_banyá-bánya_, To see-saw, teeter, move or shake up and down, rise and
fall, stand up and sit down in quick succession; a punishment meted
out to children by making them stand on one leg, cross their arms, etc.

_banyádas_, (Sp. bañada) A kind of soft cake.

_banyágà_, Rascal, rogue, wretch, villain; bad, wicked; mean, vile,
villainous. (cf. lampingásan, tampalásan, hurúng).

_bányo_, (Sp. baño) Bath, bathing; bathing-tub;
bathing-place. (cf. paligosán).

_bányos_, (Sp. baño) Ointment, salve, unguent, leaves, etc. used
as a plaster for rubbing in or massaging; massage; to rub in, to
massage. Nagbányos akó sang dáhon sang búyò sa kay Fuláno. I rubbed
N.N. with búyò-leaves. Ibányos mo iníng mga dáhon sang patáni sa batíis
sang masakít nga táo. Rub the calf of the sick man with these leaves
of the patáni-peas. Banyosí ang ákon likód. Kindly rub or massage my
back. Ibányos akó ánay sang likód sang masakít ko nga bátà. Please
massage the back of my sick child. Anó ang ibányos mo? What are
you going to use for massaging? Binanyosán nilá ang íya páa sing
alkohól. They rubbed his leg with alcohol. Mapabányos akó. I am going
to be massaged or to get somebody to rub or massage me. (cf. háplas,
hapúlas, bántil, dapáydápay, bánggos, hílot).

_baó_, A kind of small tortoise, turtle. (cf. pawíkan).

_baó-báo_, Dim. of baó. Also: The instep, the forepart of the upper
side of the human foot near its junction with the leg; the projecting
knob on a Philippine plough, where the "sandígan" is joined to the
"kabáyo" of the "dáro, arádo" (plough). The knob is somewhat like
the shell of a small tortoise. Hence the name.

_bá-og_, (B) A small fish often salted and dried. (cf. balingón, ugá,
lamayó, binulád).

_ba-óg_, Gray, grey, of a dull colour; to be or become grey. Baóg ang
íya nga báyò. His jacket is grey-coloured. Nabaóg ang íya delárgo. His
trousers have gone grey or have faded (through use or age).

_bá-og_, Bad, foul, rotten, said of eggs, especially of those having
a dead chicken inside; to spoil, become rotten or foul, to go bad
(of eggs). Figuratively: unsuccessful, to no purpose; to be or
become a failure. Nagbáog ang ítlog. The egg is bad. Mga ítlog nga
báog. Rotten eggs. Báog nga táo. An unsuccessful man, one who is
unlucky or meets with failure. Nagbáog ang íla nga katuyoán. Their
plan or intention was not carried out, came to naught, was shelved,
etc. Nabaógan gid silá sang íla nga ginkasugtánan. Their agreement
was of short duration,--did not last long,--was soon forgotten.

_ba-óng_, A kind of creeper with edible roots.

_bá-os_, A deep boil or ulcer, particularly one in the groin or
arm-pit.

_bá-ot_, (B) To be on good terms, have friendly intercourse with, treat
in a friendly way; friendly intercourse, amicable relations. Walâ silá
sing bá-ot or walâ silá pagbá-ot or walâ silá pagba-otáy. They are not
on good terms with each other. Ginba-otán akó níla sing maáyo. They
received me,--treated me, kindly,--were very good to me. (cf. ákup,
abí-ábi, áblaw, hírup, hilitóhog, hiliúgyon, hibáot).

_bapór_, (Sp. vapor) Steam-boat, steamer,
ocean-liner. (cf. sakayán-húlas).

_bará_, (Sp. varar) To run aground, to run on sand in shallow water, be
stranded (said of ships). Nagbará or nabará ang bapór. The steamer ran
aground. Andamí ang ímo pagdalá sang sakayán, agúd índì magbará. Be
careful in steering the boat, lest it should run aground. Dî mo
pagpabarahón ang bapór. Don't run the boat aground. Figuratively:
Nabará kamí kahápon sa igtubá. Yesterday we were stranded on the
other side of the river.

_bára_, (Sp. vara, barra) Yard, yard-stick; crowbar, iron
bar. (cf. báda).

_barábad_, See balábad, labáy-lábay.

_baradlísan_, (B) See baladlísan id.

_baragbáon_, (B) Cause, reason or origin of a quarrel or
fight. (cf. bagâ, alawayón).

_barághal_, Coarse, rough, not fine, not well made or done. Barághal
nga pagrára, paghabúl, pagsapíyo, pagtahî, etc. Rough or
coarse wickerwork, weaving, planing, sewing, etc. Also used as a
verb. Ginbarághal mo ang pagbúhat siníng lamésa. You made a rough job
of this table. (cf. barúbal, bástos, bá-ul, patarásak, burághal, etc.).

_baragóok_, (B) Very fat, very stout, obese, covered with, or buried
in, fat; to be very fat. Nagabaragóok ang íya nga líog, písngi,
etc. His neck, cheek, etc. is a mass of fat. A, si Fuláno baragóok
gid. Yes, N.N. is very fat indeed. (cf. matámbok, ribóok, ribusól).

_baráha_, (Sp. baraja) A pack of cards; card-playing. Nagahámpang
silá sang baráha. They are playing cards.

_barahán_, The measure of a yard, a yard-stick. (bára, Sp. vara).

_baráhus_, (B) To wrap up, etc. See baláhos id.

_bárak_, Murmur, rattle, clatter, crackle, a sound as of many voices,
a quick succession of little noises, patter; to patter, to sound
or make a noise, as of many voices, shots, falling stones and the
like. Nagabárak ang sinánlag sa gánga, ang mga tígbaw sa subâ kon
tútdan, etc. What is roasted in the pot, the reeds in the river-bed,
if burned, etc. crackles (crackle). Kon tútdan iníng kaingín, magabárak
ang mga tinapás nga sibúkaw kag kawáyan. When these forest-clearings
are burned the felled sibúkaw and bamboo crackle. Ginpabarákan
akó níla sing bató. They pelted me with a rattling shower of
stones. Ipabárak iníng balás sa íla baláy or pabaráki siníng balás
ang íla baláy. Make their house resound with the noise of this sand
thrown at it. Nabarákan akó gid siníng táo kon maghámbal. This man
is too garrulous for me when he talks. Pabaráki siá sang pamángkot,
agúd nga índì siá makasabát. Ply him with many questions in quick
succession, so that he cannot answer. Nagpabárak siá sang íya mga
rebentadór sang paglígad sang nóbia. He let off his crackers, when
the bride passed by. (cf. árak).

_baráka_, (Sp. barraca) Barrack, barracks; hut, cabin; shop,
restaurant, a public house or place where food and drink are
sold. (cf. kamálig, tiénda, púnda, talangwáyan).

_barakáng_, See balakáng.

_barák-barák_, Dim. and Freq. of bárak. To patter, murmur, rattle,
clatter, crackle, and the like.

_baráking_, (B) To tuck up the skirt, etc. See baláking id.

_barálbal_, (B) Cane, stick, etc. See balálbal id.

_barálkan_, (B) See balálkan, balalokán id. and all from balók.

_barámbad_, (B) To wind or twist round, etc. See balámbud id.


_barandílya_, (Sp. barandilla) Railing, balustrade,
handrail. (cf. alobaybayán).

_bárang_, An evil spell producing sickness; to cast an evil spell
upon. Ginbárang siá sang manugbárang. The sorcerer cast a spell of
sickness upon him. (cf. hiwít).

_barángon_, (B) A kind of very savoury banana. See balángon id.

_barárang_, An addition to the rim of a basket so as to increase its
capacity; to apply such an addition (composed of paper, leaves, mats or
the like). Bararángan mo ang bakág. Add some suitable material to the
rim of the carrier's basket to increase its capacity. (cf. balálang).

_barásag_, Lying about in disorder; to be in disorder,
higgledy-piggledy, mixed up; to lie about in confusion. Nagabarásag
dirí ang sángkap sang pánday. The tools of the carpenter are lying
about here in disorder. Indì mo pagpabaraságon ang mga butáng nga
yárà sa lamésa. Do not disarrange or disturb the things on the
table. (cf. dúm-ok, lúm-ug, wásag).

_baratáan_, (B) Uterus, womb. See balatáan id. (bátà).

_baratángan_, (B) See balatángan--couch, etc.

_baráto_, (Sp. barato) Cheap, low-priced, costing little; to be,
become or make cheap, to cheapen. Ginabaráto níla ang pagbalígyà, kay
kon mahalón, walâ sing mabakál. They are selling cheap, for if they
sell dear, nobody will buy. Baratóhon mo ang pagbalígyà sinâ. Sell it
cheap. Baratóhi akó sing diótay nga daúg mo. Give me a little of the
stake you won. Nagbaráto na ang humáy, kay maáyo ang patubás. Rice
has gone down in price, for the harvest is good. (cf. mahál--dear).

_bara-úd_, (B) See bala-ód, balaúd--dysentery.

_baráw_, Spotted, dotted, marked with various colours, having
variegated dots or spots; to be or become spotted, etc. Ang pisô
nagbaráw sang pagúnut sang íya búlbul. The chicken turned out spotted
after losing its down. (cf. kámbang).

_baráw_, A very poisonous snake, so called from its spotted skin.

_baráw-báraw_, Dim. of baráw. Having a few spots, a little variegated.

_baráy-báray_, To be stiff, benumbed; to fill, crowd,
confuse. Nagabaráy-báray ang ákon likód. My back is quite
stiff. Nagbaráybáray sa íya painóíno ang mamíngaw nga hándum kag
masubô nga hunâhúnà. Sad reflections and dreary thoughts beset his
mind. (cf. álay, bínhod).

_baráydan_, (B) Payment, etc. See baláyran, balayránan, báyad.

_barayóbay_, (B) See balayóbay id.

_baráywon_, (B) Rice to be pounded. See baláyhon id.

_bárba_, (Sp. barba) Beard, whiskers. Patubóa ang ímo bárba. Let your
beard grow. Grow a beard. (cf. búngot).

_barbában_, Bearded, whiskered, one with a large beard. (cf. bungóton,
bungtanán).

_barbéro_, (Sp. barbero) Barber, hair-cutter. (cf. manuggúnting).

_barbón_, (Sp. barbon) Bristly, hairy, full-bearded. (cf. bungtanán).

_baréu_, A plant, whose fibre is used for making mats and the like.

_baréw_, See baréu.

_bárhong_, See bálhong--to swell.

_bárho_, See bálhot--to respect.

_bárì_, (B) See bálî--to break.

_barî_, (B) See balî--broken.

_baríkas_, (B) See balíkas--to scratch.

_barikótot_, See balikótot--to contort (the limbs).

_baríl_, (Sp. barril) Barrel. (cf. toóng).

_barína_, (Sp. barrena) An auger, gimlet, drill, brace and bit; to
bore--, drill--, holes with an auger, etc. Barináhi ang tápì. Bore
a hole in the plank. Ibarína akó ánay siníng káhoy. Please drill a
hole for me in this piece of wood. (cf. baríno).

_baringáy_, A river-crab. See balingáy.

_baríno_, (Sp. barreno) A large auger; fig.: Bad humor, ill temper. Kon
umabút ang íya baríno, índì mo siá pagsuráhon. When he is in a bad
mood, don't contradict him.

_barinóhon_, One subject to frequent fits of ill temper, irascible,
choleric. (cf. kutóskutós, tarádyon, pikón).

_bário_, (Sp. barrio) Village hamlet. (cf. minurô).

_baríra_, (B) See balíla--reed (of a loom).

_barirá_, (B) See balilá--a kind of fish.

_baríri_, A kind of grass and its seeds. The latter, when ripe, come
off readily and cling to clothes, etc. Also used as a verb. Andam ka
sa pagági dirâ kay madámò ang baríri. Beware of passing there, for
there is much baríri-grass. Balakínga ang ímo sotána, kay kon dílì
mabariríhan. Raise your cassock, for otherwise it will become full of
baríri-seeds. Binariríhan ang ákon delárgo, médyas, etc. My trousers,
socks, etc. got stuck full of baríri-seeds. (cf. dalúkut).

_barís_, Fierceness, violence, brutality, inhumanity, ruffianism,
truculence; to be or become fierce, violent, ferocious, inhuman,
cruel, ruthless. (cf. bangís, píntas).

_barít_, To sharpen, etc. See balít.

_baríta_, (Sp. barreta) Anything in the shape of a bar or cake,
as a loaf of bread, a cake of soap, etc.

_bariwás_, Hit--, struck--, at a tangent; to glance off, to fly off
at a tangent; to miss, stray. (cf. salipád, talibás).

_barkílyo_, (Sp. barquillo) Rusk, a kind of crisp, biscuit-like bread;
a thin rolled wafer.

_barnís_, (Sp. barniz) Varnish, lacquer; to varnish, lacquer. Barnisí
ang aparadór. Varnish the cupboard.

_barogóok_, (B) Very fat, etc. See baragóok id.

_bárok_, Tinder.

_barókhan_, (B) The bladder. Balókhan id.

_barókoy_, (B) See balókoy id.

_baróng_, Smock, a Philippine outer garment worn by men, a sort of
jacket gathered in tucks at the rather close-fitting collar. The
baróng is now seldom used, as new styles replace the old ones.

_baróng-baróng_, Strong, fierce, violent, tempestuous; to blow
fiercely, etc. (of wind). Baróngbaróng or nagabaróngbaróng ang
hángin. The wind blows fiercely. (cf. mádlus).

_baróngbong_, (B) A shoot, a sprout from a stock, stem or trunk;
to shoot or sprout from a cut branch or trunk. Iníng páhò, dúldul,
etc. nga natapás sang isá ka túig may baróngbong na. This mango,
cotton-tree, etc. that was cut down last year, has sprouted
anew. Madámò nga mga káhoy kon tápson magapamaróngbong. Many trees,
if cut down, will sprout again from the stump or trunk. Yanáng akásya
nagabaróngbong na. That acacia is putting forth new shoots from its
trunk. (cf. salíngsing).

_barót_, Bad, insipid, stale, rotten, mouldy, applied chiefly to
tobacco and cigars; ugly, bad-complexioned (of persons). Barót
nga tabákò. Bad or rotten tobacco. Barót ang íya nga guyá. His
face is ill-conditioned, ugly, unsightly. Sa kadaanón nagbarót
iníng mga abáno. These cigars have spoiled through being kept too
long. (cf. balót).

_baróto_, (Sp. baroto) A small boat, dug-out, without outriggers,
propelled by paddle or oars and employed in the conveyance of
passengers and freight to and from large sea-craft; an open ferry-boat
with outriggers, employed for the crossing of rivers and the like.

_barúbal_, Coarse, rough, mean, not fine, not well made,
ill-done. (cf. barághal).

_barukán_, The bladder. (cf. balókan, balókhan, barókhan.

_barumbáda_, To shake to and fro, wave, brandish, flourish; to walk
about aimlessly, to wander about, to go from place to place, as if
looking for something. Anó ang ginabarumbáda mo sang ímo bastón? For
what reason are you flourishing your stick? Ibarumbáda ang ímo bastón,
kay madulúm. Swing your stick (in front), for it is dark. Indì ka
magbarumbáda dirí sa sulúd sang baláy. Don't wander about here in
the house. Nagabarumbáda gid lang silá sa bánwa. They just stroll
aimlessly about the town. Anó pa man ang ginabarumbáda mo, kay ári
na ang tanán sa lamésa? What are you still fussing about; everything
is already on the table?

_bása_, To read, scan, glance through, look--through,--over, pore
over. Matámad siá magbása. He is too lazy to read. Nakabása akó sang
íya sulát or nabása ko ang íya sulát. I read his letter. Dílì mo
pagbasáhon ang mga líbro nga maláut. Don't read bad books. Ipabása mo
sa íya iníng sulát. Give him this letter to read. Basáhi ang masakít
nga táo siníng tulún-an. Read this book to the sick man. Abáw,
daw táo ka nga walâ pagbása sang mga bág-o nga balítà. Well,
you seem to be a man who does not read the latest news. (Note the
accent in the two following examples). Daw táo siá nga walâ sing
nabasahán. He appears to be a man who has read nothing i.e. knows
nothing, has had no education. Masúnsun mabasahán náton sa mga
pamantaláan nga ----. We often find or read in the newspapers that
----. (cf. balasahón--reading-matter, etc.).

_basâ_, Moisture, humidity, dankness, damp, dampness, wet, wetness;
moist, damp, wet, soaked, dank, humid; to make or become wet, to
drench, etc. Nabasâ ang ákon tiíl. My foot got wet. Ginbasâ níya ang
ákon pányo. He made my handkerchief wet. Bás-a ang lampáso. Soak the
mop in water. Bás-i ang ití sang manók sa salúg. Clean up with water
the chicken-dung on the floor. Pahíran mo lang ang lamésa sing trápo
nga mamalá, dílì mo pagbás-on. Just wipe the table with a dry cloth,
don't use water. Binás-an níya ang íya kamút sing agás, agúd makúhà
ang dágtà sang pínta. He wetted his hand with petroleum, in order to
get out the paint-stains. Likawí ang ulán, agúd dílì ka mabasâ kag
mapásmo. Avoid the rain, lest you should get wet and catch a cold. Ang
hubág níya nga maáyo na gid nagbasâ na man. His ulcer that was quite
healed before is now suppurating (wet) again. Nagbasâ na man ang mga
matá sang ilóy sang pagkabatî níya nga may nagsámbit sang ngálan sang
íya anák nga bág-o lang napatáy. The mother's eyes became wet (filled
with tears), when she heard someone mentioning the name of her child
that had recently died. Kánding nga binasâ (nabasâ) sang ulán. A goat
that has been drenched by rain. (cf. malá--to be dry, etc.).

_basâ-basâ_, Dim. of basâ. A little wet, etc.

_basá-bása_, Cooked rice warmed up again with the addition of a little
water; to put water into cooked rice. Basábasáha ang kán-on. Put some
water into the rice and warm it. (cf. linúgaw--rice boiled in much
water and stirred about till it gets very soft and porridge-like;
hinánggup--cooked rice mixed with water, but not warmed up again).

_basá-bása_, Dim. of bása. To read a little or now and then. Walâ
gid siá pagbasábása sa baláy. He never reads at home. Walâ siá
nabasábasahán. He has read nothing, he is not well-read, has studied
nothing.

_baság_, Hollow, dull, not resonant, cracked, said of sounds, as of a
broken or cracked bell and the like; to emit a dull, hollow sound. Ang
tunúg sang linggánay nga buúng baság. The sound of the broken bell
is dull. Nagbaság ang tunúg sang linggánay, kay nabúung. The sound
of the bell has become dull, for it is cracked. Nabasagán akó sang
íya nga tíngug. His voice struck me as dull.

_baság-úlo_, Brainless, silly, stupid, brain-sick, crotchety, crazed,
fantastic. (baság, úlo).

_basál_, A peal of bells, festive ringing of bells. May basál
karón sa las dóse. There will be a full peal of bells at twelve
o'clock. (cf. ripíke).

_básal_, To ring a peal of bells. Basála ang linggánay. Ring a peal
of bells. Basáli ang mga kalasálon sing makátlo. Ring three peals
for the marriage couple. Binasálan níla sing masádya ang pagabút sang
Senyór Obíspo. They celebrated the arrival of the Bishop by a joyful
peal of bells. (cf. ripíke).

_bás-an, bás-on_, etc. From basâ--to be or make wet, etc.

_básas_, (Sp. baza) A trick (at card-playing); a round of cards.

_basás_, (Sp. baza) To make or win a trick in card-playing, to win; to
beat, overcome, outdo, subdue. Walâ kamó makabasás sa ámon. You did not
win a trick from us. Indì ka makabasás sa íya sa sugilánon, sa hámpang,
etc. You cannot beat him at conversation, at play, etc. (cf. daúg).

_básbas_, To cut, hew, trim, dress, chip wood to a shape or size
required. Basbasí ang káhoy. Dress the wood. Ibásbas and dáldag sa
káhoy. Trim the wood with the adze.

_basbáson_ Robust, vigorous, strong, able-bodied, active. Kalím-an na
ka túig ang íya nga edád, ápang basbáson pa siá. He is fifty years
old, but quite vigorous still Si Fuláno basbáson pa sa íya. N.N. is
still more robust than he.


_báse_, (Sp. base) Base, basis, base of operation,
stronghold. (cf. húkmung, tóon: palanagoán).

_bási_, A kind of very strong, intoxicating beer made from
rice. (cf. pangásì).

_básì_, Perhaps, perchance, maybe, mayhap, peradventure. Básì pa
lang. May it be so. Let us hope so. Básì nga índì kitá makatabók,
kay madámol ang ulán kaína. Maybe we cannot cross, for there was
heavy rain a while ago. (cf. áyhan, dámlag).

_básia, basiá_, (Sp. vaciar) To empty, pour out. Ibásia ang túbig,
ságbot, etc. Pour out the water, empty out the sweepings, etc. Ginbásia
níya sa bintánà ang sulúd sang palanggána. He poured the contents of
the wash-basin out of the window. Basiahí sing maínit nga túbig ang
idô. Pour hot water over the dog. Ibásia akó ánay sang sulúd (unúd)
siníng bakág. Kindly empty this basket for me. (cf. úlà, bóbò, hohô).

_básia_, (Sp. vacia) Idle, lazy, disengaged, unoccupied (particularly
applied to females). Oy, básia, silhigí ang salúg. Hey, you lazy
(fellow) girl, sweep the floor. (cf. matámad, ligoyán).

_básiaw, basiáw_, (B) Watery, thin; to thin out, become or make thin
or watery, to water. Nagbásiaw ang tínta, gátas, etc. The ink, milk,
etc. has become watery. Basiawá ang almidón. Thin the starch. Put
more water in the starch. Ibásiaw mo akó ánay siníng linúgaw sa
masakít nga bátà. Please make this rice-porridge very thin for the
sick child. (cf. lániaw, lángiaw, lasáw).

_básil_, A firm, hard spot, as a hard road, hardened soil, hard sand
on the beach, etc. (cf. the following básil).

_básil_, Any hardened or dry matter sticking to, or wedged in between,
other objects; to harden, thicken, incrust. Nagbásil ang lúnang
sa íya báyò. The mud hardened on his jacket. (cf. bágtik, tíg-a,
tígdas, malá).

_basín_, (Sp. bacín) Basin; chamber pot, stool. (cf. sulúdlan (síya)
nga--palangihián--palamus-ónan).

_bás-ing_, A small measure or quantity (of silk, damask thread,
etc.). Isá ka básing nga sóklà. A skein of silk. A little silk thread.

_basío, basíyo_, (Sp. vacio) Empty, vacant, void, blank, hollow,
unoccupied, containing nothing; a clean empty glass or plate. May
basíyo kamó? Have you a clean, empty glass (plate)? (cf. waláy unúd,
waláy sulúd; punô--full).

_báskug_. Stiffness, brittleness, strength; rigidity; to be or become
stiff or brittle; to be or become strong, vigorous. Nagbáskug ang
ákon báyò, kay natám-an sing almidón. My jacket is stiff, because it
has been overstarched. Sa waláy duhádúha magabáskug ang íya láwas sa
umá. No doubt, he will get strong again on the farm. Nagbolobáskug na
siá liwán. He is now quite strong again. (cf. tískug, balískog, kusúg).

_baskugáy_, A small river-lobster similar to, but a little larger than,
the lobó-lóbo.

_báslan, baslánay_, etc. from bálus--to answer, return.

_báslay_, Arrow, prick, dart, pointed shaft. Ang báslay sang
gúgma. Love's arrow. (cf. panâ).

_baslayánon_, Sharp, pointed, penetrating, piercing; charming,
captivating. Yuhúm nga baslayánon. A captivating smile. (cf. báslay).

_báso_, (Sp. vaso) Glass, tumbler; vase.

_báso_, (Sp. bazo) Spleen, milt. (cf. áyî, áhè).

_bás-o_, Hash; minced--meat,--fish,--vegetables; to mince, hash,
chop up. Basohá ang manók. Chop up the chicken. Bas-ohí akó sing
manók. Chop up a chicken for me. Ipabás-o ko iní sa ímo. I'll let
you make hash of this. Kaúyon ikáw sang báboy nga binás-o? Do you
like minced pork? (cf. tóktok).

_basó-báso_, To deliberate, think things over, consider. Ginabasó-báso
ko kon anó ang himóon ko. I am considering what to
do. Basó-basóha ánay ang ímo bubuháton. Deliberate first on your
undertaking. (cf. hunâ-húnà, painóíno).

_basó-báso_, Dim. of báso. Anything resembling a glass or tumbler.

_básol_, Blame, reprimand; to scold, chide, blame, reprimand,
reproach, give one a talking to. Basóla siá. Reproach him. Reprimand
him. Binásol níya akó. He chid me, blamed me. Ipabásol ko sa ímo
iníng bátà nga sutíl. I hand this naughty boy over to you for a
talking to. Nagabasoláy or nagabasolánay silá. They are reproaching
each other. (cf. bádlong, sawáy).


_básta_, (Sp. bastar) Enough, sufficient, satisfying. Básta na ang
hámbal mo. That will do, you have talked quite enough. (cf. túman,
bastánte).

_bastánte_, (Sp. bastante) Sufficient, enough, satisfactory; to
be sufficient, etc. Bastánte na iní. It is quite sufficient. This
suffices. This will do. (cf. túman, hústo).

_bastidór_, (Sp. bastidor) Embroidery-frame, rod for curtains,
hangings, decorations, etc. (cf. alóghog, balayán, pángkog, balískog,
bílog).

_bastón_, (Sp. bastón) Stick, cane, rod; walking-stick; to cane, beat
with a stick, give the stick. Bastoná siá. Give him the stick. Give
him a caning. (cf. sóngkod; bilogón, náwì, tagsáon).

_bastón ni San Hosé_, "The staff of St. Joseph", a kind of decorative
plant with beautiful green--and red--spotted leaves.

_bástos_, (Sp. basto) Rude, boorish, caddish, uncultured; rough,
coarse, unrefined, not well made or done, botched. Bástos nga
táo. A low, mean, boorish fellow, a cad, a bumpkin. Bástos nga
hénero. Coarse or rough cloth. Bástos nga batásan. Unrefined, rude,
bad manners. (cf. barághal, bá-ul, manól, barúbal).

_basúra_, (Sp. basura) Sweepings, manure, dirt, refuse, rubbish,
night-soil, dust-cart, street-cleaning; sewage, sewerage,
ordure. (cf. ságbot, hígkò, rámò, lamawán).

_básya_, See básia--lazy (especially of females).

_básyaw_, See básiaw.

_báta_, (Sp. báta) Night-shirt, night-gown. (cf. kamisón).

_bátà_, Child, baby, boy, girl, son, daughter; serving-boy, servant;
to bear a child, give birth to a child, be delivered of. Nagbátà
siá. She gave birth to a child. Nabátà siá sa Igbarás. He was born in
Igbarás. Sa dílì madúgay magabátà iníng báka. This cow will now soon
calve. Ang mga binátà. Offspring, progeny. Pilá ang íya mga bátà? How
many children has she? (cf. anák, táo, inanák, etc.).

_batâ_, Uncle. (cf. tíò, tíyò).

_batâ-bátà_, Dim. of bátà. Also: servant-boy, serving-boy,
servant-girl, serving-girl, maid. (cf. sologoón, hinúptan).

_batá-báta_, To apportion, divide, distribute, hand out, give out,
dole out. Batábatáha ang kán-on. Dole out the rice (equally to all),
(cf. katákáta).

_batád_, A kind of plant yielding an edible grain; millet.

_bátak_, To pull upwards, to raise, lift, hoist, draw or pull
aloft. Batáka ang bálde, ang bayóng, etc. Draw or pull up the pail,
the bamboo water-container, etc. Batáki akó sing kawáyan. Pull up
a bamboo for me. Ibátak akó ánay siníng sáko. Kindly lift this sack
for me. Binatákan nía ang atóp sing sin. They hauled up to the roof
some sheets of zinc. Batáki (pabatáki) ang bátà sang íya nga dungán,
agúd magáyo. Raise (have raised) the child's tutelary ghost or genius,
that it may get well. (This is a superstitious phrase).

_batakán_, Pulley, block, crane; any contrivance for lifting, drawing
or pulling upwards. (bátak).

_batakán_, A frame-work with a hole or slot through which bamboo,
bólò, rattan, etc. is passed when dressing or cleaning it for weaving
purposes. (cf. talapgohán).

_bát-al_, To bulge, swell out, be stuffed full. Nagabát-al ang íya nga
bólsa. His pocket bulges, is full. Guinpabát-al níya ang íya bólsa
sang bukáka. He stuffed his pocket with ripe kamúnsel-fruit. Indì
mo pagpabat-alón ang sáko sing támà, kay básì magísì. Don't cram the
sack too much, for it might burst. (cf. báknal).

_batáng, bátang_, (B) To lie down. Ang bátà nagabatáng sa sábak
sang íya ilóy. The child lies in its mother's lap. Pabatánga
siá sa kátre. Let him lie down on the bed. Indì mo pagpabatángon
ang káhoy dirí. Don't put the wood down here. Don't lay the wood
here. (cf. hígdà).

_bátang_, (B) To lie down sick, lie up, be sick, stay in--, keep
one's--, bed on account of some illness. Nagbátang na siá sang pilá
ka ádlaw. He has kept his--, remained in--, bed for several days.

_batáng-bátang_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of batáng. To rise and lie down
alternately, to be a little sick, feel indisposed. Nagabatángbátang
siá, kay malúya ang íya láwas. She rises and lies down again, for
she is weak.

_batán-on_, Childlike, infantine, infantile, juvenile, boyish,
girlish, pertaining to children, natural of a child. Batán-on nga
kalípay. Childlike pleasure. Batán-on nga balatyágon. Simple, natural,
unsophisticated sentiment (as of a child). (cf. bátà, bataón; payaón).

_bataón_, Young, youthful, pertaining to children, etc. See batán-on.

_bátas_, To turn to refuse or scrap, especially applied to metals. Ang
kaláyo nagbátas sang salsálon. The fire burned the iron to scrap. Ang
salsálon nabátas or binátas sang kaláyo. The iron was burned to scrap
by the fire. Indì mo pagbatáson sa kaláyo iníng sin. Don't allow this
zinc to pass through fire and become useless.

_batás_, To bear, suffer; sustain, tolerate, put up with;
stand. Makabatás ka sinâ? Can you stand that? Hántì, kay ginhímò mo
inâ, batasá na man ang ígò nga sílot. Very well then, as you have
done that, suffer now the fitting punishment. Ginbatás--or--binatás
ko ang tanán nga kahuól. I bore all hardships. Indì na akó magbatás
sang ínyo paggináhud dirí. I will not put up any longer with the
noise you make. (cf. ántus, íro, agwánta).

_batásan_, Custom, manner, habit, practice, character, usage, ways,
way of going on, use, convention. (cf. pamatásan, kagawián, kabuyó,
kinaanáran).

_batasánon_, Patient, suffering, forbearing: bearing pain, trial or
trouble without murmuring. (cf. batás, mapinailúbon, mainantúson).

_bát-aw_, A kind of peas, similar to patáni.

_bátbat_, To explain, show, expose, interpret,
translate. (cf. památbat, pátpat; sáyod, waní, huád, sáysay).

_bathálà_, God. This term seems to be of Tagalog origin. (cf. Díwa,
Diós).

_bátì_, To feel, have sensation, suffer. Mabúg-at kaáyo ang íya nga
pagbátì. He is very seriously ill or suffers much. Anó ang ginabátì
mo? What do you feel? What is ailing you? Ginbátì ko ang kasakít sa
dúghan ko. I felt a pain in the chest. (cf. bátiag, bátyag).

_batî_, To hear, catch the sound of. Nakahatî akó nga ----. I heard
that ----. Sa malayô índì ka makabatî sang tunúg sang linggánay. From
far away you cannot hear the sound of the bell. Kon mabatián mo ang
amó nga sugíd-súgid índì ka magpáti, kay lúnsay nga mga butíg. When you
hear such rumours don't believe them, because they are pure lies. Note
the accent in the following: Ang lupók sang palúpok (rekámra) batíon
sa labíng malayô nga minurô. The detonation of a mortar can be heard
in the farthest village. (cf. dungúg, památì, batî-bátì, binatî-bátì).

_batí_, (Sp. batir) To beat, stir up, as an egg, milk, dough, land in
harrowing, etc. Batihá ang tsokoláte. Beat up the chocolate. Batihón
mo ang talámnan. Harrow the field. Sín-o sa ínyo ang maálam magbatí
sing maáyo siníng sinámò (méskla) sa pagbúhat sing mamón? Which of
you knows how to beat this mixture well for making a cake?

_batíà_, (Sp. batea) A large wooden basin or trough, a
wash-basin. (cf. batíyà id.).

_bátiag_, To feel, sense, perceive, become aware of, notice, have
a sensation, suffer, be indisposed or ill. Tungúd sang lakás nga
pagdúmug mo karón pagabatiagón mo gid sa buás ang kasakít sang láwas
mo. On account of your wrestling so much you will surely ache all over
tomorrow. May ginabátiag siá. He is indisposed, feels a little ill. Sa
hinálì nakabátiag akó sing dakô nga kasakít sa ákon kílid. Suddenly I
felt great pain in the side. Ipabátiag mo ang látigo sa matámad nga
karabáw. Give the lazy buffalo a taste of your whip. Kon matúod ang
ímo ginasilíng magabátiag si nánay sing dakô nga kalípay. If what
you say is true, mother will feel very glad. (cf. bátyag, bátì).

_batiáy_, A kind of creeper with very bitter, uneatable fruit.

_batí-báti_, Dim. of batí. To beat or stir slightly, etc. Also:
to boil sugar, dissolve sugar in boiling water.

_batî-bátì_, Dim. of batî. Also: Hearsay, rumour; gossip; to know by
hearsay. May batî-bátì sa bánwa nga ----. There is a rumour current in
town that ----. Ginabatîbátì nga masulúd ang mga buyóng sa bánwa. It
is being rumoured that the robbers will enter the town. (cf. konókóno).

_batí-báti_, See butóngbútong id. Kaúyon ka sang batíbáti? Do you
like to eat the candy called "batí-báti"?

_batíd_, Experienced, proficient, skilled, well versed, good at; to be
or become expert, etc. Batíd nga táo. An expert or skilful man. Batíd
siá sa trabáho. He is skilled in work. Nagbatíd siá or nahímò siá
nga batíd. He became an expert. Batidá siá sa pagkapánday. Make him
proficient at carpentry. (cf. sagád, anád, hanás, lísto, sampáton).

_batidór_, (Sp. batidor) An egg-beater, an instrument for
beating--eggs,--cake-dough,--chocolate, etc. (cf. batí).

_batíis_, The calf of the leg. (cf. busúgbusugán, pusúpusuán).

_bátik_, See mátik--news, information.

_batík_, See matík--to hear, get to know.

_batíkbátik_, See matíkmátik, pamatikbátik--to investigate, watch, spy.

_batikál_, To squeeze--, wedge--, press--, jam--, in, to hold fast or
in place by a projection, jut or jag so as to make it difficult to move
or pull out an object. Iníng kawáyan ginabatikalán sang ibán nga mga
kawáyan. This bamboo is jammed in between other bamboos. (balatikál).

_batikóla_, (Sp. baticola) Crupper, the strap that passes under a
horse's tail and prevents the saddle from slipping forward.

_batikólon_, The gizzard, maw, chief stomach of a bird. (cf. kolokotón,
korokotón id.; bútse, balonbalonán--the craw, crop).

_batíl_, (Sp. batelejo) A sailing boat of the size of a lorcha.

_batín-batín_, To walk quickly, hurry, haste, hasten, scurry, step
briskly, run. Paypayí siá, agúd magbatínbatín. Beckon him to walk
quickly. Ang idô nagabatínbatín kon makítà níya ang íya agálon. The
dog runs, when he sees his master. (cf. dalîdálì).

_báting_, To grasp another just above the ankle and jerk up his foot
so as to throw him or break his resistance. Batíngi ang báboy. Get
hold of the pig's leg. Batíngi ang íya tiíl. Grasp him by the small of
the leg and jerk up his foot. (An expression often used in wrestling).

_batíng-batingán_, That part of the leg just above the ankle, the
small of the leg. (báting).

_batinggílan_, Stubborn, perverse, dogged, sullen, sulky,
obstinate, mulish, disobedient, wilful, self-willed, unyielding,
strong-headed, pig-headed; to be or become stubborn, etc. Sán-o pa
ikáw magbatinggílan? When did you become so stubborn? Sádto maáyo
siá nga bátà, ápang karón nagbatinggílan. He was a good boy before,
but now he has become wilful. (cf. dîmanínggol, balít-ad, paganót).

_batíon_, Audible, capable of being--, loud enough to be--,
heard. (batî).

_batísta_, (Sp. batista) Batiste, fine cambric.

_batití_, Nursing, care; to nurse, rear, bring up, take good
care of children, of invalids, of the sick, etc. Batitihá ang
bátà sing maáyo. Take great care of the baby. Nurse the baby
well. Ibatití akó ánay siníng bátà. Please look after this baby for
me. Ginbatití--or--binatití níya sing mabinalák-on ang masakít nga
bátà. She nursed the sick baby with great solicitude or concern,
(cf. sapópo, sagúd, tátap, bántay).

_batitís_, A kind of small clam.

_batíyà_, See batíà--A wooden trough, tub, basin.

_bató_, Stone, rock; to stone. Batohá ang idô. Throw a stone at the
dog. Ginbató (binató) níya silá, ang baláy, etc. He stoned--them,--the
house, etc. Kon índì ka maálam magísip batoán (batohán) mo lang. If
you don't know how to count, use stones for the purpose. Kuhái ang
dálan sináng mga bató. Take those stones off the road. Iníng dútà
madámò sing bató. This is stony soil--or--there are many stones
on this land. Bató nga maídlak (batóngmaídlak). A precious stone,
diamond. (cf. dakál-dákal--gravel; balás--sand).

_báto_, A complete thing, a whole, a piece of anything round or cubical
in shape, as an egg, ball, coconut, brick, etc. (cf. bílog, bóo, boók).

_bátò_, To resist, oppose, go against, disobey, be refractory,
answer back, contradict, rise against. Batói siá. Resist him. Oppose
him. Ginbatóan (binatóan) níya akó. He made a stand against me. He
answered me back. (cf. bátok, súmpung, kóntra).

_batóbalánì_, Magnet, loadstone, lodestone.

_batóbalaníon_, Magnetic, charming, attractive, alluring, captivating.


_batóbantilíngon_, Hard, flinty, stony, stone-hearted, obdurate,
cruel, pitiless. (cf. bató, bantíling; matíg-a, mabangís).

_bató-báto_, The kidneys, reins.

_bató-báto_, Dim. of bató. Also: To use small stones, fill or line
with pebbles or the like. Batóbatóhi ang bubón. Cover the bottom of
the water-hole or bathing place with pebbles.

_bató-bató_, Dim. of bató. Also: to do a little at a time, pick up
here and there, read and spell at the same time, do falteringly or
haltingly, do or let do by turns and the like. Ginbatóbató silá sang
Párì sang mga tóksò. The Parish-Priest picked out several questions
from the catechism for them to answer one by one. Nagabatóbató siá
sa pagbása. He reads with difficulty, falteringly, stumbling over
syllables, etc.

_batóbusílak_, Marble.

_bátog_, The yolk, the yellow of an egg.

_batohón_, Full of stones or rocks, stony, rocky. (bató).

_bátok_, (H) Against, opposed to, contrary to. Bátok inâ sa buót
sang Diós. That is against the will of God. Bátok inâ sa maáyo
nga batásan. That is contrary to good manners. May pagbulút-an
bátok sa (panugál) sugál or pagsugál. There is a law against
gambling. (cf. kóntra).

_bátok_, (H) To resist, oppose, etc. See bátò id. Indì ka
magbátok. Don't resist. Don't answer back. Dílì mo pagbatókan ang
ímo mga ginikánan. Don't disobey your parents. Don't oppose your
parents. Ibátok sa íya nga katarúngan ang ímo. Put forward your
argument against his. (cf. bátò, kóntra, súmpung, pamalábag).

_bát-ol_, Having a large stone and little pulp, said of fruits like
plums, lúmboy and the like; figuratively: dull, stupid, having little
brains; to be or become dull, etc.

_bat-ólan_, Dull, stupid; having a large stone, but little pulp
(of fruit).

_batoláng_, A kind of basket used chiefly in marketing fish; it is
usually four-cornered at the bottom and round at the top and in size
equal to an ordinary bakág.

_báton_, To receive, accept, take. Nakabáton ka sang ákon
sulát? Did you receive my letter? Hóo, nabáton ko. Yes, I received
it. Batóna iníng regálo. Accept this present or gift. Ibáton mo akó
sinâ. Kindly accept (and guard) that for me. Nabáton ko ang pílak
nga ímo ginpadalá sa ákon sa koríyo. I have received the money
you sent me by mail. Ihátag ko kuntánì sa íya iníng tulún-an,
ápang índì siá magbáton. I should like to give him this book,
but he will not take it. Ginabáton sang Diós sing malolóy-on ang
mga pangamúyò sang mga mahinulsúlon. God mercifully receives the
prayers of the contrite. Pangasáw-on kuntánì ni Fuláno si Fulána,
ápang ang íya sinâ nga ginikánan índì magbáton sa íya. N.N. would
like to marry Miss N.N., but her parents will not accept him (as
their son-in-law). (cf. balatonán--reception-room: dawô, dáwat).

_batóng_, (B) Hammock. (cf. dúyan, duyándúyan, abóyabóy).

_batóngmaídlak_, For bató nga maídlak--a diamond, brilliant.

_batóy-batóy_, (B) To take or pick up things one by one, to do the same
thing over and over again in succession, repeat the same action many
times. Batóybatoyá lang ang pagpúlut sináng mga bató. Pick up those
stones one by one. Ibatóybatóy ang pagtanúm siníng mga gútuk. Plant
these seedlings one by one. Batóybatoyá (Batóybatoyí) sa pagkúhà
iníng mga kawáyan. Take these bamboos away one by one.

_bátse_, (Sp. bache) Hole, mud-hole, a bad patch in a worn-out
road. (cf. búhò, buhôbúhò, balanáw, linggáhub, linggálhub, danáw).

_batsilér_, (Sp. bachiller) Bachelor, single, unmarried; one who
has taken a degree below that of Master of Arts at a university;
self-opinionated, conceited. (cf. láy-aw, pamatán-on: bugalón, apót,
matinaástaáson).

_batungdáan_, Monument (of stone: literally: old stone--bató nga dáan).

_batúnhan_, See butánhan, manohán.

_batúta_, (Sp. batuta) A conductor's baton, president's hammer, mace;
wand; rule, sway. May ikasángkol siá sa pagdalá sang batúta. He is
capable of directing affairs, of filling a leading position. Dakô
ang ginakalaínlaínan kon sín-o (anó) nga táo ang nagakapút sang
batúta. It makes a great difference, what sort of man holds sway
or has the controlling power. (cf. gahúm, pangólo, dumála, pasunúd,
uluyatán, kaláptan).

_bátwan_, A kind of creeper, whose fruit and leaves are edible and
taste sour like those of the alupídan.

_bátyag_, See bátiag.

_batyáy_, See batiáy.

_baúg_, Grey, old. (baóg id.).

_baúl_, (Sp. baul) Trunk, box, case, travelling-case. (cf. kabán,
káha, soklóban, tampípì, sulúdlan).

_bául_, Rough, not well made or done, botched, bungled, scamped; to do
----, make ----, perform ----, something--, act--, unseemly, unsightly,
in a coarse way, to make merely a rough outline. Baúla lang ánay ang
laráwan kag ugáling limpiohón mo. First shape out the statue roughly
and then trim it. Bául nga pamánday, panulát, etc. Rough carpentry,
careless writing, etc. Bául nga inobrahán inâ. That is (was) rough
work, not beautiful or fine work. (cf. barághal, barúbal, manól,
bástos, akúlakúl, dagóldagól).

_baúl-bául_, Anything which somewhat resembles a box or trunk.

_baúl-baúl_, Dim. and Freq. of bául--coarse, etc.

_bautisár_. (Sp. bautizar) To baptize, christen. Sín-o ang nagbautizár
sa ímo?--Ginbautisahán akó ni Párì Fuláno. Who baptized you?--I was
baptized by Father N.N. (cf. búnyag, bulunyágan, binunyágan).

_bautísmo_, (Sp. bautismo) Baptism, christening. Sertipíko sang
Bautísmo. Baptismal certificate, certificate of Baptism. (cf. búnyag).

_bautistéryo_, (Sp. bautisterio) Baptistery. (cf. bobohán).

_báwa_, A kind of ghost, elf, goblin, believed in by the superstitious
and supposed to assume preferentially the shape of a wild chicken
called iláhas. (cf. tumáo, bágat, katáw, kamâkamâ).

_báw-an_, A portable fish-trap, larger than a taón, but smaller than
a páta.

_báwang_, A vegetable, whose bulb resembles garlic and whose leaves
are similar to the leaves of onions.

_báw-as_, Sterile, unprolific, childless. barren, impotent, used
of both sexes, but mostly applied to women; to be or become barren,
etc. Si Fulána (nag) báw-as. N. N. (has become barren) is barren.

_báwas_, See báw-as. Also: Diminution, lessening, decrease; to
diminish, lessen, decrease. (cf. búhin).

_báwì_, To redeem, reclaim, deliver, free, save, set at liberty,
liberate, release. Bawía siá. Deliver him, free him. Ginbáwì kitá ni
Hesukrísto sa salâ kag sa inpiérno. Jesus Christ redeemed us from
sin and hell. Ibáwì mo iníng pílak sa ímo dútà. Use this money to
reclaim your land. Nabáwì siá sa kamót sang íya mga kaáway. He was
saved from the hands of his enemies. Kon mga saráng, ibáwì akó sang
ákon umá nga ginprénda ko. Please, if possible, reclaim for me the
land I mortgaged. Kon índì ka magbáyad sang ímo nga útang sa napátud
nga ádlaw, índì mo na mabáwì ang síngsing nga ginprénda mo. Unless
you pay your debt on the day assigned, you will not be able to redeem
your pawned ring. Ang mga Móros nabawían na, konó, sing duhá sang íla
mga biníhag. It is reported that two of the captives led away by the
Moros have been freed. (cf. tubús, luás, gáwad).

_báw-ing_, Isolated, far away, lonely, desolate, deserted; to be
or become lonely, etc. Ang báw-ing nga lugár dílì daní sang táo. An
isolated place is not often visited by man. Nagbáw-ing iníng minurô,
kay walâ na pagaestarí sang táo. This small village became desolate,
because people do not live here any longer.

_bawód_, (B) Unsteady, shaky, wobbly, swinging to and fro, rocking,
not firm; to be unsteady, etc. (cf. wáding, bayúd).

_báwod_, An arch, curve; to curve, arch, bend. (cf. balitók).

_báwog_, A bunch of coconuts growing on one stalk. Iníng isá ka báwog
may napúlò ka lubí. There are ten coconuts in this bunch. (cf. dáwog).

_bawóg_, Shadoof, shaduf, picotah, counterpoised sweep, a long beam
swinging up and down on an axle used to draw water from a cistern or
well. At one end of the beam the tímbà (pail or bucket for drawing
water) is attached and at the other end the pamató (counterpoise,
counterbalance). The pin or axle on which the beam turns is called the
paláy. Ang bawód nagasákà-panáug. The shadoof is moving up and down.


_báw-og_, Foul, rotten, stale, contaminated, fetid, putrid, polluted,
said especially of water. Báw-og nga túbig. Foul water. Nagbáw-og ang
túbig. The water has become fetid or polluted. (cf. alungaóg, báog).

_bawóg-báwog_, Any kind of lever resembling a shadoof.

_bay_, (B) Shortened form of bábay. Bay, diín ka makádto? Where are
you going to, my dear?

_bay_, (B) A particle often added to a negative answer to a question
and probably a contr. of balá. Diín si Fuláno?--Máan bay. Where is
N.N.?--How do I know? i.e. I don't know where he is. (cf. ambót a).

_bayâ_, An asseveratory or corroborative particle: certainly, surely,
what do you mean, no doubt, or the like. Akon iní bayâ. Nagdúmdum
ikáw nga ímo? This certainly belongs to me. Did you think it was yours?

_báyà_, (B) To leave, quit, abandon, desert, forsake, relinquish, give
up, let--, leave--, alone. Daw sa índì siá makabáyà sang maláut níya
nga kinaanáran. It seems as if he cannot give up his evil habits. Bayái
lang inâ. Leave that alone. Don't meddle with that. Indì mo siá
pagbayáan dirâ nga isá lang. Don't leave him there alone or all by
himself. Indì mo pagpabáy-an (pagpabayáan) ang ímong mga ginikánan sa
íla nga katigulangón. Don't forsake your parents in their old age. A,
galî, binayáan níya akó nga walâ siá maghulát sa ákon? Well now,
he has left me in the lurch and has not waited for me? (cf. bíyà).

_báyà_, (B) Anything given up, left off or discontinued. Báyà ko na
ang paginúm sing mga ilímnon nga makahulúbug. I have given up taking
intoxicating drinks. Báyà na níya ang sugál. He does not gamble any
more. He has given up gambling. (cf. bíyà).

_bayábas_, (Sp. guayábo, guayaba) The guava-tree and its fruit.

_bayâ-bayâ_, (B) Abandoned, neglected, not cared for. (cf. biyâ-biyâ).

_báyad_, Payment, settlement, disbursement, expenditure, outlay; to
pay, settle, spend, disburse. Magbáyad ka sang ímong útang. Pay (you
must pay) your debt. Sa walâ sing báyad or sa waláy báyad. Without
payment; gratis, free. Kón índì ka magbáyad sa íya karón, índì ka
makaútang sa íya liwán. If you don't pay him now, you cannot get a
loan from him again. Bayári na siá sang duhá ka mángmang nga ginhulám
mo. Pay him now the two pesos you borrowed. Ibáyad mo sa íya ang napúlò
ka mángmang nga útang mo sa íya. Pay him the ten pesos you owe him. Ang
mga komersyánte malúyag sang mga súkì nga may batásan sa pagbáyad sing
támbing. Dealers like customers that habitually pay cash. Nakabáyad ka
sang relóh nga nabáton mo gíkan sa Manílà?--Hóo, dúgay na nga binayáran
ko yádto. Have you paid for the watch you received from Manila?--Yes,
I paid for it long ago. Walâ pa akó sing ikabáyad sa ímo. I have not
yet got the means with which to pay you. Sa madalî ukón sa madúgay
magabáyad gid siá sing mahál sang íya nga sináypan. Sooner or later
he will pay dearly for his mistakes. Pabayára (--áda) siá. Make (let)
him pay.

_báy-ad_, To keep the head proudly erect, to expand one's chest and
throw the head slightly back, to strut, walk with pomposity or affected
dignity. Indì ka magbáy-ad kon maglakát. Don't hold your head proudly
erect when you walk. Ginapabáy-ad níya ang íya nga láwas. He carries
himself proudly with his nose in the air. Indì mo pagibáy-ad ang ímo
nga láwas kon maglakát ukón magpúngkò ka. Do not assume a haughty
air when you walk or sit. (cf. báy-od, lí-ad).

_báy-ad_, A kind of sea-shell. (cf. lampírong, tipáy).

_bayái_, An old song or tune, a chanty: to hum a tune. Nagsakáy siá
sa íya karabáw nga nagabayái. He sat on his buffalo humming a tune.

_bayakát_, A kind of wide-meshed basket standing on four short
legs used as a wastepaper basket, as a receptacle for soiled linen,
etc. (cf. piakát, soklóban, tampípì).

_bayát-báyat_, To take physical exercise. Ibayátbáyat mo ang ímo nga
láwas. Take physical exercise. Exercise your body. (cf. banátbánat,
unátúnat).

_bayáw_, Brother--, sister-in-law.

_bayáw_, To raise, lift, put up, elevate. Ibayáw or bayawá ang ímo
kamót. Lift up your hand. Bayawí sang kamót mo nga toó ang ímo
nga pagsúmpà. Raise your right hand for the oath you are going
to take. Ginbayáw níya siá sa kisamí. He lifted him up to the
ceiling. (cf. álsa, bátak, bákyaw, hákwat, púlut).

_báyaw_, To exalt, raise spiritually, lift up one's heart,
etc. Ginbáyaw sang Diós ang mga Sántos sa dakô nga himáyà kag
kadunggánan. God has exalted the saints to great glory and
honour. Ibáyaw or bayáwa ang ímo hunâhúnà kag tagiposóon sa
lángit. Lift up your thoughts and heart to heaven. (cf. dáyaw,
saólog, bánsag).

_bayawán_, A small basket used chiefly for winnowing rice in the
open. It is similar to a tagakán.

_bayáw-báyaw_, A bamboo bench as often used in Philippine houses
and boats; a raised bamboo floor or platform for treading out rice,
known also as "linasán" and "pápag".

_báybay_, The sea-shore, beach, strand, coast, sea-side.

_baybáyon_, The foreshore, beach, strand, that part of the sea-shore
that is washed by the tide. (cf. báybay).

_bayé-báye_, A dish of ground rice mixed with sugar and
coconut-meat. (cf. baíbái id.).

_bayén-on_, Effeminate, unmanly, womanish. (cf. agî; babayén-on).

_báyhan, báyhon, báywan, báywon_, etc. From bayó--to pound (rice).

_báyhon_, Form, shape, figure, appearance, guise, outline,
species. Yárà dirâ si Hesukrísto sa báyhon sang tinápay. Jesus Christ
is present there under the species of bread. Ang manunúlay nagpalapít
sa íya sa báyhon sang isá ka ábyan. The tempter approached him in
the guise of a friend. (cf. dágway).

_bayhónan_, Shapely, handsome, pretty, good-looking, of good
appearance.

_bayí_, Grandmother. (cf. úyang, úlang, úway, lóla, abuéla;
lakí--grandfather).

_báylo_, See báilo--to change, exchange, swap, swop.

_báyò_, A Philippine upper garment for men and women, dress for the
upper part of the body, bodice, jacket. The "báyò" is a piece of
dress of very many different kinds and styles, but all agreeing in
one point, namely that they serve as an outer covering of the upper
part of the body.

_bayó_, To pound or hull, especially rice, by means of a wooden mortar
(lusóng) and a pestle (hál-o). Báywa or bayohá ang humáy. Pound the
rice. Báywi or bayohí akó sing isá ka pásong nga humáy. Pound for me a
bushel of rice. Ibayó akó ánay siníng isá ka gántang nga humáy. Kindly
pound this gantang of rice for me. Humáy nga binayó. Rice that has
been pounded. (cf. lúbak, totó; gúmà, dásdas, líg-as).

_báyo_, (Sp. bayo) Bay, yellowish white (horses). Ginbalígyà ko ang
ákon kabáyo nga báyo. I sold my bay horse.

_bayó-báyo_, The pulse, the beating or throbbing of the pulse. Masákò
ang túmbò sang ákon bayóbáyo. My pulse is beating very fast.

_bayô-báyò_, Dim. of báyò. Something resembling a báyò; dress or
garment for a doll, for a scarecrow, etc.

_báy-od_, To walk erect with head thrown back in ostentation. Indì
mo pagbay-odán (--orán) ang mga táo. Don't walk with your head held
high in front of the people. (cf. báy-ad, lí-ad).

_bayóg_, (B) Long-faced, fiddle-faced, horse-faced, one with a long
face; to be or become long-faced. Bayóg siá nga táo. Táo siá nga
mabayóg sing pangguyáhon. He has a long face.

_bayóko_, A hardwood tree and its valuable timber.

_bayóng_, A piece of thick bamboo of about three or four yards in
length and used for fetching water from a well or river, bamboo
water-tube. (cf. salagúban).

_bayóok_, The mumps, inflammation of the salivary glands, with swelling
along the neck.

_bayoón_, See balayoón. Mahál ang báyad ko siníng mga bayoón. I paid a
lot for this cloth (for a suit of clothes, for a dress, jacket, etc.).

_bayóong_, A bag, sack, jute-bag, especially such as are commonly
used to pack unrefined sugar in.

_bayúd_, Unstable, unsteady, not firm, shaky. This term seems to be
very seldom used and, if used, is mostly employed in the form "índì
mabayúd". Iníng baláy, halígi, etc. índì mabayúd. This house, post,
etc. cannot be shaken, is not shaky, i.e. is firm, strong. (cf. bawód,
wáding).


_báywan_, From bayó, (cf. báyhan).

_beatílya_, (Sp. beatilla) Fine linen; a kind of thin, transparent
cloth.

_beberón_, (Sp. beberron) Tippler, booser, drunkard; nozzle of a
baby's feeding-bottle, (cf. palahúbug; lulutgútan, solopsópan).

_béka_, (Sp. beca) Scholarship, pension, yearly payment of a boarder
in a college, seminary, etc. Tagpilá ang béka? How much is the yearly
pension of a full boarder?

_béla_, (Sp. vela) Candle, taper. (cf. kandílà).

_beláda_, (Sp. velada) Evening entertainment, drama, play,
soirée. (cf. palagwáon, talan-áwon, hámpang, kalingáwan).

_belasyón_, (Sp. velación) Vigil, wake, prayers and entertainments
at night after a person's death, often lasting for many successive
nights, regularly nine nights. Also: The nuptial Mass and ceremony
of veiling the bride and bridegroom. (cf. puláwan; bélo).

_bélo_, (Sp. velo) Veil; the veiling of the bride and bridegroom during
the nuptial Mass; to veil. Himósa ang mga bélo nga ibélo sa buás sa
tátlo ka kalasálon. Get the veils ready for the three couples that are
going to be married tomorrow. Ang mga bálo nga nabelóhan na sang úna
níla nga pagpakasál índì na mabelóhan. Widows that received the nuptial
blessing at their first marriage cannot receive it again. (cf. tabón,
kúnop, takuróng).

_bendisyón_, (Sp. bendición) Benediction, blessing; the blessing
of a woman after childbirth; to bless. Magámpò kitá sa Diós agúd
íya bendisyonán ang áton mga talámnan. Let us beseech God to
bestow His blessing on our fields. Nagpabendisyón si Fulána kaína
sang ága. N.N. went this morning to receive the blessing after
childbirth. (cf. bendíta).

_bendíta_, (Sp. bendito, a) Blessed; to bless. Túbig nga bendíta. Holy
water. Nabenditáhan ang ímo rosaríto? Has your rosary been
blessed? Mapabendíta (mapabendisyón) akó. I am going to be blessed
or to receive the blessing after childbirth.

_benditahán_, Holy-water basin, holy-water stoup, where people bless
themselves on entering a church.

_bendíto_, (Sp. bendito) Blessed, saint: simpleton, silly, fool. Isá
siá ka bendíto. He is a fool or simpleton.

_bentáha_, (Sp. ventaja) Advantage, benefit, vantage-point,
superiority; to be in a better position or condition, to have the
advantage of. May bentáha siá sa ákon sa paglakát, kay maníwang siá
kag índì paghapóon sa madalî. He has the advantage of me in walking,
because he is lean and does not soon run short of breath. (cf. ikaáyo,
kinaáyo).

_bentánà_, (Sp. ventana) Window, casement. (cf. talamwáan, gawáng).

_bérbo_, (Sp. verbo) Verb. (cf. búhat).

_bérde_, (Sp. verde) Green; immodest, indecent, applied to talk,
pictures, writing. (cf. hiláw; bástos, maláw-ay, mahígkò).

_berdigáy_, Green. See bérde, hiláw.

_berdúgo_, (Sp. verdugo) Executioner.

_berí-béri_, Beri-beri. (cf. bílbil).

_bérso_, (Sp. verso) Verse, line of poetry, poetical
language. (cf. binaláybay, baláybay).

_bésa, besá_, (Sp. besar) A kiss, buss; to kiss, buss, salute with
the lips, especially to kiss the hand. Pádre, mabésa akó? Father, may
I kiss your hand? Besahí si tátay mo. Kiss your father's hand. Pádre,
pabesahá ang mga bátà. Father, let the children kiss your hand. Ipabésa
mo sa íya ang ímo kamót. Let him kiss your hand. Nagasúngon ang ákon
tíyà kag índì na siá magpabésa sa ákon. My aunt is cross and does
not allow me any more to kiss her hand. (cf. halúk).

_béto_, (Sp. veto) Veto, prohibition, interdict; to veto. Betóhi
yádto. Veto it. Nabetóhan níya ang amó nga pagbulút-an. He vetoed
that law. (cf. síkway, pamalábag, dumílì).

_biád-ad_, Holding one's head erect, etc. See biádbíad, líad,
liádlíad, báy-ad.

_biád-bíad_, To strut, walk about proudly with head thrown back;
to walk about idly or aimlessly, promenade or go from place to
place for lack of serious occupation. Tan-awá yanáng bugalón nga
nagabiádbíad sa dálan. Look at that proud fellow who walks on the
road with his head thrown back. Igò lang sa íya ang biádbíad. Igò
lang siá sang biádbíad. He is only fit for promenading or for walking
about idly. He does nothing but strolling, sauntering. (cf. báy-ad,
liád-líad; barumbáda, sarabánda).

_bíak_, To split. Biáka ang káhoy, kawáyan, etc. Split the wood, the
bamboo, etc. Biáki silá sing káhoy. Split some wood for them. Ibíak
mo akó ánay siníng káhoy. Kindly split this piece of wood for
me. (cf. bíal, bís-ak, líak; píhak).

_biák_, Split. Biák nga káhoy. Split wood. (cf. biál, pihák).

_bíal_, To split. Biála ang galatóng. Split the firewood. See bíak
id. (cf. bís-ak, píhak, pákas).

_biál_, Split. See biák. Biál nga galatóng. Split wood, firewood,
kindling.

_biánda_, (Sp. vianda) Viands, victuals; comestibles, food, provisions,
(cf. bálon, pagkáon, kalán-on, súd-an, dáplì, daráplì).

_biátiko_, (Sp. viático) Viaticum; to give Viaticum to a dying
person. Nabiatikohán na siá or nabáton na nía ang biátiko. He has
received viaticum.

_bíaw, bí-aw_, A spring, pool, puddle of clear water; clear, pure
(of water). Túbig nga bíaw. Pure water (from a well, cistern, spring,
etc.).

_biáy-bíay_, Ridicule, joke, chaff, derision, banter, fun; to make fun
of, poke fun at, ridicule, deride, twit, quiz, chaff, laugh at, rally,
banter, crack jokes at another's expense. Indì mo pagbiáy-biáyon ang
ákon ngálan. Don't make fun of my name. (cf. tiáwtíaw, lahógláhog,
uslít; úmpit, pasipála, uligâ, ulígyat, yagutâ).

_bíba_, (Sp. viva) Long live! Hurrah!

_bíbi_, A large, tame duck. (cf. gakít).

_bîbî, bíbì_, Edge, rim, side, bank, shore, beach. (cf. bígki, bibián).

_bìbián, bibián_, Edge, rim, border of a well or cistern; the inner
wall or lining of a well, shoring.

_bibíg_, The lip; rim, edge of a glass, of a cup, etc.

_bibígne_, Awful, terrible, shocking, tremendous; disgusting or
horrible to hear of or look at. (cf. makabibígne).

_bibíngka_, A cake made of rice-flour mixed with coconut meat, sugar,
etc., and baked. (cf. púto--the same, but boiled).

_bibínka_, See bibíngka.

_bibít_, To raise and lower the various heddles in a loom, when
weaving a design in different colours; to make--jusi,--variegated
cloth, to weave various designs. Bibití. Raise the heddle. Maálam ka
magbibít? Do you know how to work various designs on a hand-loom?

_bíbo_, (Sp. vivo) Lively, animated, hustling, daring, audacious,
energetic, vivacious. (cf. mabákas, mapísan, maúkud, mapántok, lísto,
alísto, maábtik, sagád; batíd, anád, matinguháon).

_bída_, (Sp. vida) Life; to live, work for a livelihood, keep oneself,
maintain oneself. Anó ang ginabída mo sa tingulán? What do you do
for a living during the rainy season? (cf. kabúhì, pangabúhì, pangítà).

_bidâ_, To stop a hole or leakage in a pot or other vessel with
plaster, thick paint, cement, etc. Bidaí ang gorgoríta, kay may
balanâ. Plaster the water-cooler, for it has a crack. Ibidâ iníng isá
ka hákup nga siménto sa alhíbi. Stop the leak in the water-tank with
this handful of cement. Ibidâ akó siníng láta, kay nagatubúd. Kindly
plaster this can, for it leaks. (cf. pálhit, dókdok, súngsung, tábon,
patogón).

_bidáhon_, Livelihood, maintenance, sustenance; work, job,
employment. Walâ siá karón sing bidáhon. He is at present out of work,
has no job or remunerative employment. (cf. bída, pangítà, palamúgnan,
alagarán, palangitán-an).

_bídang_, A kind of very light Philippine cloth or gauze, used chiefly
for pillow-cases, linings, nets, decorative purposes, and the like.

_bidhanán_, Having plenty of roe or spawn, said of fish. (cf. bíhod).

_bíding_, (English "beading") Beading; to bead. Maálam ka balá
magbíding? Do you know how to bead? Hóo, kon may bilidingón. Yes, if
there is any beading to be done. Kon amó inâ, bidíngi ináng báyò ko. If
that is so, bead that jacket (blouse, dress) of mine. (cf. gansílyo--to
crochet, knit).

_bídlan, bídlon_, From bilíd--to inspect, look at.

_bidyíw_, A spear, harpoon. (cf. bángkaw--lance).

_biérde_, See bérde--green.


_biérnes_, (Sp. Viérnes) Friday, Biérnes Santo. Good Friday. Ang mga
ádlaw nga biérnes sa Kuarésma. The Fridays in Lent.

_bígà_, Harlotry, whoredom. Pagpamígà--To practise harlotry; act as
a prostitute. (cf. bíghal).

_bigáon_, Harlot, strumpet, bad woman, courtesan, whore, bawd,
prostitute. (cf. álpot, patótot, puta, bighalán).

_bíghal_, See bígà.

_bighalán_, See bigáon.

_bíg-id_, To rub against, strike (as a match, etc.). See bág-id.

_bígki_, Rim, edge, border, bank, margin. Sa bígki sang subâ. On the
bank of the river. (cf. binít, bibíg, pángpang).

_bigkíl_, Knot in bamboo, from which the branches (símsim)
spring. (bikíl id.).

_bigkílan_, Knotty, gnarled. (bikílan id.).

_bígkis_, Girdle, bandage, usually made of yarn; to gird or
bandage. Bigkisí ang bátà. Bandage the baby. Ibígkis iníng bunáng
nga mapulá. Bandage with this red yarn. (cf. lígas, wágkos).

_bígne_, To overawe, terrify, astound, stun with fright. Sugíri
siá sang bág-o nga natabô nga nakabígni sa tanán nga mga táo
nga nakabatî. Tell him of the recent event that filled all men,
who heard of it, with awe. Sang pagtán-aw níya sang dakô nga pilás
siníng makaloló-oy nga táo binígne (nabignehán) siá. When he saw the
large wound of this poor fellow he got a shock. Nabígne (Binignehán)
siá sang buáya. He was terrified by the crocodile. (cf. lígne, sígne,
lígna, rígna).

_bigól, bígol_, Hardened, caked; to harden, become caked. Nagbigól ang
lúnang sa íya panápton. The mud hardened on his clothes. Nabigolán
ang ákon delárgo sing pínta. My trousers are (were) stiff with dry
paint or some paint has hardened on my trousers. (cf. ápol, ákmol,
bágtik, pígol, píghol).

_bigól-bigól_, Dim. of bigól. Bigólbigól iníng ulúnan. This pillow
is full of small hard lumps. Bigólbigól ang lala-ó sa dálan. The mud
on the road is slightly hardened or caked. (cf. bilógbilóg).

_bigóng_, To warp, twist, pull--, put--, out of shape. Ang kalabánan
sang mga tápì nagabigóng sa ínit. Most wooden boards warp in the
heat of the sun. Nagbigóng ang káhoy sa díngding. The wood in the
partition-wall warped. Bigongá or pabigongá ang láta. Crumple or batter
the can. Bigongí ang kwárta sa kílid. Turn down the edge of the coin.

_bigóte_, (Sp. bigote) Mustache.

_bígsang_, See bígà, bíghal.

_bigsangán_, Harlot, strumpet, prostitute, whore. (cf. bigáon,
bighalán, etc.).

_bígtas_, To break, snap, sever, part, fall asunder, put asunder. Indì
gid siá magpaubág, bisán mabígtas (bigtasón) ang mahírup níla nga
paghiliábyanay. He will not yield, even though their friendly relations
should be broken off. (cf. búgtò, útud, bíngkas).

_bíhag_, A captive, prisoner; a cock killed in the cockpit; the remains
of a repast, food left on the table after a banquet, etc.; to capture,
take--captive,--prisoner, lead into captivity. Bihági silá bisán
sing isá lámang sa íla. Capture at least one of them. Ang mga Móros
sádto ánay nagpamíhag (nagbíhag) sing madámò nga mga Bisayâ. The
Moros formerly led many Visayans into captivity. Nabíhag ang íya
tagiposóon. His heart was captivated.

_bihág-bíhag_, Dim. of bíhag. Also: A children's game "The hen and
the hawk". Nagahámpang silá sang bihág-bíhag. They are playing "The
hen and the hawk."

_bíhang, biháng_, To discover, to open--, tear--, rend--,
clothing so as to expose the skin. Amligí ang pamúngkò mo, kay
básì mabihangán ikáw. Be careful in sitting down, lest you expose
yourself. Figuratively: Katákatáhon mo sing maáyo ang mga kalán-on kag
ilímnon nga natigána sa mga bisíta, kay básì makulángan kag bihangán
kitá. Portion out well the food and drinks prepared for the visitors,
for otherwise we may run short and be put to shame. (cf. búklang,
gísì, búhang).

_biháng_, A large rent, tear, hole, aperture, in garments; torn,
rent or open in such a way as to expose the skin. (cf. gisî, búklang).

_bíhod_, Roe, spawn, eggs of fishes. (cf. bidhanán).

_bíhon_, A kind of Chinese vermicelli, very slender and
white. (cf. míki, míswa, pánsit, sotánghon).

_biká_, A kind of creeper, a wild vine and its fruit. Its grapes are
small and not very palatable.

_biká_, Potsherd, a piece of broken crockery; broken (of jars,
pots, etc.).

_bikâ_, Straddling; standing, sitting or walking with the legs wide
apart. (cf. bakâ).

_bíkà_, To straddle, to spread the legs wide apart when sitting,
standing or lying. Indì ka magbíkà. Don't spread your legs so wide
apart. Ginbíkà níya ang íya páa. He spread his legs out. Indì mo
pagbikáon ang ímo páa. Don't spread your legs. Kúlang kaáyo ang ímo
nga pagtáhud, kay nagbíkà ka sa atubángan sang mga bisíta. You are
wanting very much in politeness towards visitors, for you spread your
legs in their presence. Indì mo silá pagbikáan liwán. Don't spread
your legs again before them--or--in their presence. (cf. bákà).

_bikâ-bíkà_, To open and close the legs a number of times in
succession.

_bikákà_, See bíkà.

_bíkal_, To argue, debate, discuss, engage in a discussion or
argument. Bikálon mo siá sa tungúd sang maáyo nga batásan. Argue
with him about good manners. Bikálan ta ang bág-o nga pagbulút-an
nahanungúd sa mga kalasálon. Let us debate about the new law referring
to marriages. Nagabikaláy silá sang mga kaayóhan kag kalaínan sang
gobiérno nga amerikánhon. They are discussing the good and bad points
of the American Government. (cf. báis).

_bíkat_, To open--, force--, press--, asunder, tear or pull apart (a
purse or the like). Bikáta ang tinápay. Pull the loaf asunder. Ibíkat
akó ánay sang ákon bólsa, kay akó índì makabíkat sinâ. Kindly open my
purse for me, as I cannot force it open. Bikáta akó sang pológwan, kay
pasúdlon ko ang manók. Open the mouth of the chicken-basket for me, for
I am going to put in the cock. (cf. bílad, húmlad--to open, unfold).

_bikíl_, See bigkíl id.

_bikílan_, Knotty, knobby, knarled, gnarled, applied especially to
bamboo. (cf. bigkílan).

_bíkis_, Bandage, binding material. See bígkis id.

_bíknol_, To move about, be up and busy, to be stirring, to stir one
self, to be active. Indì na siá makabíknol. He cannot move about any
more, he is unable to do any work. Hálus na gánì siá makabíknol gíkan
sa kabúdlay, balatían, katigulangón, etc. He can scarcely move any
longer on account of being tired, sick, old, etc. Makabíknol pa siá
maglágaw?--Indì na gid; pirme lang siá nagahígdà. Can he still walk
about? Not at all; he is bed-ridden. (cf. tíknol, túknul).

_bíkrat_, To tear, rend clothing, etc. Nabíkrat ang ákon báyò. My
jacket was torn. Bikratá lang ang kóko. Simply tear the white cloth
asunder. Bikratí akó sing duhá ka bára siníng hénero. Tear off for me
two yards of this cloth. Ginkáptan níya akó sa likód kag biníkrat níya
ang ákon báyò. He grasped me by the back and tore my coat. (cf. píkrat,
gísì, páhak, bábha).

_bikwálon_, Clumsy, awkward, gawky, ungainly, clownish,
uncouth. Bikwálon ang íya nga paghámbal. His talk is uncouth. He
talks in a queer way. Bikwálon ang íya nga paggího. His movements
are clumsy or ungainly. Bikwálon nga táo. A gawk. An awkward, clumsy
fellow. (cf. baksiwâ, manól).

_bíla_, (Sp. vela) Candle, taper. (cf. béla, kandílà).

_bílad_, To open; unfold (a book or the like). Bilára (--áda)
ang tulún-an. Open the book. Bilári akó sang líbro. Open the book
for me. Ginabílad mo lang ang líbro nga walâ mo pagbasáha. You are
holding the book open without reading it. Biniláran níya ang látok
sang íya mga panápton. He spread or displayed his clothes on the
table. (cf. húmlad, bulád, ládlad; bíkat--to force asunder, etc.).

_biláho_, (H) The spike of a plant, as that of the sugar-cane, of
the tígbaw-reed, etc. (cf. biráho; budiáwi--the spike of maize, etc.).

_bílang_, As, like, as if, as it were, as though, as much as to
say. Bílang útud ko siá. He is my brother, as it were. Sagurón ko
siá nga bílang anák ko. I shall take care of him, as if he were my
son. (cf. daw, súbung).

_bílang_, To consider as, esteem as, judge, estimate, think, hold,
take for, look upon as. Nagbílang siá sa íya nga makáwat. He took him
for a thief. He looked upon him as a thief. Bilángon mo siá nga tíyò
mo. Consider him (treat him as) your uncle. Ginbílang níla akó nga
manugbúlung. They looked upon me as a doctor. Indì mo siá pagbilángon
nga maláut, kon walâ mo masayóri. Don't pronounce him bad, unless you
know for certain. Nalágyo siá, kay walâ na siá makabatás sang maláin
nga pagbílang níla sa íya. He ran away, because he could not stand
any longer their bad treatment of him. (cf. hunâhúnà, dúmdum).

_bilánggò_, To imprison, put in prison, jail, gaol, incarcerate,
confine, lock up. Bilanggoá ang makáwat. Put the thief in
prison. Binilánggò níla ang buyóng. They incarcerated the
robber. Ipabilánggò mo ang tigtampálas sa mga polís. Get the police
to lock up the criminal. Ang mga binilánggò. Prisoners. Ibilánggò
ang nadakúp sa madalî, agúd índì makabúhì. Put the captive in jail
at once, lest he should escape. Iníng baláy ginbilanggoán níla sang
mga nabíhag. They confined the captives in this house. (cf. húnong).

_bilanggóan_, Prison, jail, gaol, place of confinement. Nasentensiahán
siá sing tátlo ka túig sa bilanggóan. He was sentenced to three years
imprisonment. (bilánggò).

_bílas_, (Sp. vela) Candle, taper, dip. Isá ka bílas. One
candle. N.B. Compare: Isá ka métros--one metre; isá ka sántos--a
saint, etc., the Sp. plural form being often used for the Visayan
singular. (cf. béla, bíla, kandílà).

_bilás_, Brother-in-law, sister-in-law. Unlike "bayáw", the
term "bilás" is strictly confined to the husbands and wives (not
otherwise related to each other) of two (or more) sisters or brothers
respectively. (cf. birás; bayáw).

_bilát_, Vulva; the genitals of a woman. (cf. pokák, póklo, putáy,
púyò).

_bílbig_, To notch, nick, to strike or break off a piece, as of
crockery, glass-ware, etc. Nabilbigán ang kólon. The cooking pot had a
piece broken off. Bilbigí ang púnta sang awís. Strike off the point of
the awis-shell. Bilbigá ang binílbig. Break the potsherd. (cf. bínting,
píngas).

_bílbil_, See beríbéri.

_bilbilón_, See beríberíhon.

_bilí_, Price, cost, worth, charge; to be worth, cost, be the price
of. Pilá ang bilí siní? How much is this? Nagabilí sing duhá ka
písos. It costs two pesos. Pilá ang pagpabilí mo siní? How much
do you charge for this? Pabilihí siá sing tátlo ka salapî sináng
kálò. Charge him (Have him charged) one peso and fifty centavos for
that hat. Pinabilihán akó níla sing támà. They overcharged me. Bilihán
mo kon pilá ang gústo mo nga ibáyad sinâ. Name the price you would
be willing to pay for that. Ang humáy nga sádto nagabilí sing mamísos
ang pásong nagabilí karón sing ápat ka písos. The rice that formerly
cost one peso a bushel now costs four pesos. Nagabalígyà kamí sa kubús
kag pát-ud nga bilí, ápang támbing ang báyad. We sell at a cheap and
fixed price, but on a cash basis. (cf. kabilihánan).

_biliáko_, (Sp. bellaco) A jester, joker, clown, buffoon. (cf. társo,
alakáyo, payáso).

_bilíbid, bilibíd_, The Bilibid-Prison in Manila. Also used as a
verb. Bilibidá siá. Send him to Bilibid. Indì mo pagbuháton inâ, kay
mapabilíbid ikáw kon madakúp ka. Don't do that for if you are caught,
you will be put in Bilibid.

_bilíbitóon_, A kind of tree. (bulibitóon id.).

_bilíbod_, To sprinkle, strew, scatter, as grain, flowers or the
like. Bilibóri (--ódi) ang manók sing humáy. Scatter some rice-grains
to the chickens. Ibilíbod sa mungâ ang isá ka púdyot nga maís. Scatter
a little corn for the hen. Binilibóran níla ang laráwan sang Mahál
nga Bírhen sing madámò nga mga búlak. They strewed the statue of
the Blessed Virgin with many flowers. (cf. bóbod, sábwag, waráwag,
sábud, sáb-og).

_bilíd_, To look at something held in the hand, to handle, examine,
inspect. Nakabilid akó sang bág-o nga hénero nga kóko sa tiénda kag
sa ákon bántà dílì maáyo nga kláse sang hénero yádto. I inspected the
new white cloth in the shop and according to my opinion it is not
a good kind of cloth. Bídla iní kon úyon mo. Look at this and see,
whether you like it. Bídli akó sang mga patádyong nga ginabalígyà
ko, kay básì may mauyónan ka. Examine the skirts I keep for sale,
perhaps there are some to your liking. (cf. mútad, sulúng, mulálong,
tán-aw, túluk).

_bilídhon_, Worth inspecting, precious, dear, costly, expensive;
high-priced. (cf. mahál, hamílì).

_bilihagón_, One who is to be or should be captured; one who is an
easy prey to. (cf. bihag).

_bílik_, (H) To twist or double threads, especially threads of
different colour. Bilíka ang bunáng nga maputî kag mapulá. Twist the
white and the red yarn together. Bilíki akó sing bunáng nga maputî
kag maitúm nga hústo sa isá ka báyò. Double white and black yarn
sufficient for a jacket for me. Binílik nga báyò. A jacket made of
doubled threads in various colours. (bírik id.).

_bilín_, (H) The rest, remainder, remains, remnant, what is left over
or behind; to be left over etc. Pilá ang ginbáyad mo siníng bilín nga
hénero? How much did you pay for this remnant of cloth? Ang ági kag
bilín sang mga salâ. The traces and remains of sin. Pilá ka pásong
ang nagakabilín pa dídto? How many bushels are left there still? Amó
na lang iní ang nabilín? Is this all that is left? (cf. salín, turá).

_bílin_, Order, command, commission, injunction; to order, enjoin,
command, give an order to, direct, dispose, rule; pabílin--to
remain; stay, be left behind. Anó ang bílin mo? What is (was)
your order? May igabílin ikáw sa Ilóng-ílong? Have you an order
for Iloilo? Bínli (for bilíni) ang ímo útud nga padálhan níya akó
sing isá ka páres nga maáyo nga sapátos. Order your brother to send
me a pair of good boots. Magpabílin ka sa baláy. Stay (remain) at
home. Mapabílin ikáw sa baláy? Are you remaining at home? Shall you
stop at home? Ginpabílin siá sa baláy ni nánay. Mother left him at
home or told him to stop at home. Ipabílin siá sa baláy. See to it
that he stops at home. (cf. túgon, sógò, sálà, bilín).

_bilíng_, (H) A sharp sudden pain, a stitch; to have or suffer
a stitch. Nagabilíng ang kílid ko. I have a stitch in the
side. Nabilingán ang ákon batíis or nabilingán akó sa ákon batíis. I
have a cramp in the calf of my leg. (biríng id.).

_bilinhión, bilinhíon_, (H) To be kept or reserved as
seed-grain. (bínhì).

_bilinlúdan_, (H) A receptacle for the particles of rice called
"bínlud".

_bilitayán_, (H) Gallows, gibbet, anything used for hanging up
things. (cf. bítay).

_bilitayón_, (H) A person or thing that is to be or should be hung
up or hanged.

_bílo_, Veil. See bélo.

_bílog_, Line, wire, string, rope, for drying clothes upon. Ihaláy sa
bílog ang ákon báyò nga humóg sa bálhas. Hang on the line my jacket
that is wet with perspiration. (cf. salabláyan, písì, alámbre).

_bílog_, One piece or article, a whole, particularly applied to things
that are roundish or cubical. (cf. báto, bóo, boók).

_bilóg_, Whole, entire, complete, integral, full, all together,
no part missing; solid, not hollow; to make or form a whole,
etc. Láwas kag kalág amó ang nagabilóg sa táo. Body and soul form
the whole man. Ginkabilogán sang mga pumulúyò ang íla nga pándut. The
inhabitants were all united for the celebration of their feast. Bilogón
mo ang tsokoláte, dílì mo pagtabliyahón. Make the chocolate up in
roundish lumps, not in tablets or slabs. Ibilóg akó ánay siníng
sensílyo ko nga salapî. Kindly give me a "salapî" for these fifty
centavos. Ginkabilogán níla ang amó nga sulát. They wrote that letter
in common--or--they all agreed to despatch that letter. Nagbilóg ang
duhá níla ka tagiposóon. Their two hearts were as one. Ginhatágan níya
akó sing isá ka páhò nga bilóg. He gave me a whole mango. (i.e. not
only part of it).

_bilóg-bilóg_, Dim. of bilóg. Also: lumpy, clumpy, full of small
knots or clusters; to form small lumps, etc. Nagabilógbilóg iníng
almidón. This starch is lumpy.

_bilogón_, Cane, cudgel, rod, stick especially a stick of rattan.

_bilóng-bilóng_, A kind of small, flat fish much liked for food.

_bílos_, (Perhaps from the Sp. velo, velero) A small sailing boat. Indì
ka magsakáy sa isá ka bílos. Don't embark in a small sailing-boat.

_bílwa_, To sprain, dislocate, put out of joint. Nabílwa ang íya nga
tiíl. His foot was sprained. Dì mo pagbilwahón ang íya abága. Do not
dislocate his shoulder. Indì ka magámbak dirâ, kay matáas kag básì
mabílwa ang ímo páa. Don't jump down there, for it is deep and you
might sprain your leg. (cf. súlpò).

_bilyáko_, See biliáko--a jester, etc.

_bilyansíko_, (Sp. Villancico) Christmas carol. (cf. daígon).

_binabáye_, Effeminate, female-like, especially applied to a cock
with the habits of a hen. (cf. babáye, binabayé).

_binabayé_, Pertaining to--, fit for--, proper for--, women; womanly,
feminine, woman-like. Báyò nga binabayé. A waist, bodice, woman's
shirt. (cf. ináng-ínang, binabáye).

_binabáylan_, Superstitious, credulous, pertaining to practices
and observances of those that believe in wizards, sorcerers,
conjurors, etc. Binabáylan nga batásan. Superstitious practices or
observances. (babáylan).

_bináboy_, Piggish, swinish, hoggish, after the manner of
swine. (cf. báboy).

_binagáy-bágay_, Tuned; harmonious; to tune, harmonize, arrange
harmoniously; to reconcile contradictions, bring about peace and
friendship, restore order. (cf. bágay, bagáy).

_binág-bínag_, To consider, ponder, balance; to apportion, arrange
well. Binág-binágon mo ang ímo hunâhúnà sa tátlo ka báhin. Consider
well three points. (cf. painóíno, hunâhúnà, basó-báso, palibólíbo,
panúmdum; bahínbáhin).

_binágtong_, (H) A parcel, package, bundle, anything wrapped up in
an apron, skirt, blanket, etc. (cf. bágtong, pinutús).

_binakól_, Anything (especially chicken) cooked or stewed inside a
joint of bamboo. (cf. bakól).

_binákol_, Beaten, whipped, flogged. (cf. bákol).

_binalangkáan_, (B) Cut in two, halved, split asunder,
cloven. Binalangkáan nga nióg (lubí). A coconut split open. Split
coconut husks. (cf. balángkà, binalúk-an).

_binalangkaán_, Place where something is split; crack, split,
fissure. (cf. binalangkáan).

_binalántak_, Wickerwork with weavers that pass alternately over two
spokes and under two spokes. (balántak).

_binaláybay_, Parable, similitude; poem, poetry; to use poetical
language. Hámbal nga binaláybay. A figure of speech. Poetical
expression. Pagsermón nga binaláybay. Preaching in the form of
parables. Ang mga binaláybay nga sinulát ni Fuláno matahúm. The
poems written by N.N. are beautiful. Maábtik siá magbinaláybay. He
is an adept in the use of poetical language (whether spoken or
written). (cf. baláybay).

_binalighotán_, Bound up in a knot, said particularly of a
handkerchief or the like with knots for holding money or other
small articles. Nadúlà ang íya pányo nga binalighotán sing tátlo
ka mángmang. She lost her handkerchief with three pesos tied up in
it. (cf. balighot, binugkósan, binugkosán).

_binalónas_, Water in which rice has been washed. (cf. balónas,
balinónas).

_binalúk-an_, Cut open, split in two; one half of an empty coconut
shell together with its husk; coconut husks. (cf. bukâ, binalangkaán).

_binalúndò_, Bewitched, transformed, changed by a spell into something
else. (cf. balúndò).

_binangî_, (B) Mate, helper, assistant. (cf. kaúbay, búlig, kabúlig,
katímbang).

_binangíg-bángig_, To altercate, quarrel, bandy words cf. bángig,
súay).

_binángon_, The Philippine long knife carried in a scabbard on the
hip by workmen. The scabbard or case is called "tagúb" (cf. bólo,
pinútì, siántong, sandúkò, ginúnting, talibóng, kális, súndang, uták).

_binángto_, A full grain; a piece or whole of something cubical in
shape; full roast maize-grains that have not burst in the process of
roasting. Malúyag ka magdoóm sang binángto? Do you like to eat (chew)
roast corn? (cf. binílog, binántuk).

_binánhaw_, Raised to life, raised up. (cf. bánhaw).

_binántuk_, A grain; a piece or whole of something roundish or cubical
in shape. (cf. binílog, binángto, bináto, iyás, uyás).

_binaríta_, A full bar; in bars, by the bar. Nakabakál akó sing habón
nga binaríta. I bought some soap in bars. (baríta).

_bináryo_, Rural, village-like; by villages. Batásan nga
bináryo. Village customs. Rural manners. (cf. báryo).

_bináryo_, (Sp. binario) Binary, double, consisting of two parts;
in music: 2/4 time.


_binástos_, Rough, uncouth, unpolite, impolite, uncivil,
unmannered, coarse, uncultured; mean, low, immodest, indecent, foul,
obscene. Binástos nga hámbal, pangulús, pangabúdlay, etc. Unpolite
talk, a very ordinary or inferior way of dressing, rough work, etc. Ang
binástos níya nga batásan. His rude manners. Binástos gid ang íya nga
ginngásal. He used very foul language. (cf. bástos, manól, barúbal;
damák, sáprat, mahígkò, maláway).

_binátà_, Children, offspring, progeny, family, descendants; childish,
infantile, puerile, kiddish, babyish, pertaining to childhood,
silly. (cf. bátà, inanák, inalabúab; pínayaón, ulianón, ayopáka,
alogadí, tsótso, urumánon, etc.).

_binatasán_, Custom, manner, usage, demeanour, behaviour. (batás;
cf. batásan, pamatásan, kinaanáran, kinabatásan, kagawián).

_binatî-bátì_, News, information, hearsay, report, rumour, advice,
word. Walâ silá sing binatîbátì kon sa diín siá karón. They have no
word as to his present whereabouts. (cf. batî).

_bináto_, A complete or full piece, grain, etc.; in full roundish
pieces, by the piece. (báto; cf. binílog, binángto, etc.).

_binatóbató_, Small stones, pearls, beads or the like. (cf. bató,
batóbató).

_bín-bin_, To neglect, pay no attention to, become estranged from,
disregard, abandon, take no account of. Ginabínbin níya ang íya mga
manák. She neglects her stepchildren. Indì mo pagbinbinón ang ímo
mga pariénte. Don't become estranged from your relatives. (cf. pálhi,
síkway, pahámak, ahígahíg, pabáyà).

_bínda_, (Sp. venda) Bandage; to bandage, bind up. Bindahí
ang pilás. Bind up the wound. Ginbindahán níla ang íya hubág sa
bútkon. They bandaged the ulcer on his arm. Ibínda iníng báhin sang
hénero sa íya nga pilás sa páa. Use this piece of cloth to bind up
the wound on his leg. Ibínda akó ánay sang ákon kamót. Kindly bandage
my hand. (cf. higót, bígkis).

_bindonggáda_, Tripe.

_bindónggo_, The paunch, the stomach of cattle. (cf. binúgwang).

_binéras_, (Sp. vinajera) Wine and water-cruets as used at Holy Mass;
a vial or small bottle for holding wine, etc.

_bingá_, The tiny stalk by which grain is fastened to the ear.

_bingahón_, Pertaining to or mixed with bingá. Walâ akó makakáon, kay
bingahón ang kán-on. I could not eat, for the rice was full of bingá.

_bíngat_, To unfold, open, stretch asunder. Bingáta ang bibíg, bábà,
bólsa, etc. Open the lips, mouth, purse, etc. Ibíngat akó ánay sang
bábà sang masakít nga bátà, kay itíl-og ko sa íya iníng linúgaw. Kindly
open the sick boy's mouth, for I am going to feed him with this
rice-porridge. Nabingátan akó sang ákon bólsa. Sín-o ang nagbíngat? My
purse has been opened by somebody. Who opened it? (cf. bíkat).

_bingáw_, Jagged, nicked, notched, indented, having one or more teeth
missing; wanting--, lacking--, one or more teeth. (cf. pingás).

_bíngaw_, To jag, notch, nick, indent, knock or draw out a tooth and
the like. Ginbíngaw sang amáy ang ngípon sang íya anák. The father
pulled out his son's tooth. Mabíngaw ang lagárì kon magági sa isá
ka bató. The saw will have teeth broken off, if it passes over a
stone. Bingáwi siá sing isá ka ngípon. Deprive him of a tooth. Bingáwa
ang íya nga ngípon. Draw his tooth. (cf. píngas, bílbig).

_bingawón_, Notched, jagged, nicked, having one or more teeth
missing. (cf. bingáw).

_binggár_, (Sp. vengar) To challenge, provoke. (N.B. Scarcely,
if ever, has this term the Spanish meaning of avenging, taking
revenge). Binggahá si Fuláno. Challenge N.N. Ginbinggár níya akó. He
provoked or challenged me. Ságad (nagaságad) siá paminggár. He
is always ready to throw out a challenge. Hípus ka lang; índì ka
magbinggár sa íya. Be quiet now; don't provoke him. (cf. ákyat).

_bínggid_, To disagree, separate, fall out, quarrel,
fight. (cf. bángig, súay, simáng, sipák, síbag, áway, bulág, sál-ag).

_bínggis_, To bind, tie, lash, fasten, fetter. (cf. búgkos, lígos,
higót, bígkis, bángot, ángot, angót, góos, balíghot, balô).

_bínggit_, Stye (in the eye). (cf. búntug).


_bínghal_, A snarl, growl; to snarl, growl, as a dog: to bark
at. Figuratively: Bininghalán akó níya. He shouted (barked) at
me. (cf. sínggit, tághol, láhay).

_bingíg_, Out of the vertical line, out of the perpendicular, not
quite straight, sloping, slanting, leaning, slightly inclined; to
slope, lean, slant, rake, incline. (cf. balingíg, tingíg).

_bingít_, Crying easily, cry-baby, peevish, cross, fretful,
over-sensitive, emotional, especially said of children that fret and
cry without apparent reason. (cf. ámog, pawíkan).

_bíngka_, See bibíngka, bibínka id.

_bíngka_, Edge, rim, border, bank. (cf. bígki, gíding, bínka, binít).

_bíngkal_, To break in a door, etc., to force an entrance. Bingkalá
ang ganháan. Break in the door. Bingkalí silá sing isá ka puérta. Force
open one door for them. Ibíngkal akó ánay siníng puérta, kay nawád-an
akó sang lyábi. Kindly burst open this door for me as I have lost
the key. (cf. búngkal).

_bíngkas_, To fray, fret, chafe, become loose and torn. Nagakabíngkas
ang mga ninahót siníng heneró. The threads of this cloth are getting
loose and broken. (cf. tíngkas).

_bíngkit_, See bínkit.

_bíngkol_, A knob, protuberance; the hip-bone prominent in a horse,
ass, etc. (cf. bokól, pískil).

_bíngkong_, To warp, twist out of shape. (cf. bigóng).

_bínhì_, Seed, seed-grain; any small hard particle, as of sand, salt,
sugar, etc. Also verb. Binhión ko gid iníng humáy. I am going to
preserve this rice as seed-grain. (cf. líso; bilinhíon, iyás, uyás,
binángto, binántuk, bináto).

_bínhod_, Numbness, pins and needles, loss of feeling; to be benumbed,
have pins and needles. Nagabínhod ang batíis, bútkon ko, etc. My calf,
arm, etc. is benumbed. Nabinhorán (--odán) akó sang ákon páa. I lost
all feeling in my leg.

_biní-ak_, Split, etc. See biní-al id.

_biniál_, (Sp. venial) Venial, easily pardoned, pardonable, excusable,
light, small (of sins or faults), (cf. palapatawarón).

_biníal_, Split, cloven. Biníal nga káhoy, kawáyan, etc. Split wood,
bamboo, etc. (bíal).

_biníklan_, (B) A splinter, a piece of split wood or
bamboo. (cf. baníklan, baníslak).

_binilasyón_, Pertaining to a wake, fit or proper for a wake. Pulús
gid lang binilasyón ang ímo kalantáhon. All your songs are only fit
for a wake. (cf. belasyón, puláwan).

_binilánggò_, Prisoner, convict, inmate of a prison, one who is
serving his time. (cf. préso, bilánggò, bilanggóan).

_binílog_, Full, complete, a whole piece of any roundish or massy
body. (bílog; cf. bináto).

_binís-ak_, Split, cloven, parted. (cf. biníak, biníal, bís-ak).

_binisayâ_, Visayan, pertaining to the Visayan language, customs,
manners of life, etc. (bisayâ).

_binít_, (B) Edge, rim, border, margin side, corner, any place away
from the centre or middle. Pabinít--to put or place on or go to the
edge of, etc. Mapabinít lang kamó. Just place yourselves at the outer
edge. Sa binít sang baláy, subâ, dálan, etc. At the side of the house,
river, road, etc. Pabinití (pabínti) ang hénero sing tahî. Sew the
cloth at the edge or selvedge. Pabínta (pabinitá) ang síya. Put the
chair to the side of the room near the wall, away from the centre,
etc. according to the context. (cf. bíbî, bígki; higád, hilít).

_bínka_, See bíngka.

_bínkit_, To tie, fasten, secure, bind together; to gather,
collect. Nagabínkit silá sang íla mga bátà. They are gathering
their children together. Nagbínkit (nagbilínkit) silá sang íla mga
pinamakál. They collected and bound together the things they had
bought. (cf. típon; búgkos).

_bínlan, bínli, etc._ From bílin--to enjoin, etc.

_bínlud_, Small particles of hulled rice. Indì masal-otán sing bínlud
ang ilá sugilánon. One cannot put in a tiny particle of rice, when
they converse together i.e. they chatter so much and so quickly,
that one has no chance to put in a word. (cf. bilinlúdan).

_binó_, To stew inside a closed receptacle surrounded by water in such
a way, that no water comes in contact with what is being stewed. Binohá
lang ang paglútò sang manók. Stew the chicken. (cf. bakól with the
difference that in bakól water comes in contact with what is being
stewed).

_bíno_, (Sp. vino) Wine, brandy, cognac, whiskey, gin, spirits in
general; hence it is often necessary to ask, what kind of "bíno"
is meant. (cf. álak).

_binobokán_, The empty shell of an egg, snail, mussel,
etc. (cf. alokabá, olokabá).

_binódo_, (B) Salted, pickled, put into brine, salt. Binódo nga ísdà,
páhò, etc. Salt fish, mangoes, etc. (cf. binóro, bódo).

_binókbok_, Ground, crushed, pulverized, powdered, mashed. Binókbok
nga bugás, kamóti, maís, etc. Ground rice, mashed sweet potatoes,
crushed corn, etc. (cf. bókbok).

_binókot_, Shut up, inclosed, confined, segregated; living in a
religious community secluded from the outer world. (cf. bókot).

_binolónbóon_, Wound on a spool; by the spool; a spool, reel,
bobbin. Binolónbóon nga bunáng. A spool of yarn. Yarn by the
spool. (cf. bolónbóon, polóndan).

_binóog_, (B) Roasted--, baked--, at a fire or over live
coals. Binóog nga maís, ísdà, kamóti, etc. Popped corn (pop-corn),
baked--fish,--sweet potatoes. (cf. bóog, iníhaw, sinúgba).

_binóro_, (H) See binódo.

_binót_, To strike the ground or floor with a pointed instrument,
as with the point of a stick, dibble, pole or the like. Sang pagbinót
ko sang tagád naígò ang ákon tiíl kag napílas. When I thrust down the
dibble my foot was hit and wounded. Ibinót mo ang tagád sa dútà. Dig
the dibble into the ground. Binotí sang bastón mo iníng búhò. Poke
your stick into this hole. Bininotán níya ang haló sang íya bára. He
stuck the point of his crowbar into the iguana.

_bínta_, (Sp. vinta) A small boat, particularly used by the Moros of
Mindanao for fishing, commerce or even piratical excursions.

_bínta_, (Sp. venta) Sale, selling; roadside inn,
hostel. (cf. pamaligyáon; talangwáyan).

_bínta_, (Sp. venta) An easy score, easy to get or hit (in billiards
and the like).

_bíntay_, A fishing net of moderate size, larger than a "láya"
and smaller than a "tsintsóro". Pagpamíntay--to catch fish with the
bíntay-net. (cf. pókot, sángya).

_bíntay_, A long ear-ring.

_bíntig_, To break--, twist--, knock--, snap--, off a piece or the
extreme point of a thing. Bintigí ánay ang bagúngon kag ugáling
supsupón. First break off the end of the shell of the bagúngon-snail
and then suck it out.

_bínting_, Heddle, heald (of a weaving loom).

_bintósa_, (Sp. ventosa) Cupping-glass; to cup, apply a
cupping-glass. Bintosáhi ang íya likód. Apply a cupping-glass to his
back. (cf. tándok).

_binúang_, Foolish, absurd, idiotic, imbecile, fatuous, drivelling,
weak-minded, feeble-minded, soft, crazy, stupid, addle-pated; after
the manner of fools, like a fool. (cf. búang, linóko, tinónto).

_binúdngan_, Texture, textile, home-spun, fabric, cloth woven from
spun threads. (cf. búlung, búrung).

_binúgkos_, Bundled together, in a bundle, parcel, bale, batch, lot,
pack, set, by the bundle, packet, package, parcel, fagot, etc. Binúgkos
nga káhoy. A fagot (faggot) of firewood. Nakabakál akó sing tabákò,
lánot, etc. nga binúgkos. I bought some tobacco, hemp, etc. in bundles
or by the bundle. (búgkos).

_binugkosán_, Bundle, package, parcel; bundled up, tied together, made
up in a bundle; knot; place where something is tied. (cf. binalighotán,
búgkos).

_binúgwang_, The stomach of cattle, horses, sheep, goats and the like;
the paunch.

_binúgway_, A tress, tuft, lock, small knot, clump or bunch of flexible
things, as hair, thread, strings, etc.; protruding, projecting, coming
forth, sticking out, hanging out. Ginbáklan mo balá akó sing bunáng
nga binúgway? Have you bought some skeins (small hanks) of yarn for
me? Binunô siá kag binúgway ang íya mga tinái. He was stabbed and
his bowels protruded. (cf. búgway).

_binúhat_, A work, a creation, creature, something--done,--made,
handiwork, production, product, fabric, performance. (cf. búhat).

_binuhátan_, Work occupation, doings, deeds, acts,
performance. (cf. búhat, binúhat).

_binukídnon_, Pertaining to mountaineers, to--their speech,--their
customs,--their manner of living, etc.; rude, boorish, uncultured,
uncultivated, rough, uncouth, clownish; a yokel, bumpkin, clown,
country lout. (cf. búkid, bukídnon).

_binulád_, Spread, dried (in the sun); sun-dried fish. (cf. ugá,
lamayó, balingón).

_binúlan_, In--, by--, the month, monthly; monthly wages or
salary. Pilá ang binúlan mo? What is your monthly salary? (cf. búlan,
bulánbúlan).

_binúlig_, A full bunch of bananas, in bunches, by the bunch. Magbakál
ka sing ságing nga binúlig. Buy some bananas by the bunch. (búlig).

_binuligáy_. To assist or help one another. Magbinuligáy kamó. Help
each other. (búlig).

_binúlung_, (H) What has been spun, thread, yarn, silk, cotton,
twist. (búlung).

_binulús_, A whole piece, roll, bale, suit or the like; by the bale,
roll, etc. Walâ silá pagbalígyà, kóndì sa binulús gid. They don't
sell anything, except by the whole piece, roll, etc. (bulús).

_binunálan_, One that has been whipped. Ang idô nga binunálan
nalágyo. The dog that was whipped ran away. (búnal).

_binúnga_, Fruit, result, outcome, issue, upshot, consequence, end,
culmination, consummation. (cf. búnga).

_binunyágan_, Christian or baptismal name; a Christian, one that has
been baptized or christened. Sín-o ang binunyágan mo? What is your
baptismal name? (cf. búnyag, bulunyágan).

_binurigál, binurígal_, Noisy, rowdy, boisterous; to be noisy,
etc. Nagabinurigál silá. They are rowdy, boisterous. (burigál).

_bioléta_, (Sp. violeta) The violet; violet colour.

_biolín_, (Sp. violín) Violin. Ang biolín ginagolót ukón ginarabél
sang árko. The violin is played by a bow pushed and pulled to and fro.

_biolinísta_, (Sp. violinista) Violinist; violin-player.

_biómbo_, Screen. (cf. kansíl, palipúd, palalípdan).

_birá_, (Sp. virar) To wind, turn, twist, open or close with
some force, applied to screw-nuts, hinges, etc.; to tack, veer,
wear, put about, said of ships. Birahá ang biságra nga kipót. Pry
(prize) open the closed hinge. Ginbirá níla sang biradór ang ólo
sang dirúskas nga dáan. They turned the screw-nut of the old screw
with the monkey-wrench. Birahá ang láyag. Shift the sail. Birahá ang
dawdáwan. Crank the engine (by hand). (cf. wárik, wálik, lúbag, likô).

_birá-bíra_, Dim. and Freq. of birá

_birâ-bírà_, The fine, thin ligaments in animal
organisms. (cf. lanítlánit--tendon, sinew).

_biradónde_, (Sp. redondo) A small round tomato.

_biradór_, A screw-wrench, screw-key, monkey-wrench,
spanner. (cf. birá).

_biráho_. (B) See biláho--the spike of sugar-cane, etc.

_birákra_, To sit or lie down with legs drawn up and spread far
apart. Indì ka magbirákra. Don't sit (lie) down with your legs drawn
up and spread far apart. (cf. bíkà, bákà).

_bírang_, A kind of Philippine gauze. See bídang.

_birás_, Brother-in-law, sister-in-law. See bilás. (cf. bayáw).

_bíray_, A regatta; to celebrate a regatta. Nagabíray silá sa
pagpadungúg sang piésta ni San Huán Bautísta. They are holding a
regatta in honour of the feast of Saint John the Baptist. (Probably
from the Sp. virar).

_birgî-bírgì_, To refuse apparently or merely outwardly, to hide one's
real liking for something, etc. See bisyóbísyo, ind-í-índì, birôbírò,
istí-ísti id. Nagbirgîbírgì ka, ugá-i naglásti ka man sináng dólse. You
refused to take that sweetmeat, yet you really wanted it very much.

_birgó-íri, birgoíri_, A kind of Philippine dance.

_bírhen_, (Sp. virgen) Virgin. Ang Mahál nga Bírhen. The Blessed
Virgin. (cf. úlay).

_birî_, A kind of plant similar to the takinís; also: a species of
wild fig.

_biribíke_, (Sp. berbique) A carpenter's brace, a wimble, augur,
gimlet.

_bírik_, To twist, etc. See bílik.

_biríl_, (Sp. viril) Monstrance.

_birína_, (Philippine Sp. virina) A small candlestick, socket, or
receptacle for a candle, especially for candles around sacred images;
globe, glass shade for candles. (cf. gwardabrísa).

_biríng_, See bilíng id.

_bíro_, Lamp-soot, lamp-black. Also used as a verb. Nabiróhan ang túbo
sang kínke. The lamp-chimney got black with soot. (cf. agyó, agéu).

_birô-bírò_, To joke, jest, talk or act playfully; to refuse or
decline apparently, to simulate a dislike or aversion. (cf. tiáwtíaw,
lahógláhog, oróg-oróg; bisyóbísyo, birgîbírgì, indî-índì).

_birtúd_, (Sp. virtud) Virtue.

_bis_, (Sp. vez) Time, times; now and then, occasionally. May bis
---- kag may bis ----. At one time ----, at another time ----. Isá
ka bís. Once. Duhá ka bis (bísis). Twice. (cf. bísis id.).

_bisá_, (Sp. besar) To kiss (the hand); a kiss. Bisahí ang íya nga
kamót. Kiss his hand. (cf. bésa id.; N B. Bisá and bésa are mostly
used for kissing the hand, halúk for kissing the face, etc.).

_biságra_, (Sp. bisagra) Hinge, butt.

_bís-ak_, To cleave, split. Bis-aká ang káhoy. Split the wood. Bis-akí
akó sing gatóng. Split some firewood for me. Ibís-ak akó ánay siníng
káhoy. Kindly split this wood for me. (cf. bíal, etc.)

_bisán_, Though, although, even though, even if, notwithstanding. Indì
na siá makatulún bisán linúgaw lang. He cannot swallow any more,
even rice-porridge. Matámad siá magóbra bisán mahál ang sóhol. He is
too lazy to work, even if wages are high. Bisán si sín-o--or--kon
si sín-o nga táo. Any man, whoever he be. Hándà siá magkáon sing
bisán kon anó lang. He is ready to eat anything. Bisán daw anó man
----. Whatever ----. However (great, small, etc.) ----. (cf. máskin).

_Bisayâ_, Visayan, a native of the Visayan Islands. Ang mga Bisayâ. The
Visayans, the Visayan people. (cf. Bisyâ id.).

_bísbol_, Baseball.

_bisikléta_, (Sp. bicicleta) Bicycle, bike.

_bísio_, (Sp. vicio) Vice; vicious, naughty, unruly, disobedient,
defective, out of order. (cf. bísyo id.).

_bisió-bísio_, Dim. of bísio. (cf. bisyóbísyo).

_bisióhan_, Naughty, vicious, unruly, difficult to
manage. (cf. bisyóhan id.).

_bísis_, (Sp. vez, veces) See bis. Napúlò ka bísis. Ten times. May
bísis nga maáthag ang íya hámbal kag may bísis nga índì siá
makatúsngaw. At times he talks quite distinctly, and at times he
cannot pronounce (say) a word. (cf. maka--).

_bisíta_, (Sp. visita) A visitor, guest: to visit, pay a visit, call
upon, go to see, examine, inspect. Madámò ang mga bisíta sa baláy
karón. There are many visitors in the house at present. Bisitáhi si
tíyò mo. Visit your uncle. Nabisitáhan níya ang masakít nga bátà. He
paid a visit to the sick boy. Bisitáhi (bistáhi) ang humáy kon madámò
ang mga máya. Go and inspect the rice-field to see whether there are
many maya-birds there. Pabisitáhi (pabistáhi) siá sa médiko. Let a
doctor examine him. (cf. dúaw, bísta).

_bisíto_, (Sp. besito) A little kiss; a kiss on the mouth or face;
to give a kiss on the mouth or face. Bisitóhi siá or hatági siá sing
bisíto. Kiss his face or mouth. Give him a kiss. (cf. halúk, bisá).

_biskótso_, (Sp. biscocho) Biscuit, biscuit-like bread, rusk.

_bískwit_, Biscuit.

_bísò_, Lid, cover, especially an earthen lid for a pot or jar; to
cover with a lid. Butangí sing bísò ang kólon or bisói ang kólon. Put
a lid on the cooking-pot. Ibísò iní sa bangá. Put this as a lid on
the water-jar. (cf. loón, táklub, takóp).

_bísò_, Plate, dish. (cf. pínggan).

_bisperás_, (Sp. vísperas) Vespers; eve (of a feast). (cf. tughapón).

_bísta_, (Sp. vista) Eye-sight, sight, vision, view, scene, vista,
landscape, panorama; the trial or hearing of a case in court,
appearance of the parties in court; to examine, investigate, view, see,
inspect. Kortabísta--Short-sightedness. Largabísta--Long-sightedness.
(Sp. cortavista, largavista). (cf. bisíta; kítà, tán-aw; usísà,
pangusísà).

_bíste_, (Sp. viste) Clothes, garments, wearing apparel, robes; to
wear clothes, etc. Nagabíste siá sing mahál nga mga panápton. She
is wearing costly apparel. Indì ka magbíste nga súbung sang isá
ka prínsipe. Don't dress yourself up like a prince. Ginbistehán
níya ang laráwan sang Mahál nga Bírhen. She robed the statue of the
Blessed Virgin. Pabistehí siá. Provide him with clothes. Clothe him
or her. (cf. ulús, panápton, naúg).

_bistído_, (Sp. vestido) Well dressed, well groomed, wearing a new or
fresh suit of clothes; short clothes, a frock for a girl. Bestído siá
gid. He is well dressed, indeed! Nagabistído pa siá. She is still
wearing short clothes or girl's frocks. Ang bistído ángay sa mga
bátà. Short dresses are for young girls.

_Bisyâ_, Visayan. Bisyâ man siá. He is also a Visayan. He is also a
native of the Visayan Islands. (cf. Bisayâ id.).

_bisyâ_, A kind of rice. (cf. arabón).

_bísyo_, (Sp. vicio) Vice, bad manners, evil conduct, naughtiness;
to be vicious, naughty, bad, wicked; to refuse, be disobedient, be
out of order (of machines etc.). Walâ siá sing mga bísyo. He has no
vices. Indì ka magbísyo kon sogóon. Don't be disobedient when you are
ordered to do something. Nagabísyo siá kon kaisá. Now and then he is
naughty, stubborn. Ginbisyohán níya ang pagkáon. He was naughty at
mealtime. He disturbed the meal by his bad manners, by quarrelling
or the like. (cf. bísio id.).

_bisyó-bísyo_, Dim. of bísyo. Also: To refuse pettishly a favour or
gift, to be unwilling to do or accept something, to behave petulantly,
peevishly. (cf. birôbírò, indîíndì, birgîbírgì, bisióbísio).

_bisyóhan_, Vicious, naughty, petulant, peevish, pettish, fretful,
bad, of evil customs or habits. Bisyóhan nga bátà. A naughty boy,
a wilful child, a bad girl. (cf. maláin).

_bitâ_, A tree belonging to the cinchona family and yielding
quinine. The roots and bark are often boiled, and the resulting bitter
liquid is taken as a febrifuge and tonic.

_bítad_, To open, unfold, spread out. Bitára (--áda) ang líbro. Open
the book. Bitári akó siníng líbro. Open this book for me. (cf. bílad,
hítad, húmlad).

_bitána_, A kind of fishing-net similar to, but smaller than,
tsintsóro. Pamitána--to catch fish with the bitána.

_bítas_, To tear, rend, split or break open, applied especially to
the circumference of apertures. Nabítas ang ilóng sang karabáw. The
ropehole in the buffalo's nose tore through. Indì mo pagbitáson ang
búhò sang dágum. Don't break the eye of the needle. Nabitásan ang
dalúnggan níya sang arítos. Her ear was split by the ear-ring tearing
through. (cf. útud, búgras, lígtas).

_bitás_, Mutilated, injured by having something rent or broken off;
fissure, rent, mutilation. Ang karabáw nga may bitás ginatawág nga
bitás nga karabáw. A buffalo with a torn nose is called a split-nosed
buffalo. (cf. utúd).

_bítay_, To hang, suspend, string up. Bitáya ang ságing,
kahón, etc. Hang up the bananas, the box, etc. by means of a
string. Ginbitáyan níla ang káhoy sang kánding nga inanítan na. They
hung up to the tree the flayed goat. Ibítay akó ánay siníng bakág nga
may unúd nga tinápay. Kindly hang up for me this basket filled with
bread. Nasentensiahán siá sang hukóm nga bitáyon. He was sentenced
by the judge to be hanged.

_bitayán_, Gallows, gibbet, etc. See bilitayán id.

_bitáy-bítay_, Dim. and Freq. of bítay. To hang up loosely or for a
short while, to hang up and take down repeatedly.

_bítbit_, To carry in one's hand (a handbag or the like). Bitbitá ang
pinutús. Carry the parcel in your hand. Bitbití akó sing duhá ka láta
nga salmón kag maglakát kitá. Take along for me in your hand two tins
of salmon and let us go. Ibítbit akó ánay sang ákon sapátos. Kindly
carry my boots in your hand. (cf. dalá).

_bítì_, To feel a burning pain, to smart as when exposed to great heat,
or when eating anything sharp, hot or pungent, and the like. Nagabítì
ang pánit ko. My skin smarts as if scorched. Indì ka magkáon sing
katúmbal, kay magabítì ang dílà mo. Don't eat chili, for your tongue
will smart. Ginpabítì sang pimiénta ang bibíg ko. The pepper made my
lips burn.

_bitî_, A burst grain of roasted corn; a film on the eye. (cf. butî
id.).

_bitík_, Flea.

_bitikón_, Full of fleas, pertaining to fleas. (bitík).

_bítin_, To draw--, pull--, lift--, haul--, up, hoist, to snatch
with a swift motion. Bitína ang bátà. Lift up the child. Ang bátà nga
putót ginabítin sa ság-ang. A stunted child is lifted by its chin. (A
superstitious belief has it, that in this way the child is made to
grow well). Bitíni akó sing isá ka bayóng. Draw up for me one bamboo
container of water. Ibítin akó ánay siníng baúl. Kindly lift or haul
up this box for me. Ginbítin níya ang sotána níya sang pagtabók níya
sa subâ. When he crossed the river he raised his cassock. (cf. bátak,
álsa, hákwat; baláking. N.B. "hákwat" is used more for lifting heavy
loads, "bítin" for light articles).

_bitín_, A kind of large snake, living mostly in trees. It swoops
down and hauls up its victim; hence the name. (bítin).

_bitín-bítin_, Dim. and Freq. of bítin. To raise slightly, etc. Also:
To tuck up--, raise--, clothes slightly in order to be able to walk
fast. (cf. baláking).

_bítlag_, A piece of split bamboo or wood, a splinter. (cf. biníklan,
lipák).

_bítlig_, A film on the eye, cataract. (cf. kúlap).

_bitligón_, Filmy, having a film, affected with a cataract in the
eye. (cf. kulápon).

_bitó-bíto_, A kind of ear-ring in the form of a number of small
beads or balls fastened together.

_bitóg-bitóg_, See bilógbilóg--lumpy, etc.

_bítok_, An intestinal worm. (cf. bítos id.).

_bitókon_, Pertaining to, afflicted with, intestinal worms, one that
has worms. (bítok).

_bitóla_, (Sp. bitola) Measure, model, sample, muster. (cf. huluáran,
solókban).

_bitón_, (Sp. betun) Shoe-blacking, polish; to shine--, polish--,
black--, a shoe, etc. Bitoná or bitoní ang ákon mga sapátos. Shine,
polish, my shoes. Ibitón akó ánay sang ákon mga sapátos. Kindly
polish my boots for me. Makahibaló ka balá magbitón? Do you know how
to shine shoes? (cf. limpiabótas--a boot-black).

_bitóon_, Star, orb, planet.

_bítos_, See bítok--an intestinal worm.

_bitóson_, See bitókon. (bítos--bítok).

_bitsó-bítso_, Small, round, crisp bread, a small roll of bread.

_bitsokóy_, A sort of roll (of bread) of a roundish or oblong form.

_bíyà_, That is given up, left off, abandoned, deserted, relinquished,
got rid of; to leave, abandon, relinquish. Bíyà ko na inâ nga
pagkáon. I have now given up eating such things. Bíyà ko na ang
pagbáile. I have left off dancing, given up dancing. Indì mo pagbiyáan
ang bátà sa baláy. Don't leave the baby at home. (cf. báyà id.).

_biyâ-biyâ_, Neglected, abandoned, left alone. Biyâbiyâ nga bátà. A
neglected child, one not cared for or looked after. (cf. bíyà).

_biyá-bíya_, To carry--, bring--, to. Diín mo man inâ
biyábiyáhon? Where are you taking that to? Indì mo pagbiyábiyáhon
ang bátà sa malayô. Don't take the baby far. (cf. daládála).

_biyáyà_, To nurse, rear, bring up. Sang nawád-an akó sang ákon mga
ginikánan siá amó ang nagbiyáyà sa ákon. When I was bereaved of my
parents it was she that took care of me. Ang bátà nga ílo ginbiyayáan
sang íya nga tíà. The orphan child was reared by its aunt. Ibiyáyà
akó siníng bátà nga walâ na sing ilóy. Kindly look after this child
that has no longer a mother.

_bóbeda_, (Sp. bóveda) Vault, arch, ceiling. (cf. kisamí).

_bóbò, bôbô_, To pour out or over. Ibó-bò ang tsá, túbig, etc. Pour
out the tea, water, etc. Bobói siá sing túbig. Pour water over
him. Ginbobóan (Ginbôboán) níla sing maínit nga túbig ang idô nga
nakakáwat sang kárne. They poured hot water over the dog that stole
the meat.

_bóbo_, To baptize without ceremonies, to confer baptism in articulo
mortis. Binóbo nga bátà. A child baptized in danger of death. Bobóha
ang bátà. Baptize the child (in danger of death). Ipabóbo mo ang ímo
bátà nga yárà sa katalágman sang kamatáyon sa isá ka táo nga maálam
magbóbo. Hand your child that is in danger of death over to a man
who knows to baptize.

_bóbod_, To scatter--, strew--, throw--, grain or the like to
chickens, etc. Bobóri (--ódi) ang manók. Scatter some food for the
chickens. Binobóran ko ang manók sing diótay nga humáy. I threw a
little rice to the chickens. (búbud id.).

_bobód_, Chicken-food, anything like grain, etc. thrown to poultry
and the like. (cf. bubúd, bolobód id.).

_bóbog_, A kind of tree growing to a large size and believed by the
superstitious to be the abode of tumáo, bágat, dwíndi, kamâkamâ, etc.

_bobohán_, Baptismal font; any place where water is poured out. (bóbo).

_bobón_, Well, water-hole, bathing-hole near a river. (cf. áwang).

_bobóng_, Material used to cover a top, an edge, rim; to put on the top
or end of, to edge, to rim. Ibobóng ang sin sa atóp. Put the corrugated
iron on the roof. Bobongá (bobongí) ang atóp sing sin. Ridge the roof
with galvanized iron. Bobongí ang pakô sang ákon báyò. Put an edging
round the cuff of my jacket sleeve. (bubúng id.).

_bobongán_, Ridge, edge, top, rim. (bobóng; bubungán).

_bóboy_, (B) Aunt. (cf. tíà, tíyà, darâ, mánding; áling).

_bódbod_, To bind the rim or edge, especially of wickerwork, with
rattan or other material. Bodborá--or--bodborí (--odá,--odí) ang
bakág. Put a rattan rim round the top of the carrier-basket. Ibódbod
iníng owáy sa amákan. Edge the bamboo mat with this rattan.

_bódbod_, To get or make salt from sea-water by pouring the sea-water
over smooth sand letting it dry and repeating the process till the sand
becomes thoroughly saturated with salt. This sand is then collected
in a heap; more water is poured upon it and the outflow, thick with
salt, is poured into bamboo troughs to dry in the sun. Crystallized
salt is the result, which, scooped out and collected, is then ready
for use or sale. Nagabódbod silá sa baybáyon. They are making salt
from sea-water on the beach.

_bodéga_, (Sp. bodega) Store-room, ware-house; retail-grocery; hold
of a ship. (cf. almasín).

_bódhon_, Full of mucus (of the nose), running at the nose, snotty
(vulgar). (cf. bohód).

_bódo_, To salt, pickle, put in brine. Bodóha ang ísdà, páhò,
etc. Pickle the fish, mango, etc. Ibódo akó ánay siníng búgsò nga
ísdà. Kindly pickle this piece of fish for me. Bodóhi akó sing
tóloy. Salt down some sardines for me. Binódo (binóro)--salted
(pickled) fish. (cf. bóro, asín, gamós).

_bóg-an, bóg-on_, etc. From bóog--to roast--, bake--, broil--, over
live coals.

_bóg-oy_, A children's game played with stones or marbles. The one who
hits with his marble those of his opponent scores a point, but when he
misses, the opponent gets his innings; to play with marbles or stones
the bóg-oy game. Ang mga bátà nagabóg-oy. The boys are playing marbles.

_bóg-oy_, Well matched; to be well matched, have about equal advantages
and disadvantages, said especially of wrestlers, boxers and the
like. Nagabóg-oy ang mga nagadulúmug. The wrestlers are well matched.

_bóg-oy_, A toss-up; to toss up sea-shells, marbles, stones, coins,
etc. at the beginning of a game to decide who gets the first innings.

_boháwi_, Whirlwind, cyclone, water-spout, sand-storm.

_bohód_, Mucus, snivel, snot. Pahíri ang bohód mo. Wipe your nose. Indì
mo pagsúnghon, kóndì pahíran mo ang bohód mo sang pányo. Don't use
your fingers to remove the mucus from your nose, but wipe it off with
a handkerchief. (cf. bódhon).

_bohók_, Hair, tresses. Also used as a verb. Indì kamó mabohók sa
sugilánon, kay daláyon gid lang ang ínyo sugilánon nga waláy úntat. One
cannot (put in a hair) get a word in edgeways when you talk together,
for you talk on without interruption or pause.

_bohók-bóhok_, Filaments, down, hair-like threads; awn, beard,
especially the hair-like filaments growing out of the top of the
maize-cob, pubes.

_bohokón_, Hairy, full of hairs, pubescent. See bókhon. Walâ siá
magkáon sinâ nga súd-an, kay bohokón. He did not partake of that
side-dish, because it was full of hairs. (buhokón id.).

_bóhos_, The tough, leathery sheath at the bottom of
betelnut-branches. (cf. baláka--a similar sheath at the bottom of
bamboo-branches; suák--the sheath surrounding the flowerbud of the
coconut palm).

_bóhot_, Sultriness, closeness, heat; to be or become sultry, close,
hot, stuffy, stifling. Nagabóhot ang tiémpo. The weather is close,
sultry, the heat is stifling. Nabohótan gid akó sang ínit. I felt
the close heat very much. (cf. gín-ot).

_boikotíyo_, Boycott: to boycott. (cf. likáw).

_bokabuláryo_, (Sp. vocabulario) Vocabulary, lexicon,
dictionary. (cf. kapulúngan).

_bóka de páto, bokápáto, bóka y páto_, (Sp. boca de pato) A pair of
pincers, nippers, tongs, pliers, (cf. kímpit).

_bokádo_, (Sp. bocado) A mouthful: the bit in a horse's bridle.

_bokál_, (Sp. vocal) Oral, vocal, spoken: voter, member of a
governing body or board; vowel. Ang tersér bokál. The third member of
a Provincial Board. Dagmití ang katapúsan nga bokál. Put the accent
on the last vowel.

_bókbok_, A borer insect as well as the wood-dust produced by its
action.

_bókbok_, To crush, powder, grind, mash, pulverize, comminute, break,
bruise, pound, reduce to fine particles. Bokboká ang bugás. Powder the
hulled rice. Bokbokí akó sing diótay nga maís nga kinokót. Grind some
corn for me. Binókbok nga balátong. Mashed beans. Ibókbok mo akó ánay
siníng dalógdog nga ipamányos ko. Kindly crush this dalógdog-fruit
for me, as I wish to rub myself with it. Figuratively: Natungâtúngà
námon ang dálan nga mapailóngílong kag bokbokán kamí sang ulán. We
had covered about half the distance on the road leading to Iloilo,
when we were overtaken by a pelting shower of rain. (cf. sâsâ, tâtâ,
mômô, lumâ, pusâ).

_bókhon_, Hairy, mixed with--, full of--,--hairs,--filaments. Bókhon
nga tinapay, kán-on, sópas, etc. Bread, rice, soup, etc. mixed with
filaments. (cf. bohók, bohokón).

_bóklod_, A small or low hill, mound, hillock, elevation, knoll,
hummock, (cf. bakólod--a large hill; búkid--a mountain: bánglid--a
slope).

_boklód-bóklod_ A little hilly, uneven, bumpy, up and
down. Boklódbóklod iníng dálan, salúg, etc. This road, floor, etc. is
uneven, is full of little bumps and hollows.

_bóklon_, Knobby, knotty, bumpy, having one or more
hard--bumps,--protuberances,--swellings. Ang may bokól ginatawág nga
bóklon. That which has a knob is called knobby. (cf. bokól).

_bokó_, Knot, joint, especially in a bamboo.

_bokó-bóko_, Knuckle, ankle, wrist-bone, knob, boss, stud.

_bókod_, (B) To take up--, grasp--, with one's fingers, to eat
with one's fingers. Ang kán-on ginabókod. Rice is eaten with the
fingers. Ang mga Amerikáno índì makakibaló magbókod. The Americans
do not know how to eat with their fingers. Ibókod lang ang kán-on,
kay walâ kitá sing kutsára. Simply eat the rice with your fingers,
as we have no spoons. (cf. húngit, hamál, dapá, timó).

_bokód_, (B) A little, as much as one can take up with his
fingers. (cf. hungít, hamál, dapál, timó).

_bokóg_, (H) A small fish-bone; to stick in the throat, obstruct the
throat. Nabokóg akó sang síkag sang ísdà. A fish-bone stuck in my
throat. (cf. síkag).

_bokóg_, (H) Vertebra, spine, backbone, especially in a fish; anything
that stiffens or strengthens. (cf. balískog).

_bokóg_, (B) Width, breadth of cloth, etc. Iníng hénero makitíd sing
bokóg. This cloth is narrow in width.

_bokogón_, Full of small bones. (cf. sikágon).

_bokohón_, Knobby. (bokó: cf. bóklon).

_bókol_, The bud of a flower; a young, small coconut.

_bokól_, Knob, hard protuberance, stud, boss, bump, hard
swelling. (cf. bokóbóko).

_bókon_, To fill a narrow space, be enclosed or shut up within
narrow limits, hang or hover about. Nagabókon ang asó sa sulúd sang
kosína. The smoke fills the whole kitchen. Nagbókon ang kaugút
níya sa sulúd sang íya dúghan. Anger filled his breast--or--his
rage was smothered in his breast (without exploding). Indì mo
pagpabokónan sing asó ang kwárto. Don't allow the room to be filled
with smoke. Pinabokónan sang kaláyo ang baláy sing asó. The fire
filled the house with smoke.

_bokón_, (B) No, not, not that, not so, it is another, it is
otherwise. Bokón ti imáw riá. No it is not so. No, not that
one. (cf. dílì amó inâ).

_bokón-bókon_, (B) Improper, wrong, unbecoming, bad. Bokónbókon ang
ímo patúga. Nagasinutíl ka galí? What you did was wrong. Are you
really so wicked?

_bokóng_ (B) Wrinkle, crease: to wrinkle, crease, be uneven, full
of creases, wrinkled. Nagabokóng ang apóro. The lining is full of
creases. Kaayóha ang pagtahì sang kwélyo, agúd índì magbokóng. Alter
the sewing of the collar, so that it may not wrinkle. Indì mo
pagpabokongón ang apóro sang ímo sáya. Do not let the lining of your
gown get creased. (cf. kubúng, sokóng).

_bókot_, To shut up, imprison, confine, isolate, segregate,
lock--up,--in, pen, coop up. Bokóta ang báboy kag patambokón
mo. Shut up the pig and fatten it. Bokóti akó sing duhá ka báboy,
kay iháwon ko sa sulúd sang duhá ka búlan. Shut up and fatten
for me two pigs, for I am going to slaughter them within two
months. Mga mádre nga binókot. Cloistered nuns. Bokóta siá sa íya
hulút nga índì siá makagwâ. Lock him in his room, so that he cannot
go out. Ginpabókot níla siá sa bilanggóan. They had him--locked
up,--incarcerated,--confined in prison,--imprisoned,--sent to
prison,--put in prison. (cf. húnong, bilánggò).

_bóktot_, A hunchback, humpback, crookback. Ang táo nga may dakô nga
bokól sa likód ginatawág nga bóktot. A man with a hump on his back
is called a hunchback. (cf. búgtot).

_bokwanán_, Knobby, knotty. Bokwanán nga kawáyan, tubó, túdlò,
etc. Knotty--bamboos,--sugar-cane,--fingers, etc. (bokó).

_bóla_, (Sp. bola) Ball; cylinder, roller in a mill.

_bolánte_, (Sp. volante) Fly-wheel.

_bólas_, Semen humanum; genitale virile. Pamólas--to use the expression
"bólas" in anger or contempt, to shout "bólas" at somebody. (cf. bilát
and pamilát--the corresponding terms for the female sex).

_bolkán_, (Sp. volcan) Volcano.

_bólo_, (Sp. bolo) The Philippine large knife called "binángon", bolo.

_bólò_, A kind of very light and slender bamboo.

_bolobáyhon_, Mediocre, middling, ordinary, indifferent, average,
passable, tolerable, pretty, fair, not so bad, so-so, satisfactory,
neither large nor small, neither ugly nor beautiful, neither very
good nor very bad. (cf. báyhon, gáwa),

_bolobód_, (H) Chicken--food, poultry-food, anything to be fed to
poultry. (cf. bobód, bóbod).

_bolók_, A spotted, variegated surface; spotted, dapple, variegated
with spots. Ang leopárdo bolók. The leopard is spotted. Manók nga
bolók. A spotted chicken. (cf. pintókpíntok).

_bolók_, Not good, of inferior quality or workmanship; dull,
backward. Ang mga gintotón-an nga bolók. Dull or backward
pupils. (cf. balót, barót; pákok).

_bololághot_, (H) To be overwhelmed with work, be very busy, unable
to cope with all the work. Daw sa índì akó makaílis sang ákon mga
panápton, kay nagabololághot akó. I have scarcely time to change
my clothes, for I am overwhelmed with work. Nagabololághot lang ang
ákon mga buluhatón. My work is overwhelming, I cannot cope with all
I should do.

_bolónbóon_, To wind, roll (round or on a spool, etc.). Bolónboóna
ang bunáng. Wind the yarn on a spool. (cf. binolónbóon; pólon, púlon).

_bólsa_, (Sp. bolsa) Purse, burse, pocket, money-bag. Kastígo inâ sa
bólsa. That is a drain (lit.: punishment) on the purse. (cf. pálhuk).

_bómba_, (Sp. bomba) A bomb; a pump; to pump. Ibómba ang bómba
sa áwang. Work the pump at the cistern or well. Bombahí akó sing
túbig. Pump up some water for me.

_bombardéo_, (Sp. bombardeo) Bombardment.

_bombardéro_, (Sp. bombardero) Bombardier, drummer.

_bombardíno_, Tenor-horn, euphonium.

_bombáy_, Onion. (cf. sebúyas, báwang).

_bombáy_, A man from Bombay, India; an Indian. Ang mga komersyánte
nga bombáy. Merchants from India. Hindu (Hindoo) merchants.

_bombéro_, (Sp. bombero) Fireman, member of a fire-brigade; a pumper,
one whose duty it is to work at a pump; drummer.

_bombílya_, (Sp. bombilla) Hand-lantern; globe: bulb (of electric
light).

_bómbo_, (Sp. bombo) A drum: to drum, beat a drum. Bombohá
(bagtolá) ang bómbo. Beat the drum. Bombohí ang mga músiko, kay may
asisténsya. Beat the drum to call the musicians together, for their
assistance is required. (cf. garagadáng, tambór).

_bóo_, A piece of anything roundish or cubical, applied to eggs,
various kinds of fruit, stones, etc. (cf. bílog, bátò, bináto, boók,
binántuk, binángto).

_bóog_, (B) To roast--, bake--, broil--, over live coals. Bóg-a
(boóga) ang kamóti. Bake the sweet potato. Bóg-i (boógi) akó sing
kárne, ísdà, ságing, maís, etc. Roast some meat, fish, bananas,
corn, etc. for me. Ibóog akó ánay siníng maís. Kindly roast this corn
for me. Maís nga binóog, unúd nga binóog, etc. Roast--corn,--meat,
etc. (cf. íhaw, súgba).

_boók_, See bóo id.

_boón-bóon_, A small box or receptacle with a lid, especially applied
to receptacles of various shapes and sizes made of bamboo or of
buri-leaves.

_borángkol_, Loosely fitting and out of shape, misshapen, said of
footwear; pieces of leather, etc. tied to the foot instead of boots;
sandal. Borángkol kaáyo ang íya mga sapátos. His shoes are very
ill-fitting.

_bórda_, (Sp. bordar) Embroidery; to embroider. Bordahí ang pányo
ko. Embroider my handkerchief. Ibórda mo akó sinâ. Kindly embroider
that for me. Indì mo pagtahión, kóndì bordahá gid. Don't sew, but
embroider. (cf. pamugták-púgtak).

_bordáhi_, (Sp. bordada) Tack, the tacking of a ship; to wear ship,
tack a ship, to put about; to go to and fro, roam about to no
purpose. (cf. pakádto-pakarí, sarabánda, barumbáda).

_bordón_, (Sp. bordón) A large bass-string in musical instruments;
the chief vein on the right and left extremities of the human body;
the burden or refrain of a song. Ang ugát sa kílid ginatawág nga
bordón. The vein at the side is called bordón. Bordón de las cuérdas. A
game often indulged in at a wake. (Síngsing papanáwa, palibútlibúta
sa hárì kag réina, etc. Pass the ring, send it round to the King and
Queen, etc.).

_borkíl_, (Sp. broquel) Dangling earrings. Arítos nga borkíl. Ear-rings
with a dangling pendant.

_bórlas_, (Sp. borla) Fringe, tassel, tuft.

_bórnos_, (Perhaps from the Sp. burro) Foolish, silly, stupid, but
mostly used in joke, not in contempt. Abáw, táo nga bórnos ikáw! or
Abáw, kabórnos sa ímo! What a silly (donkey, goose) you are!

_bórò_, To mumble, murmur, mutter, grumble, utter indistinct
complaints, talk or complain in a low tone, be pensive, to brood over
wrongs suffered, difficulties to be overcome, etc.; to hiss, fizz,
bubble. May batásan siá sa pagbórò. He has the habit of muttering
and grumbling. Indì ka magbórò tungúd sang diótay nga kalisúd. Don't
murmur and complain on account of a small trouble. (cf. sórò, búog,
burútbúrut, akálakál, sindakál).

_bóro_, See bódo--to salt fish.


_bóro_, (Sp. burro) A game of cards.

_boroboník_, (B) (Probably a corruption of the Sp. muñeca) Doll,
puppet. (cf. molomunyéka, munîmúnì).

_boroboníka_, (B) See boroboník--doll, puppet.

_borô-bórò_, Dim. and Freq. of bórò. Also: to simmer, bubble: fizz,
hiss.

_borók_, (B) See bolók.

_borók-bórok_, Dim. and Freq. of borók, bolók.

_borók-borók_, The cry of a hen. (cf. kákak, katákkaták--cackle;
karakaták, kurukutúk--cluck).

_borón_, (Sp. borron) Blot, blur, stain, smudge: to blot, blur,
run, as ink on old paper or on blotting paper. Nagaborón ang tínta
sa papél. The ink is blurred on the paper. Naboronán ang papél sang
tínta. The paper was blotted with ink.

_borón_, Stout and short, thickset, stumpy. (cf. búdul, pudól).

_bórong_, To blow or puff up or out, to inflate. Ang hángin
nagabórong sang hábul, láyag, etc. The wind inflates the blanket,
fills the sail, etc. Ang hábul, láyag, etc. ginabórong (ginaboróngan)
sang hángin. The blanket, sail, etc. is being puffed out by the
wind. (cf. baróngbaróng).

_bórong_, (B) To spin, etc. See búlung, búrung.

_borót-bórot_, See borô-bórò--to bubble, simmer, hiss.

_bósbos_, Operation, dissection, surgery; to dissect, cut open,
operate upon, perform the caesarian operation. Bosbosá ang bátà sa
kílid sang íya nga ilóy. Perform the caesarian operation. Bosbosí ang
íya kílid. Cut him open at the side. Ibósbos iníng kotsílyo. Use this
knife for the operation. Nabósbos na ang íya apéndise. His appendix
has been cut out. Binósbos sang médiko ang íya apendisítis. He was
operated upon by the surgeon for appendicitis.

_bosína_, (Sp. bocina) Fog-horn, horn, trumpet, hoot, toot, whistle,
loud warning signal; to toot, hoot, blow the whistle, sound the horn
(of an automobile, etc.). (cf. huní, síyak, píto).

_bótas_, (Sp. bota) Boot, shoe, footwear. (cf. sapátos, sapín,
butítos).

_bótbot_, To draw or pull out; to pretend to extract an alleged
splinter, stone, etc. from a person's body in superstitious
practices. Ang babáylan, konó, nagbótbot sing bató, inágsap, biníklan,
etc. sa batíis ni Fuláno. The wizard, it is said, took out a stone,
chip, splinter, etc. from the calf of N.N.'s leg. Ginbotbotán or
binotbotán sang babáylan ang masakít nga bátà sing tátlo ka bató. The
wizard removed three stones from the sick boy's body.

_bóte_, (Sp. bote) Small boat, skiff, canoe, gig, dory.

_botí_, See butí id. (cf. dógsing).

_botíka_, (Sp. botica) A drug store, an apothecary's shop, a chemist's
shop.

_botikáryo_, (Sp. boticario) Druggist, apothecary, chemist.

_botikín_, (Sp. botiquin) Medicine chest.

_botílya_, (Sp. botella) Bottle.

_botín_, (Sp. botín) Spatterdash, spats, leggings, gaiters.

_bótkon_, Arm, forearm; to take by the arm. Ginbótkon níya akó
kag dálhon sa higád. He took me by the arm and led me into a
corner--or--dragged me aside.

_bóto_, (Sp. voto) Vow, voice, vote, suffrage; to vote. Botóha
si Fuláno sa pagkapangúlo-bánwa. Vote for N.N. as Municipal
President. (cf. panáad, sáad; pílì, pilî).

_botó_, Brood, clutch, hatch, young ones, applied to birds; to breed,
get, have or produce young ones. Ang mungâ nga bolók amó ang nagbotó
siníng mga pisô. The spotted hen is the one that hatched these
chickens. Bág-o pa lang nabotó iníng mga pisô. These chickens were
hatched only a short while ago. Walâ pa mabotó ang mga ítlog siníng
mungâ. The eggs of this hen are not yet hatched. Ang mga binotó. The
brood, young ones, young birds, chickens. Ipabotó iníng mga ítlog sa
mungâ. Let these eggs be put under the hen. Pabotohí (pabótwi) akó
siníng duhá ka ítlog sang páto sa ímo mungâ. Have these two duck's
eggs hatched by your hen. Put these two duck's eggs under your hen.


_botól_, The mother-louse. (cf. kúto, kayúmad, lusâ).

_botón_, (Sp. botón) Button. (cf. botónes, pútyong, pítyong).

_botónes_, (Sp. botón) Button, stud. (cf. pútyong, pítyong).

_bótoy_, To be full to bursting point, to throb as a sign of a
near discharge from boils, ulcers, swellings, etc. Nagabótoy
ang ákon hubág. My swelling throbs as if it were well-nigh
bursting. (cf. báknal).

_boyâ_, See buyâ--tied below the waist, slovenly, etc.

_bóya_, (Sp. boya) Buoy, life-buoy, (cf. balísa).

_bóyboy_, To complain of ingratitude or the bad return made for
benefits, to remind one of all the good done to one and the bad
recompense received, to expostulate or remonstrate with. Ang bátà
ginbóyboy sang íya ilóy. The child was taken to task by its mother
for its ingratitude. Boyboyá siá. Expostulate with him. Reprove him
for his ingratitude or remonstrate with him about the wrongness of
his conduct. (cf. túmboy).

_bóy-on_, A fat, protuberant stomach.

_boy-ónan_, Having a fat, protuberant stomach,
pot-bellied. (cf. bóy-on).

_brása_, (Sp. braza) A fathom, two yards, six feet. (cf. dupá).

_bráso_, (Sp. brazo) Arm, especially the upper arm; arm of an arm-chair
and the like. (cf. bótkon, bútkon, halambúyan).

_brilyánte_, (Sp. brillante) Brilliant; diamond. (cf. bató nga
maídlak),

_bríndis_, (Sp. brindis) Drinking one's health; a toast.

_brískas_, (Sp. brisca) A game at cards.

_bróas_, (Sp. broa) Biscuit, cracker. (cf. bískwit).

_brokádo_, (Sp. brocado) Gold or silver brocade.

_brótse_, (Sp. broche) Brooch; clasp; locket.

_búà_, The soft pulp or meat of a sprouting coconut; a kind of
malignant tumour; prolapsus uteri.

_búad_, Increase, augmentation, progeny, offspring; to augment,
increase, multiply. Ang kalabánan sang mga kágaw nagabúad sa támà
nga kadásig. Most of the microbes multiply very rapidly. Iníng túbig
nabuádan (nabuáran) sing madámò nga úlud. Many worms have been bred
in this water. Ang mga báksat kag bitík dílì makabúad sa táo nga
matínlo sing láwas kag panápton. Bugs and fleas cannot breed on a
man that keeps his body and clothes clean. Amó iní ang ginabuáran
sang mga báboy. This is the place where pigs are raised. Amó iní ang
ginapabuáran ko sing mga báboy. Here I am breeding pigs. (cf. pamúad,
buluarán, pabuluarán).

_buád-ad_, To burst--, split--, open, said of rice, peas, beans, corn,
etc., when cooked; also adjective; burst open. Nagbuád-ad ang balátong,
mónggo, kán-on, etc. The beans, monggo, rice, etc. have burst whilst
cooking. Buád-ad nga kán-on. Rice that bursts when cooked. (cf. butî,
búsdik).

_búang_, A lunatic, fool, idiot, ass, etc., etc.; to be or become a
fool, stupid, etc., etc. Sán-o pa ikáw magbúang? Since when did you
become such an ass? Indì mo pagbuángon ang ímo nga kasúbung. Don't
make a fool of your fellow-man. (cf. kólò, tampuháw, kalúndong,
etc.). N.B.--"Búang" appears to be of Chinese origin.

_buáng-buáng_, Dim. of búang. Not quite right in his mind, not quite
normal, not in one's proper senses, etc., etc. (cf. buangít, kólò,
tampuháw, etc.).

_buangít_, A little crazy, half-witted, simpleton, weak-minded.

_buangón_, Foolish, crazy: pertaining to--, proper of--, like--,
a fool.

_buáon_, Pertaining to búà, affected with búà, which see.

_buás_, (H) To-morrow. Buás sa ága. To-morrow morning. Buás sa
hápon. To-morrow afternoon or evening. Buás--or--sa buás mapamanílà
akó. To-morrow I'll go to Manila. (cf. harúm-an).

_búay_, To flow abundantly (of blood, tears, perspiration,
etc.). (cf. búgwak, búswit, busawák, butaróg, tululágay, talabirís).

_búay_, Crumpled up, partially molten and twisted iron after a fire;
to be or become crumpled, etc. through fire. Abáw, nagbúay na galî ang
sin. Alas! I find that the roofing-iron has been crumpled and twisted.

_buáya_, Crocodile, alligator, cayman, caiman. (cf. balangítaw).

_bubón_, Well, cistern; waterhole, bathing-hole. (cf. áwang).

_búbud, bubúd_, See bóbod, bobód.

_bubuháton_, That is to be or should be done; an act of--. Bubuháton
sa Pagtóo. An act of faith. (búhat).

_bubúng, bubungán_, See bobóng, bobongán.

_búdhaw_, Faded, having lost its colour. Nagbúdhaw sa támà nga búnak
ang íya báyò nga maitúm. On account of too much washing his black
jacket faded. Binúdhaw na ang íya sáya nga mapulá sádto. Her skirt
that was red before has now faded.

_búdhì_, Betrayal, treachery, foul play, treason, perfidy,
perfidiousness; to betray, be false to, be faithless,
disloyal. Ginbudhián ni Hudás ang Aton Ginóo. Our Lord was betrayed
by Judas. Indì ka magbúdhì sa ímo isigkatáo. Don't be false to
your neighbor. Ginalaúman ko ang pagtúman níya sinâ sa waláy búdhì
ukón balíbad. I expect him to execute that without treachery or
excuse. Andam ka siníng táo, agúd dílì ka mabudhián níya. Beware of
this man, lest he play you false. (cf. luíb).

_budhión, budhíon_, Treacherous, false, faithless, disloyal, foresworn:
traitor, betrayer. (cf. mabúdhì, maluíb).

_búdhon_, Snivelling, sniveller, one who has a constant running at
the nose. (bohód; bódhon).

_budiáwi_, The spike of some plants, as that of maize: the fruit of
the buri-palm.

_budiawí_. To have or form a spike (budiáwi) of flowers.

_budióng, búdiong_, Trumpet, horn, bugle, sea-shell, conch that may
be blown as a horn.

_búdlang_, A kind of long, reed-like grass, also called bugáng.

_búdlay_, Fatigue, hard work, toil, drudgery; to tire, require great
exertions. Kon magkáli ka sing bubón pagabudlayón ka gid. If you dig a
water-hole you will get very tired. Ginbúdlay or binúdlay níya akó. He
tired me out, he required much work or great exertions from me. Indì mo
siá pagbudlayón (pagpabudlayón) sing támà. Don't overwork him. Don't
tire him out. Ginpangabudlayán ko sing dakô ang pagpatíndog siníng
baláy. I had much work and trouble in putting up this house. Indì
ka magdalá sing kahíkaw sa kinabudlayán sang ibán. Don't envy others
what they get by much exertion. (cf. pangabúdlay, lúyà, rúyà, pául,
kápoy, álay).

_búdlò_, Protruding (of eyes); to protrude, stand out. Nagabúdlò ang
íya mga matá--or--búdlò siá sing matá. His eyes are protruding. He
is pop-eyed.

_búdol_, A kind of jelly fish.

_budóng_, (B) Taciturn, silent, of few words, not talkative,
uncommunicative, shy, bashful, timid, retiring, keeping aloof from
others out of caution or timidity. Budóng nga táo. A taciturn or timid
man. Anó ang ginapabudóng mo? What makes you timid? Why are you so
reserved or retiring? Indì ka magpabudóng. Don't be shy or timid,
(cf. komód, mahípus).

_búdul_, Stocky, stumpy, thickset, fat, stout, low in stature,
but large in circumference; to be or become thickset, etc. Búdul
nga táo. A thickset, stocky, stout man. Nagbúdul siá. He has
grown stout. Nabudúlan akó sa íya. He appeared to me to be rather
corpulent. (cf. pudól, tipúngkò, karibúd, karibudó).

_budyáwi, budyóng_, See budiáwi, budióng.

_buélta_, (Sp. vuelta) Return, coming back; to return, come back,
retrace one's steps. Sán-o man ikáw magabuélta? When are you coming
back? Nakabuélta siá? Has he returned? Sa pagbuélta mo dálhan mo
akó sing tinápay. On your return bring me along some bread. Huy,
sapiór, bueltahón mo akó karón. Hi. chauffeur, come back and fetch
me soon. Húo, pahulamón ko ikáw siníng maléta, ápang ipabuélta mo sa
ákon sa madalî. Yes, I'll lend you this hand-bag, but mind and have
it returned to me soon. Ari na ang maléta nga ginbuélta (ginpabuélta)
níya. Here now is the handbag he brought (sent) back. Naglakát siá
sa Ilóngílong kaína sang ága kag nagbuélta siá siníng hápon. He
walked to Iloilo this morning and came back this afternoon or
evening. (cf. bálik, paúlì, panumbalík, ógpot).

_bueltá-buélta_, To go, walk or pass to and fro, be coming and going
repeatedly. Anó ang ginabueltábuélta mo? What are you walking to and
fro for? Why are you coming and going so often? (cf. balíkbálik).

_buenabísta_, (Sp. buena vista) A fine view; a kind of ornamental
plant of various shapes and sizes and all with beautiful leaves,
found in almost every house-garden.

_buéno_, (Sp. bueno) Good, well, all right. Buéno, tápus na. Good,
that's all. Buéno, lakát na kitá. All right, let us go. (cf. maáyo).

_bugá_, To belch forth, spit out, as a volcano; to chew betelnut,
spit it into the hand, rub it and then apply it as an ointment to a
child, etc. to protect it against catching a cold, stomach-ache or
the like. Ang bolkán nagbugá sing mga bató nga natúnaw sa kaínit. The
volcano threw out molten stones. Bugahí ang bátà sing minamâ. Rub the
baby with chewed betelnut. Ipabugá mo sa íya ang ímo bátà, kay siá
nagamamâ. Hand your baby over to her for a rubbing, for she is chewing
betelnut. Nagsakít ang tiyán sang bátà, kay walâ níla pagbugahí. The
child got a stomach-ache, because they did not massage it with chewed
betelnut.

_búgà_, A kind of whitish, soft sandstone. (cf. dínglè--a darker kind
of sandstone).

_bugâ-búgà, bugâ-bugâ_, Dim. of búgà. Like white sandstone: full
of such sandstone. Inday, batóna akó, kay malápad ang ákon dútà;
bisán bugâbugâ, ápang kargádo sa pasákà. Sweetheart, accept me,
for my lands are extensive; they may be full of white sandstone,
but they are watered by irrigation.

_bugáhay_, To flow over, overflow, flow--out,--off. Nagabugáhay ang
túbig. The water overflows. Sang pagtokád ko sináng bakólod nagbugáhay
gid lang ang ákon bálhas. When I ascended that hill, my perspiration
flowed in streams. Ginpabugáhay níla ang túbig sa talámnan. They
caused the water to flow over the field. Pabugaháya ang túbig. Let
the water flow--or--cause the water to flow. Pabugaháyi ang humáy
sing túbig. Flood the rice-field. (cf. sagáhay, áwas, ílig, balagáhay).

_bugál_, Pride, haughtiness, vainglory, arrogance, loftiness,
insolence, overbearing conduct. Walâ siá sing bugál. There is
no pride in him. Pagbinugál, pagpabugál--to be proud. Indì ka
magpabugál. Don't be proud. Ang mga nagabinugál talamáyon. Proud
people are contemptible. (cf. dayáw, pagkamatinaastaáson).

_bugalán_, Proud, overbearing, insolent, haughty, lofty, vainglorious,
stuck-up, puffed up.

_bugalón_, See bugalán. Also: To be or become proud, etc. Indì ka
magímpon sa mga bugalón, kay bâsì magbugalón ka man. Don't associate
with the proud lest you should become proud yourself. Nabugalonán
akó sa íya. He is too stuck-up for me. He appears to be showing
off. (cf. matinaastaáson).

_bugánà_, Plentiful, abundant, galore: to be abundant, etc. Nagabugánà
na ang kwárta, humáy, ísdà, etc. Money, rice, fish, etc. are now
plentiful. Nabuganáan kamí dídto sang pagkáon. We had plenty to
eat there. Sang isá ka túig nagbugánà ang pinatubás. A year ago the
harvest was abundant. (cf. dagáyà, dagásà, abúnda).

_bugáng_, A reed-like grass. See búdlang.

_buganóy_, A frequent loose stool: to have a frequent loose stool
as people suffering from dysentery or diarrhoea. Nagabuganóy siá. He
has a frequent loose stool. (cf. lupút, panlibáng).

_bugás_, Hulled rice; pimple; to hull or be hulled (of rice). Nagbugás
na ang humáy sa lusóng. The rice in the mortar has been hulled. Ang
duhá ka pásong ginbugás ko sa pándut. I had two bushels of rice hulled
for the feast. Bugasá iníng isá ka gántang. Pound or hull this ganta
of rice. Bugasí akó sing napúlò ka gántang sa mga dumulúaw. Hull me
ten gantas of rice for the visitors. Ginabugasán akó ni Fuláno. I am
supplied with hulled rice by N.N. Binugás mo na ang pilít nga sulumanón
kag ilibusón? Have you hulled glutinous rice for making súman (cooked
rice mixed with sugar and the juice of coconut-meat) and íbus (rice
mixed with the juice of coconut-meat, wrapped up in coconut-leaves
and boiled)? May tátlo ka bugás siá sa guyá níya. He has three pimples
on his face. (cf. humáy, pálay--unhulled rice: kán-on--cooked rice).

_bugás-búgas_, Dim. of bugás. Also: Young, small fruit of the
betelnut palm.

_bugasón_, Pertaining to rice, full of rice; pimpled or spotted as if
with rice-kernels, especially said of diseased pork looking as if a
great number of rice-kernels were imbedded in it. Indì akó makaúyon
sang báboy nga bugasón. I do not like to eat spotted pork.

_búg-at_, Weight, heaviness, ponderousness, heftiness; to be
or become heavy, weighty, ponderous, hefty. A, nagbúg-at na ang
báboy. Well, the pig has become heavy now. Nagbúg-at na ang kárga ko,
kay nagbínhod ang ákon abága. My load feels heavy, because my shoulder
is benumbed. Nabug-atán akó sinâ. That was too heavy for me. Indì ka
magpabúg-at sang ímo láwas kon mapatíbong ka. Don't let yourself be a
dead-weight, when you are carried on a man's shoulders. Fig.: Indì ka
magpabúg-at sang pangabúhì sang ímo mga ginikánan. Don't be a burden
to your parents. Nagbúg-at na kaáyo ang íya pagbátì. His condition
has become very serious. He is very dangerously ill. (cf. tágbong).

_búgaw_, To drive or scare away. Bugáwa ang manók, píspis, kánding,
etc. Drive away the chickens, birds, goats, etc. Bugáwi ang ugá
sang manók. Scare the chickens off the dry rice. Ipabúgaw sa bátà
ang mga kánding sa hardín. Let the boy drive the goats out of
the garden. Binugáwan níla ang humáy sang mga máya. They scared
the maya-birds off the rice-field. Ibúgaw akó ánay siníng mga
manók. Please, drive off these chickens. (cf. tábug, íway, pahalín).

_búgaw_, Pimp, procurer, bawd, go-between, (cf. agwatáto).

_bugáy_, Gift, present, donation, favour; to make a gift or
donation. Ginbugayán siá sang Mahál nga Diós sing madámò nga mga
grásya. He had many graces bestowed upon him by God. Ang mga bugáy
sang Diós nga Espiritú Sánto. The gifts of the Holy Ghost. Ginbugáy
sang Diós sa áton ang Sántos nga Pagtóo. God granted us the gift of
Holy Faith. Iníng makalilípay nga tabô bugáy sang Diós sa ímo. This
joyful event is a favour sent you by God. (cf. hátag, dólot, dúlut,
regálo). (N.B. "bugáy" is almost exclusively used for supernatural
gifts or favours received from God).

_búghà_ (B) To open, cut open. Bughaá ang lubí. Cut open
the coconut. Bughaí akó sing isá ka lubí. Cut open for me one
coconut. Ibúghà akó ánay sináng lubí. Kindly open that coconut for
me. (cf. bukâ, balángkà).

_búghat_, Relapse; to suffer a relapse, fall sick again. Andam
ka, agúd índì ka mabúghat. Take care, lest you have a relapse. Si
Fuláno nga bág-o pa lang magáyo sa balaód nabúghat na, kay walâ siá
magámlig sing maáyo sang íya láwas. N.N. who has lately recovered
from dysentery has had a relapse, because he did not take good care
of himself. (cf. lúkmat).

_bugítbugít_, To flow or trickle in small and frequent quantities,
said of light rain, urine, diarrhoea, or the like. Nagabugítbugít
ang kalibútan. It rains a little at frequent intervals. It is showery
weather.

_búgkos_, A bundle, parcel, fagot, faggot, bale, package, anything tied
together with a string; to tie, bind together, fasten with a string,
make a bundle or parcel of. Bugkosá ang písì, káhoy, pinutús, etc. Tie
the rope, the wood, the parcel, etc. Bugkosi akó sing káhoy nga pilá
ka nahót. Make me a bundle or fagot of a few sticks of wood. Ibúgkos
akó sang ákon kwárta sa ímo nga pányo. Please, tie up my money in
your handkerchief. Gatóng nga binugkosán. Firewood made up in fagots
or bundles. Ang isá ka búgkos nga káhoy, kawáyan nga liníyas, tubó,
tabákò, etc. A bundle of wood, of split bamboo, of sugar-cane, of
tobacco-leaves, etc. (cf. bágtong, putús; binágtong, pinutús).

_búgnà_, Revelation, inspiration; to reveal, inspire. Ang
búgnà (ni) kay San Huán. The revelations of St. John. The
Apocalypse. Ginbugnaán sang Diós si San Huán Ebanhelísta sing
madámò nga mga butáng nga tinágò. God revealed to St. John the
Evangelist many hidden things. Ginbúgnà sang Diós sa mga Sántos ang
madámò nga mga palaabúton. God revealed to the Saints many future
happenings. Nabugnaán ang mga manunúlat sang Bíblia. The writers of
the Bible were inspired.

_búgnak_, To pour down, fall, drop, flow (of rain, tears, etc.;
cf. búnok, púgnak, tágnak, táktak).

_búgnaw_, Cold, chill, chilliness, coolness; frigidity, freshness; to
be or become cool, fresh, frigid, chilly, keen, bleak, raw, nipping,
piercing, bitter, biting, cutting, chill. Ang túbig nagbúgnaw sa
bangâ. The water has cooled in the water-jar. Ginpabúgnaw níla sa
hángin ang túbig nga inínit. They cooled the hot water in the fresh
air. Ipabúgnaw mo akó siníng kapé, kay índì akó kaúyon sang kapé nga
lakás kaínit. Kindly cool this coffee for me, for I do not like coffee
that is too hot. Nabugnawán akó siníng hángin. This wind is quite
refreshing. I feel (comfortably) fresh in this wind. Nagabúgnaw na ang
íya gúgma. His love is growing cold. (cf. túgnaw, lamíg, ramíg, yamíg).

_búgnay_, A kind of tree with edible fruit; its wood is not of much
use, except as firewood, and for making rice-mortars.

_búgno_, To speak to, be on speaking terms with, converse with, have
social relations with, make friends with, make it up. Walâ na gid
silá magbugnohánay siníng duhá ka simána nga naglilígad. They have
not spoken to each other for the last two weeks. Magbúgno ka sa íya
or bugnohá siá. Speak to him. Converse with him. Humalín sang pagsúay
níla sádtong isá ka ádlaw walâ gid silá magbugnohánay. Since their
quarrel the other day they have not spoken to each other. Walâ na silá
pagbugnohánay. They are not on speaking terms any more. (cf. támyaw,
pakigpulóngpúlong, hámbal, abíábi).

_búgnos_, To gather--, collect--, remove--, take away--,
withdraw--, live coals or firewood, so that a fire may not burn
brightly. Bugnosá ang gatóng. Take the firewood off the fire. Bugnosí
ang tiníg-ang. Withdraw the firewood from under the freshly cooked
rice. Diín ka maghalín?--Sa digamohán, kay nagbúgnos akó sang
tiníg-ang. Where do you come from?--From the kitchen, because I have
taken the firewood from under the boiling rice.

_búgnot_, To tear--, pull--, wrench--, drag--, out with some
force. Bugnotá ang íya bohók. Pull out his hair. Bugnotí siá sing
isá ka búknit nga bohók. Tear out a pinch of his hair. Ginbúgnot
níla ang dílà sang báka nga iníhaw. They wrenched out the tongue
of the slaughtered ox. Ibúgnot mo akó sináng haló sa búhò. Please,
drag that iguana out of the hole for me. (cf. hábnus, húnus, gúnut;
lúk-ad; lúkat; gábut, húlbot).

_bugó_, A large-sized kind of maize that requires a rather long time
to ripen (hudyánan). The smaller kind (munáhan) ripens quicker.

_bugô_ (B) Short; brief, curtailed; to shorten, become short. Ginbugô
ko ron ang ímo sóol, súlnga.--Hóod, mayád man, pay pabugoí pa gid ti
sángka pulgáda. (cf. Ginlíp-ot ko na ang ímo pakô, tan-awá.--Hóo, maáyo
man, ápang palip-otí pa gid sing isá ka pulgáda). I have shortened
your sleeve, look here.--Yes, all right, but shorten it by one inch
more. Bugoá ang pagútud sang tápì. Cut the plank short. Bugô nga
bánko, kalát, sulát, etc. A short bench, rope, letter, etc. Bugoón
mo ang sóol sang ákon báyò. Shorten the sleeve of my jacket. Make a
short sleeve for my jacket. (cf. líp-ot).

_búg-ong_, Fat, having plump cheeks, fat-faced. (cf. baragóok).

_bug-óngan_, Of fat--, plump--, cheeks, having puffy cheeks; a kind
of large, fat frog.

_búg-os_, Whole, entire, complete; to do something fully, completely,
thoroughly. Ang búg-os nga panimaláy. The entire family. Sa búg-os
níya nga kusúg. With all his strength. Bug-osá ang ímo hunâhúnà nga
sa Manílà ka makádto. Make up your mind fully, that you will go to
Manila. Bug-osí siá sang ímo pagtábang. Assist him with right good
will. Give him all the help you can--or--that he needs. Ibúg-os mo
ang paghátag sang ímo dútà sa ímo nga apó, kay walâ man ikáw sing
anák nga buhî. Give all your land to your grandson, as you have no
son living. (cf. tanán, bilóg).

_búgras_, To break off, snap asunder, part, as a string or the
like. Nabúgras ang kalát nga nahigót sa bálsa (nahígtan sang
bálsa). The rope to which the ferry was attached snapped in two,
parted. Bugrasá ang hílo. Break off the thread. Bugrasí akó
ánay sang písì siníng pinutús. Kindly break the string of this
parcel. Sa dakô nga kasubô daw sa mabúgras ang mga nahót sang íya
tagiposóon. On account of great sorrow her heart-strings are almost
breaking. Ang kalát mabúgras sa nagamayán. The rope will snap where
it is thinnest. (cf. útud, tígpò, lígtas, búgtò).

_búgrit_, Boaster, braggart, bluffer; to boast, brag, vaunt,
bluff. Daw si Búgrit ka. You are a veritable braggart. Indì
ka magbúgrit (magpabúgrit). Don't boast. Indì mo pagipabúgrit
ang diótay mo nga pagkasampáton. Don't brag about your little
accomplishments. Ginpabúgrit níya ang diótay níya nga tinón-an. He
boasted of his little learning. Indì mo siá pagpabugritán
(pagbugritán). Don't boast in his presence. (cf. hámbug, hádak,
búr-it, wákal, etc.).

_búgrong_, Full-bodied, fleshy, fat, corpulent, stout, obese; to be
or become stout, etc. Nagbúgrong siá. He grew stout. (cf. búg-ong).


_bugróngan_, Very fleshy, very fat, double-chinned, very plump as to
the cheeks. (cf. búgrong).

_búgsak_, To put--, throw--, chuck--, down with some force,
drop violently. Indì nínyo pagibúgsak ang baúl, kóndì ibutáng
sing mahínay. Don't drop the box with violence, but put it down
gently. Ginbúgsak (pinúsdak) níya ang bayóong kag nabúung ang mga
botílya sa sulúd. He threw the bag down and the bottles inside
broke. Bugsakí ang idô sing bató. Throw a stone down on the dog
(with some force). (cf. púsdak, púgsak).

_búgsay_, An oar, paddle, scull; to strike the water with an oar, to
paddle, scull. Bugsayá ang túbig. Beat the water with the oar. Bugsayí
ang bóte. Row the boat. Ibúgsay akó sing diótay nga tión siníng
bóte. Please, row this boat for me for a short time. Paanó ang
pagdúngkà nínyo, sa búgsay ukón sa láyag? How did you reach land,
by means of oars or sails?

_búgsò_, A part, share, division, piece, small heap of meat, fish,
etc.; to divide, portion out, cut in parts, make small heaps of. Bugsoá
ang kárne sing waló ka atádo nga mamísos. Cut the meat in eight pieces
of a peso-worth each. Bugsoí akó sing bále pisítas sináng atádo. Cut me
off a peseta worth of that piece. Ibúgsò akó ánay siníng ísdà. Kindly
cut up this fish for me. Binugsoán níya siá sing bále salapî. He cut
him off a piece worth fifty centavos. (cf. híwà, gulút, gíray, giráy;
dolón, atádo, túmpok).

_búgsok_. Stake, post, upright, driven into the soil for a fence,
etc.; to drive into the soil, plant a post and the like. Binúgsok na
níla ang búgsok. They have driven the post into the ground. Bugsokí
sing halígi iníng búhò. Set up a post in this hole. Ibúgsok mo akó
ánay siníng kawáyan. Kindly drive that bamboo into the ground for
me. Nagbúgsok silá sing Krus sa ibábaw sang linúbngan. They planted
a cross above the grave. Ang solár nga pagapatindogán níla sang bág-o
nga baláy nabugsokán na sing waló ka halígi. The ground on which they
are going to erect the new house has already eight posts set up in it.

_búgtas_, To break, snap (of ropes, etc.). (cf. lúgtas, lígtas,
búgras, búgtò, útud).

_búgtas_, To harm, injure, weaken, enfeeble. Nabugtasán siá sa gútum,
trabáho, úhaw, etc. He was weakened by hunger, work, thirst, etc. Indì
mo pagbudlayón ang báka sing támà, kay básì mabugtasán. Don't give
your ox too much work to do, lest he should come to harm.

_búgtaw_, Awake, waking; to wake, awaken, get up, rise, open one's
eyes after a sleep, be aroused from sleep. Nakabúgtaw (nagbúgtaw)
na siá?--Hóo, kay ginpabúgtaw ko siá. Is he awake now?--Yes, for
I woke him. Búgtaw ka, kay ádlaw na. Wake up, for it is bright
day. Pabugtawá siá. Wake him. Ginbugtawán níya yádtong gáhud. He
was--waked,--woke,--woken,--wakened,--awakened,--roused, by that
noise. He woke up at that noise. Ipabúgtaw akó ánay sa íya. Please wake
him for me. Bugtawí sa buás ang paggalíng sang tubó. Rise tomorrow
in time for the milling of the sugar cane. Rise very early tomorrow
morning for the milling of the sugar cane. (cf. matá, pamúka, agáp).

_búgtò_, (B) Brother, sister; to be brothers or sisters. Nagabulúgtò
silá. They are brothers, they are sisters, they are brother
and sister. Nagpakigbúgtò siá sa ákon. He treated me as a
brother. (cf. útud).

_búgtò_, To break, snap, part, sunder. Indì mo pagbugtoón ang
písì. Don't break the string. Ginbúgtò níla ang talikalâ. They
broke the chain. Indì mo paghúgton ang kalát sing támà, kay básì
mabúgtò. Don't tighten the rope too much, for it may snap. Nabugtoán
kamí sing kalát sang pálò. Our rigging parted. Nabugtoán akó sing
isá ka góta. One of my traces snapped. (cf. búgras, útud, tígpò,
lúgtas, lígtas).

_búgtong_, A kind of shrub similar to dalógdog.

_búgtong_, Only, solitary, exclusive, only specimen of the kind. Ang
búgtong nga Anák sang Diós. The Only Son of God.

_búgtot_, Hunchback, humpback, crookback; to be or make oneself very
small, bend low, back down, show fear, be intimidated. (cf. bóktot).

_bugtotái_, A kind of shrub and tree.

_búgtoy_, Remiss, slack, not tight, not taut, loose, sagging; to be
or become slack, etc., to linger, tarry. (cf. tugák, halúg, pabúgtoy).

_búgwak_, To flow freely, flow in a streamlet, flow profusely (of
menorrhagia, etc.). Nagabúgwak ang dugô sa íya pilás. The blood is
flowing copiously from his wound. (cf. búswit, busawít, busawák;
talabirís, tululágay).

_búgwal_, To thrust, jab, stick, stab, prick, lunge at with an upward
motion. Ibúgwal ang bagát sa haló nga dirâ sa díngding. Jab the pole
against the iguana there on the wall. Bugwalá siá. Lunge at him from
below. (cf. dúgdug, hárog; búngkol, búntal).

_búgway_, To come forth, protrude. Nagbúgway ang tinái sang binunô. The
bowels of the stabbed man protruded. (cf. gíway, gáway).

_búgway_, A small measure or quantity of thread or yarn. (cf. bás-ing,
búknol).

_buhâ_, (B) Wasteful, squandering, extravagant, thriftless, unthrifty,
prodigal, improvident. Buhâ nga táo. A spendthrift.

_buhahâ_, See buhâ. Buhahâ siá nga táo. He is a squanderer,
spendthrift, prodigal, (cf. maúdhà, mainusíkon, mahinguyángon).

_búhang_, Opening, gap, break, breach in
a--dam,--dyke,--embankment,--levee, etc.; to open, breach a dam,
etc. Buhángi ang kahón sang humáy. Make a gap in the bank of the
rice-field. Ginbuhángan níla ang púnud sa subâ. They made a breach in
the river-dyke. Ibúhang akó siníng púnud. Please, open this dyke for
me. Nagasupón gid lang ang túbig dirí, kay walâ sing buhangán. The
water, naturally, collects here, for there is no outlet.

_buhangán_, A breach--, gap--, opening--, in a dam, etc.

_buhát_, Done, accomplished, performed, made. Buhát na ang baláy. The
house is now finished, built. (cf. humán, tápus).

_búhat_, Deed, work, performance, act, action; to do, make, perform,
accomplish, execute, fashion, turn out. Buháti akó sing delárgo,
baúl, binángon, etc. Make me a pair of trousers, a trunk, a bolo,
etc. Ibúhat mo akó sing kálò. Kindly make a hat for me. Iníng
lugár, konó, pagabuhátan níla sing isá ka dakô nga baláy. In this
spot, it is said, they are going to build a large house. Sín-o
ang nagbúhat sinâ?--Akó amó ang nagbúhat.--Ngáa man nga ginbúhat
mo? Who did that?--I did it.--Why did you do it? Usisáon mo sing
maáyo ang mga binuhátan sináng táo. Inquire well into the doings of
that man. Iníng mga káhoy ibúhat ko sa ákon baláy. These trees I'll
make use of to build myself a house. Indì ka magbúhat sinâ. Don't do
that. (cf. hímò, túga). Figuratively: Búhat na kon ginapaúlan ka sang
ságad língkod. Stand up and move about, if you are getting cramped
from sitting long.

_búhat_, Verb. (cf. ngálan, butáng--noun).

_búhay, buháy_, (B) Long protracted (of time); to tarry, to be or
remain long, etc. Búhay na nga--. It is long since--. Nagbúhay ka
sa pagbakál siní. You were a long time buying this. Nabúhay na nga
naghalín siá. It is a long time since he left. Nabuháyan (nabuhayán)
akó sa ímo dídto. You tarried a long time and let me wait there. Indì
na mabúhay kag magaabút ang tingulán. It will not be long before the
rainy season is here. (cf. dúgay).

_buhayán_, A kind of creeper with edible roots.

_buháy-búhay_, (B) Dim. of búhay. A rather long time, during a
considerable space of time. Buháybúhay ang paghulát níya túbtub
nga nadángat níya inâ nga palangakóan. He had to wait quite a long
time before he got that position. Buháybúhay ang íya pagántos
sang balatían. He had to suffer from the disease a considerable
time. (cf. dugáydúgay).

_buháy-buháy_, (B) Presently, shortly, at once, in a moment, in--,
within--, a short time. Karón buháybuháy hapítan ko ikáw. I shall
presently call upon you. I shall visit you soon. Karón buháybuháy
maabút ang koríyo. The mail will be in shortly, within a short
time. (cf. dugáydugáy).

_buhî_, Alive, live, living, quick, existent, not dead; to live,
be alive; to live, stay, reside, have one's abode or residence,
remain. Buhî nga táo. A live man. A vigorous, energetic, alert,
active man. A "live wire". Ang mga buhî kag ang mga minatáy. The
quick (living) and the dead. Buhî pa si Fuláno?--Hóo, buhî pa siá. Is
N.N. still living?--Yes, he is living still. Kútub sang pagsulúd níya
sa pagkamónha nagkabuhî pa siá sing napúlò ka túig. From the time
of her entrance into the order she lived ten years. Ang pagkabuhî
(pagkinabuhî) níla sa íla umá matáwhay kaáyo kag malinóng. They--are
living,--live,--have lived, a very happy and quiet life at their
farm. (cf. búhî; patáy--dead; puyô, lúntad, amoyóng, estár).

_búhì_, To bring back to life, raise to life, resuscitate, revivify,
revive, restore to life; to be or get--free,--loose, to escape
from confinement; to free, release, liberate, let go; to support,
sustain, maintain. Buhíon mo ang bátà ko, kay kon índì, ambót sa
ímo. Bring my baby back to life, for if not, I don't know what will
happen to you. Ginbúhì liwát sang Aton Ginóo si Lásaro. Lazarus was
raised to life again by Our Lord. Nakabúhì ang báboy sa tángkal. The
pig got out of the sty. Buhíi (búy-i) ang mga báka sa buhián. Let
the cattle roam about free--, loose--, in the pasture. Ginbuhían
sang bátà ang píspis sa háwla. The boy let the bird out of the
cage. Nabuhían na ang mga gintotón-an, ang mga binilánggò, etc. The
students have been--dismissed,--given leave to depart (from the
school), the prisoners have been set free, etc. Buhíi (búy-i) ang
binángon. Release your hold on--, drop--, the bolo. Binúy-an (binuhían)
níya ang tulún-an. He dropped the book. Siá amó ang nagabúhì sa íya
mga ginikánan. He is the one that supports his parents. (cf. bánhaw,
luás, gwâ; sagúd, agubáy).

_buhián_, Pasture, open field where domestic animals may graze and
roam about free. (cf. burúy-an).

_búhin_, Diminution, reduction, deduction, subtraction, lessening; to
lessen, diminish, reduce, deduct, subtract, take off. Nagaamát-amát
sang búhin ang humáy. The rice is slowly getting less. Nakabúhin
siá sang arína. He took off some flour. Ginbuhínan níya ang swéldo
sang íya mutsátso, kay matámad, konó. He lowered, docked, the wage of
his servant, for he is lazy, he says. Buhíni ang bilí siní, kay támà
kamahál. Lower, cut, the price of this, for it is too dear. Ibúhin
mo akó sing isá ka pásong nga humáy sa íya párte nga limá ka pásong,
kay may útang siá sa ákon. Please, deduct one bushel of rice from
his share of five bushels, for he is in debt to me. Iníng tambóbo
nga may humáy walâ pa sing búhin. This rice-granary has not yet been
touched (no rice has been taken from it). Nabayáran ko siá sa waláy
búhin. I paid him in full (without haggling on my part or remission
on his). (cf. pakulús, paisót, padítay, patikî, kúpus, íban).

_buhís_, Tax, duty, tribute, toll, license; impost; to pay a tax,
etc. Nakabuhís ikáw sang sédula, contribusyón teritoryál, etc.? Have
you paid your cedula-tax, land-tax, etc.? Húo, bág-o pa lang akó
magbuhís sinâ. Yes, I paid it only a short while ago. Ginbuhisán
níla ang idô. They paid their dog-license. Iníng kwárta ibuhís
ko sa ákon gantángan. I'll use this money to pay the tax on my
ganta-measure. Ginbuhís ko na ang ápat ka mángmang sa ákon sédula,
kay nagparekárgo silá sa ákon (or naparekargohán akó níla) tungúd
sang ákon pagkamoróso. I have paid the four pesos for my cedula,
for they charged me double on account of my being behindhand,--in
arrear,--my not providing myself with a cedula in due time.

_búhò_, Hole, aperture, orifice, depression, cavity, hollow, opening;
to make a hole, etc. Buhói iníng tápì, láta, kahón, dútà, etc. Make
a hole in this plank, tin, box, ground, etc. Binuhóan na níla ang
bulugsókan sang baláy. They have already made the holes in the ground
on which the house-posts are to be set up. Ibúhò akó ánay sing isá
ka láta nga gátas, kay ilakót ko sa kapé. Will you, please, open a
tin of milk for me, because I wish to mix it with the coffee. Pagwaá
ang haló sa íya búhò. Get the iguana out of its hole.

_buhô-buhò_, A small hole, shallow depression, perforation, pore. Ang
mga buhôbúhò sang pánit. The pores of the skin.

_buhô-buhô_, A number of small holes; full of small holes, perforated,
riddled. Ang báyò mo buhôbuhô--or--madámò sing buhôbuhô. Your jacket
is full of small holes.

_buhokán_, One that has thick, bushy hair; hairy, shaggy,
hirsute. (cf. bukhanán).

_buhokón_, See bohokón.

_buisít, buísit_, Ill-starred, unlucky; luckless, unfortunate,
miserable, out of luck; to be or become unfortunate, etc. Nagbuisít
ang íya pangabúhì. His life became miserable. Indì ka magbána sa
kay Fuláno, kay básì mabuisitán ikáw. Don't marry N.N., for you
may be miserable with him. Nabuisitán silá sa karón nga túig sa
íla nga pangúma, kay diótay gid lámang ang íla pinatubás. They were
unlucky this year with their farming for their harvest was very small
indeed. (cf. waláy swérte, maláut sing pálad--or--síng kapaláran,
etc.).

_bukâ_, To open, cut open. Búk-a (bukaá) ang lubí. Open the
coconut. Búk-i akó sing isá ka lubí. Open a coconut for me. Ibukâ akó
ánay siníng lubí, kay ímnon ko ang butóng. Please, cut this coconut
open for me, for I wish to drink the coconut-milk. (cf. balángkà).

_buká_, To break open, burst (of an ulcer or the like). Ang hubág nga
ginpapálì sang manugbúlung nagbuká liwát. The ulcer that was cured
by the doctor has broken open again.


_búkad_, To open, disclose, unfold, undo, discover. Bukára (--áda)
ang pinutús. Undo the parcel. Bukári (--ádi) akó sing isá ka
káha nga abáno. Open a box of cigars for me. Ibúkad mo akó ánay
sing isá ka pakéte nga sigarílyo. Kindly open for me a packet of
cigarettes. (cf. húbad, bulád, ládlad).

_bukád_, Flower, blossom, bloom; to flower, bloom, blossom. Nagabukád
na ang bákong. The bacong-lily is flowering. (cf. búskad, pamúskad,
bukádkad, pamukádkad).

_bukádkad_, To blossom, bloom; flower. Sa búlan sang Máyo madámò nga
mga búlak nagabukádkad (nagapamukádkad). In the month of May many
flowers are in full bloom. (cf. bukád).

_búkag_, Dishevelled, rumpled, loose, unkempt, shaggy; to be or
become dishevelled, etc. Nagabúkag ang ímo bohók. Your hair is
dishevelled. Dî mo pagpabukágon ang ímo bohók. Don't rumple your
hair. Nagabúkag siá, kay mabáskug kaáyo ang almidón sang íya mga
panápton. He cuts an awkward figure, because his clothes are starched
too much. (cf. bukágkag, págpag, burungáyngay).

_bukágkag_, See búkag, págpag, burungáyngay. Nabukágkag iníng
bunáng. This yarn has become entangled. Dî mo pagpabukagkagón ang
bunáng. Don't let the yarn become entangled. Táo nga bukágkag. A man
who has his ideas in disorder, one with an ill-regulated mind.

_bukáka_, The eggs of crabs. Those of the alimángo crab are much
esteemed as food.

_bukáka_, The ripe, burst-open pods of the camunsel tree; to
become ripe, burst open (of the camunsel-fruit). Nagabukáka na ang
kamúnsil. The camunsel-fruit is bursting open. Waláy ángay ang kasádya,
ang kamúnsil kon mamúnga, ang mga soltéro kag dalága nagaalágaw sang
bukáka. There is no pleasure equal to the time when the kamunsel-fruit
ripens; when young lads and maidens fight for the burst-open fruit.

_bukál_, Bubble, froth, foam; to seethe, bubble, froth, boil. Nagabukál
na ang túbig. The water is boiling. Sa tiémpo sang kólera ímnon mo
ang túbig nga pinabukál kag pinabúgnaw sa bangâ. During an epidemic
of cholera you should drink water that has been boiled and cooled in
a water-jar. (cf. akálakál, sindakál; búlà).

_bukalás_, Rough of speech, rough-spoken, coarse of manners; to be
or become rough, coarse.

_bukálong_, (H) To swell, become--swollen,--bloated,--inflated,
to puff up, blow up. Ang balókhan sang báboy kon húypan (huyupán)
sing kagíngking magabukálong. A pig's bladder, if blown up by means
of a bamboo tube, will become a balloon. Ginkagát siá sang kamaláyo sa
písngi kag nagbukálong. He was stung in the cheek by a kamaláyo--wasp
and it swelled up. (cf. hábok, úkad).

_bukálwà_, To issue, come forth, spill, flow over. Nagabukálwà ang
túbig. The water is being spilled or is flowing over. Nagbukálwà
ang íya láway. Saliva flowed from his mouth (in a stream). Dílì
mo pagpabukalwaón ang tinóla. Don't spill the sauce of the
side-dish. Pabukalwaí ang báso sing diótay nga túbig, agúd magtínlò
ang íya bibíg. Spill a little water from the glass, so that its edge
may become clean. Pinabukalwaán níla ang lamésa sing tínta. They
spilt some ink on the table. (cf. álwak, ályak, úlyas, úlyak).

_búk-an_, A tree-worm, grub or larva often found on
trees. (cf. tamílok).

_búk-an, búk-on, etc._ From bukâ--to cut open, etc.

_bukána_, (Sp. boca) Mouth of a river. (cf. gibwangán, gibungán).

_bukárong_, (B) To puff up, blow up, etc. See bukálong.

_bukás_, To open, unfold, unclose, make open, remove any fastening or
obstruction from, as to open a door, a box, a case, etc.; to begin,
commence, open (a school, a bridge, parliament, etc.). Bukasí
ang panteón. Open the mortuary niche. Binukasán (binúksan) akó
sang ganháan sang batâbátà. The servant boy opened the door for
me. Ibukás akó siníng puérta, baúl, bintánà, etc. Please, open this
door, box, window, etc. for me. Sa buás nga ádlaw pagabúksan ang
buluthóan. To-morrow the school will be opened. Classes will commence
(begin) to-morrow. Nabúksan na ang bág-o nga táytay. The new bridge
is now open (to traffic, etc.). (cf. ábri).

_bukás_, Open, agape. Bukás nga sulát. An open letter. (cf. nabúksan
from bukás).

_bukatód_, Summit, crest, top; hill, mountain. (cf. putókputokán,
aliputokan; búkid, bakólod, pukatód).

_bukatorón_, High, steep, hilly, mountainous. (cf. bukatód).

_búkaw_, Owl, night-owl.

_bukáy_, A kind of soft white stone; blond, white, whitish; albino. May
manók akó nga bukáy kag alimbúyug. I have white and black chickens. Ang
mga bukáy kag alimbúyug. The black and the white races. (cf. putî,
albíno, lágtì).

_bukáyò_, Coconut candy, cake of unrefined sugar mixed with shreds
of coconut meat. (cf. bándi).

_bukhanán_, Covered with hair, very hairy, having much hair, hirsute,
shaggy. (cf. bohók, bohokón).

_bukî_, To open a little a parcel, envelope, curtain, etc. in order
to find out what is inside or behind. Bukií kag usisáon mo kon anó
ang sulúd sang pinutús. Open the parcel a little and see what is
inside. Binukî or binukián níya ang sóbre sang ákon sulát. He partly
opened the envelope of my letter. Bukií akó sang kortína. Open the
curtain a little for me. (cf. tukî).

_búkid_, Mountain. (cf. bakólod--hill).

_bukídnon_, Mountaineer, pertaining to mountaineers or people living in
the mountains, coarse, rough, uncultured, stupid, boorish, clownish,
uncouth.

_bukikî_, To open, turn aside, part (as the hair when looking for
lice). Bukikiá ang mga pinaníd sang tulún-an. Turn the leaves of the
book. (cf. bukî, busíksik, busíkad, bulád, hítad).

_bukikís_, Low, mean, boorish, uncultured, unrefined,
ignorant. (cf. bukídnon, manól, burághal, bástos, waláy, tinón-an,
ignoránte).

_bukískis_, See bukikís.

_búklad_, To open, unfold, spread out, as a blanket, the contents of
a parcel and the like. Buklará (--adá) ang hábul, pányo, etc. Unfold
the blanket, handkerchief, etc. Buklarí akó sing hábul nga ginabalígyà
mo, kay kon úyon ko báklon ko. Spread out one of the blankets you are
selling, for if it is to my liking I shall buy it. Ibúklad akó ánay
siníng pányo. Kindly unfold this handkerchief for me. (cf. bílad,
húmlad, bulád).

_búklang_, (B) A rent, tear, hole, especially in women's
dresses. (cf. biháng).

_búklas_, To snatch, tear away, grasp and pull suddenly, seize
with a sudden or swift motion. Ginbúklas sang idô ang kárne nga
ákon ginbítbit. The dog snatched away the meat I was carrying in
my hand. Indî mo pagbuklasón ang mga butáng nga ginahátag sa ímo,
kóndì batónon mo sing mahínay. Don't snatch things given you, but
receive them gently, without haste. Ibúklas akó ánay sang hábul nga
nasabláy sa alámbre. Kindly pull down for me the blanket hanging on
the wire. (cf. sábnit).

_búklas_, Indistinct, not clear (of speech); to speak
indistinctly. (cf. samót).

_búkles_, (Sp. bucle) Parting of the hair.

_búklon_, See bóklon--knobby, etc.

_búknit_, To take hold of with the thumb and fore--or middle--finger,
pinch, pluck. Ginbúknit gid lang níya ang bátà. He just took hold of
the child with his thumb and finger (and pulled it along). Indì mo
pagbuknitón ang ákon báyò. Don't finger my jacket. Buknití siá sa
pakô sang íya báyò. Pluck the sleeve of his jacket. Ibúknit akó sa
íya nga dulúnggan. Please pinch his ear. (cf. píknit).

_búknol_, A small measure of yarn or thread, a skein. Ang isá ka
labág may napúlò ka búknol. A hank has ten skeins. (cf. maréhas).

_bukó_, Knuckle; joint, knot. (bokó id.).

_búkò_, (B) To say, think, intend, plan, utter. Nagbúkò siá nga
sa buás makádto siá sa Ilóngílong. He intends to go to Iloilo
to-morrow. Ginbukóan níya ang pagdúaw sa íya nga tíyà, ápang walâ siá
magdúaw sa íya. He said he would pay a visit to his aunt, but he did
not visit her. Ginabúkò níla nga ----. They gave out that ----. They
intend to ----.

_bukohán_, Knotty, knobby. See bokwanán id.

_búksan_, búksi, etc. From bukás--to open.

_búksing_, (English: boxing) Boxing.

_búkya_, A sea monster, a giant octopus. (cf. kugíta).


_búla_, (Sp. búla) Bull, papal bull.

_búlà_, Foam, froth, spume; to foam, froth, spume (at the
mouth). Nagabúlà ang bábà sang pakâ. The frog emits froth from the
mouth. (búrà id.).

_búla_, Fortune, luck. (Obsolete; buláhan, etc. are derived from it),
(cf. bálà).

_bulád_, To spread out, especially to dry in the sun. Buladá
or bulará ang humáy, ang hábul, etc. Spread out the rice, the
blanket, etc. Bularí ang amákan sing humáy. Spread some rice on the
bamboo-mat. Ibulád akó sang ákon báyò, kay nabasâ. Please put out
my jacket to dry (in the sun), for it is wet. (cf. ládlad, bílad,
banílad).

_buladór_, (Sp. volador) Kite. Palupará or patágba ang ímo buladór. Fly
your kite. (cf. pinakâ, sapísápi, sinángula).

_bulág_, Blind in one eye, one-eyed, but also used to imply total
blindness. (cf. lamón, butá--totally blind).

_búlag_, To deprive of one eye. Nabúlag ang íya nga matá. He lost
one eye, became blind in one eye. Nagbúlag siá sang matá sang idô. He
deprived the dog of one eye. Ginbúlag níya ang matá sang kánding. He
blinded the goat in one eye.

_bulág_, To sever, separate, divorce, part, sunder, put
asunder. Bulagón nínyo ang ínyo nga paghilúngug. Break off from
living together. Magbulágay kamó. Separate from each other. Ginbulág
(ginpabulág) níla ang duhá ka bátà nga nagaáway. They separated the
two fighting boys. Bulagí ang laláki, kay walâ kamó makasál. Separate
from your paramour, for you are not married. Ang ginímpon sang Diós
índì pagbulagón sang táo. What God has joined together, let no man
put asunder. Sa pagbulágay nagagíkan ang kalímot. Separation begets
forgetfulness. "Out of sight, out of mind".

_bulagáw_, Bright red, yellowish; blond, golden, light and fair
(said of hair, eyes, complexion, etc.).

_bulagís_, One having blue eyes, blue-eyed.

_bulágnò_, Blind in one eye, wanting--, lacking--, an eye,
one-eyed. (cf. bulág).

_buláhan_, Happy, blessed, blest, beatified, blissful, felicitous,
fortunate, lucky, favoured; to be or become happy, etc. Sa ulíhi nga
mga ádlaw magabuláhan ka gid, kon magkabuhî ka sing matárung. You will
finally become very happy indeed, if you lead a good life. (cf. baláan,
paláran).

_bulahín_, (B) Anything set apart or kept for another; to set apart,
put aside, reserve, keep for. Bulahiná iníng isá ka pínggan nga kán-on
sa kay tátay. Keep this plate of rice for father. Bulahiní si nánay
sing mamón. Set some cake apart for mother. Ibulahín akó ánay sing duhá
ka bílog nga páhò, kay malúyag akó magkáon sinâ sa buás sa ága sa ákon
pamáhaw. Please keep two mangoes for me, because I wish to eat them
tomorrow morning at my breakfast. (cf. tigána, bílin, turá, salín).

_bulahô_ (H) A disease of the ear that causes an evil-smelling
discharge. (cf. ilíg).

_búlak_, Flower, blossom, bloom; to flower, blossom, bloom. May búlak
na or nagapamúlak na ang kalatsótse. The calachoche has flowers,
is flowering.

_búlak_, Cotton, cotton-plant. (cf. dúldul, búrak).

_bulák-búlak_, Dim. of búlak. Also: Anything resembling a flower;
flower of speech, flowery (of speech).

_buláklak_, A decorated comb as worn in the hair by a bride or by a
girl on some festive occasion.

_buláknit_, To snatch or seize with a rapid motion of the hand,
to grab, to grasp suddenly or with great swiftness. Bulaknitá
ang íya lápis, husáy, relóh, etc. Snatch her pencil, comb, watch,
etc. Ginbuláknit níya ang ákon pányo sa pálhuk ko. He snatched the
handkerchief out of my pocket. Ginbulaknitán akó níya sang ákon
kálò. He suddenly took away my hat. (cf. búklas, sábnit, bulákwit).

_bulákwit_, To snatch, catch, seize, lay hold of, grab, take up,
with great swiftness. Indì mo pagbulakwitón ang bátà. Don't snatch
up the baby with such suddenness. Binulákwit níya ang kólon upúd ang
tiníg-ang kag nalágyo. He caught up the pot of boiling rice and made
off. (cf. buláknit; etc.).

_bulalákaw_, Meteor, falling-star, shooting-star. (cf. bululákaw).

_bulálo_, A shell fish that is a little larger than a búskay.

_bulálo_, A kind of hard, variously coloured stone.


_bulalóy_. Dull, stupid, backward, slow. (cf. gágo, búngaw, pákok,
bághak, bulúk, kulángkuláng).

_bulalóy_, A kind of shell-fish. (cf. bulálò).

_búlan_, Moon, month. Also verb. Nabulánan akó dídto. I was there a
full month.

_búl-an_, búl-on, etc. From buúl--to take.

_bulán-búlan_, Monthly, every month: to do something regularly every
month. Nagabulánbúlan siá magkonpesár. He goes to confession every
month. (cf. binulánbúlan).

_bulán-bulán_, A kind of plant that causes a severe itch, when
its spores are brought in contact with the skin; a kind of small
fish. (cf. nípay, kalahós).

_buláng_, A cock-spur, the small knife fastened to the cock's natural
spur in cock-fighting.

_búlang_ To participate in cock-fighting, to cock-fight, bet or
wager on a cock-fight, cause a cock to fight in the cockpit. Diín
si Fuláno?--Dídto sa bulangán, nagabúlang. Where is N.N.?--He is
there in the cock-pit, cock-fighting. Indì mo pagibúlang iníng
manók, kay alángálang pa. Don't fight this cock in the cockpit,
for its training is not complete yet, it is too young, etc. Indì
náton pagbulángon ang áton manók. We will or must not let our cocks
fight each other. Pasampoká pírme ang duhá ka manók, agúd mahánas,
kay kon mahánas na ibúlang ta silá sa pándut sang bánwa. Get the two
cocks to try their strength against each other constantly in order
to make them expert, for if they are up to it we will fight them in
the cockpit on the town-festival.

_bulangán_, A cock-pit. Walâ na kamí sing bulañgán sa ámon bánwa,
kay tamà katáas sang buhís. We have no longer a cockpit in our town,
for the license-tax is too high.

_bulánon_, Pertaining or referring to the moon; moonlit, moon-blind,
purblind, not seeing well, dim-sighted. Bulánon ang gáb-i sang pagabút
námon dirí. It was a moon-lit night, when we arrived here. Iníng táo
índì makabása, kay bulánon ang íya panúluk. This man cannot read,
for his sight is dim.

_búlas_, See bólas, túros.

_buláug_, To stumble--, step--, fall--, into a hole, a mud-pool,
etc. Mangalókos ka sang ímo sárwal, kay lunángon ang dálan, kag ándam
ka, agúd índì ka makabuláug sa danáw. Tuck up your trousers, for the
road is muddy, and be careful not to step into a puddle. (cf. tádag,
túdag).

_buláw_, To throw or cast an evil spell over, to make sick by an evil
spell, said by the superstitious to exist in various secret places and
mountain recesses. Kon magkádto ka sa mariít nga lugar hípus ka lang,
kay, kon dílì, bulawón ka kon mabululáwon (bululáwon) ka. If you go
to a haunted place, keep quiet, lest a spell of sickness be cast upon
you, if you are liable to be influenced by spells. Binuláw siá, konó,
kay nagsínggit sa tálon. He became sick through a spell, they say,
because he shouted in the jungle.

_buláw_, A kind of fish.

_buláwan_, Gold. Bús-og nga buláwan. Pure gold, solid gold.

_bulawánon_, Golden, gilt, made of gold, shining or precious like gold.

_buláw-búlaw_, A kind of creeper.

_búlbul_, Fine hair, down, feathers. (cf. balahíbo).

_bulbúlan_, Covered with feathers or fine, soft hairs, downy; feathery.

_bulbulón_, Hairy, downy, feathery.

_búldok_, (Perhaps from the English "bulldog") A kind of revolver;
a special breed of swine.

_búlgon_, Having an entirely white eyeball.

_búlhang_, To push through, to force one's way through, pass
unceremoniously through or in front of others. Sang nagasugilánon kamí
nagbúlhang siá sa tungâ námon. As we were talking he rudely passed
between us. Ginbúlhang níya ang mga bisíta. He unceremoniously pushed
through the visitors. Binúlhang sang bahâ ang púnò sang táytay. The
current forced its way through the bridge-head. Dílì mo pagbulhangán
ang prosesyón. Don't cut through--, walk or pass across--, the
procession. (cf. luháng).

_búlhit_, To boast, brag, swagger. (cf. hámbog, búgrit, búr-it, wákal).

_búlhot_, To emit puffs of smoke or air with some noise, to whiff,
puff, fizz, fizzle. Walâ maglupók ang kámara (kámra, rekámara) kóndì
nagbúlhot lang. The mortar did not detonate, but simply fizzled
out. (cf. burhot id.).

_búlhug_, To throw (a spear or lance); to push, pull, drag. Ginbúlhug
(binúlhug) akó níya sa idálum. He pushed or dragged me down.

_bulî_, The back, seat, croup, rump, fundament, buttock: the bottom
of anything. (cf. likód, talúdtud).

_búli_, A red and white spotted sea shell, a larger kind of
búskay. (cf. búskay, mángay, sigáy).

_búli_, To polish, make glossy, make shiny. Bulíha ang patádyong
ko. Put a gloss on my skirt. Patádyong nga binúli. A kind of
glossy skirt. A patádyong that has been starched and made glossy by
beating. (cf. híning, silíng, sílì).

_búli_, To roll (cotton for spinning, etc.). Bulíha ang búlak,
agúd áton pamúdngon. Make the cotton up in rolls, that we may spin
it. (cf. dúli, balólon, lolón).

_búli_, To cover with paste or paint, to plaster, paste over, daub,
smear, spread, overspread, overlay, coat. Bulíha ang sílyo sang
tayóbong. Cover the stamp with tayóbong-paste. Indì mo pagbulíhon
iníng papél sing pintúra. Don't daub this paper with paint. Bulíhi
ang búyò sing ápog. Smear some lime on the búyò-leaf. Ibúli akó ánay
siníng sóbre. Kindly put some paste on this envelope. Ibúli iníng
isá ka púdyot nga ápog sa búyò. Spread this pinch of lime on the
búyò-leaf. (cf. pálhit).

_bulibitóon_, A kind of tree. (cf. bilibitóon).

_bulibitóon_, A kind of starfish.

_bulíbud_, To encircle, coil--, wind--, twist--, put--, around;
to entangle. Nabulibúran (binulibúdan) siá sang kalát. He became
entangled in the rope. (cf. balibód).

_búlid_, To fall down and roll over, to tumble or drop down in a
heap. Nagbúlid siá. He fell and rolled over. Andam ka, agúd índì ka
magbúlid. Look out, lest you should tumble over. (cf. lígid).

_bulíd-bulíd_, Dim. of búlid. (cf. ligídligíd).

_búlig_, A whole stem of bananas having bunches of bananas along it.

_búlig_, To help, assist, aid, lend a hand, give a helping hand, do
or work jointly with another. Bulígi akó. Help me. Binulígan níya siá
sa pagarádo. He helped him to plough. Nagabuligáy, nagabuligánay or
nagabinuligáy silá. They are co-operating, helping each other. Ipabúlig
ko sa ímo ang ákon sologo-ón. I'll let my servant assist you. Kon índì
siá nínyo pagbulígan índì siá makatápus sang íya nga olobráhon. He
cannot finish his work, unless you come to his assistance. Kay
ginbulígan mo akó sa pagpatíndog sang ákon baláy pagabulígan ko man
ikáw sa pagpatíndog sang ímo. Because you assisted me in building my
house I will also help you in erecting yours. (cf. tábang).

_búlig_ Helpmate, help, helper, aid, assistant,
auxiliary. (cf. kabúlig, katímbang).

_bulíkat_, To open, unfold, press open. (cf. bíkat, buríkat).

_bulílaw_, A kind of thornless bamboo with white, yellow and green
stripes, striped, streaky like the bulílaw-bamboo. (buríraw id.).

_bulináw_, A small white fish. Ang íya mga túdlò daw bulináw. Her
fingers look like a bulinao-fish, i.e. they are white and slender.

_bulíng_, (H) Stain, dirt, smudge; to stain, smudge, soil, dirty,
mess, begrime, sully. Nabulingán siá sang bulíng sang kaláhà. He
was smudged with soot from the pan. Indì mo pagibulíng ináng bíro
sa nawóng sang bátà. Don't blacken the face of the baby with that
lampblack. (cf. músing, hígkò, dágtà, buríng).

_bulínga_, Eggs of fishes, roe, spawn, especially of the alimósan,
tabángkò, etc. (cf. burínga, bíhod).

_bulíng-bulíngon_, (H) A little dirty or soiled, rather dirty.

_búlingón_, (H) Soiled, dirty, grimy, smudged, begrimed, stained,
dirtied, messed, sullied. Bulingón ikáw; palígos ka. You are dirty;
take a bath. Bulingón ang kamót mo, segúro nangóot ka sa kólon. Your
hand is dirty; surely you have been groping in the kettle. Bulingón
nga panápton. Soiled linen, clothes to be washed, the wash, clothes
for the wash. (buringón id.).

_bulingót_, Displeased, morose, stern, annoyed, dark-browed, vexed,
put out, sulky, gloomy, glum, offended; to frown, scowl, knit one's
brows, pull a sour face, lower, look--angry,--offended, to pout,
sulk. Indì ka magbulingót. Don't make such a sour face. Ginbulingotán
akó níya. He frowned at me. He gave me an angry look. He looked darkly
at me. (cf. sulingót, suringót, súnggud, kolisáw, korisáw, buringót).

_búlit_, To spot, speck, spatter, stain, soil, fleck with some adhesive
matter. Nabulítan akó sang lúnang. I was covered with mud. Ang pintúra
nagbúlit sang ákon delárgo. The paint spotted my trousers. Indì mo
pagibúlit ang sabáw sa íya nga báyò. Don't spatter his jacket with
sauce. (cf. bulíng, músing, hígkò).

_búlkat_, To perplex, confuse, cross-examine, bewilder by
putting many disconnected questions and the like. Ginbúlkat
(ginbulkátbúlkat) sang abogádo ang testígo. The lawyer tried to
bewilder the witness, cross-examined the witness. Ibúlkat akó sang
pinaháyag sináng táo. Cross-examine that man for me. Try to make him
contradict his statements by putting many questions to him in quick
succession. (cf. pát-aw, lúthò, láktaw).

_bulkát-búlkat_, Dim. of búlkat. Bulkátbulkatá siá kon matúod ang íya
nga ginpaháyag. Put him some perplexing questions to see whether what
he declared is true. (cf. pat-áwpát-aw, luthôlúthò).

_búl-o_, The fat tissue near the ovary and oviduct in hens.

_búlto_, (Sp. bulto) A piece of luggage, case, trunk, box: a carved
or chiselled image or statue; anything bulging; a measure that holds
two bushels of rice.

_buluadán_, Place where animals are bred. (cf. búad, buluarán).

_buluarán_, (H) See buluadán id. (cf. pabuluarán).

_buluágas_, To disintegrate; to disperse. Nagbuluágas ang mga buyúng
sang pagabút sang mga soldádo. The brigands fled or dispersed, when
the soldiers arrived. (cf. buluásag, bulwágas, bulwásag).

_buluásag_, See buluágas, bulúblag.

_bulúblag_, (H) To separate, part, scatter, leave, disjoin, disband,
fall away, disperse. Nagbulúblag na ang mga pamatán-on, kay tápus
na ang dúmug. The young people have dispersed, for the wrestling is
over. (cf. burúblag, bulág).

_bulubungán_, (H) The ridge of a roof, etc. (cf. bubungán, alibungán).

_bulúg_, (B) Short-haired, close-cropped: to cut the hair short, to
crop the hair close. Bulugá ang bohók ko. Cut my hair short. Bulugí
siá sang íya bohók. Cut his hair short. Mapabulúg akó. I am going to
have my hair cut. Ibulúg iníng gúnting sa íya nga bohók. Use this
pair of scissors to cut his hair short. Ibulúg akó ánay sang ákon
bohók. Kindly give me a close crop. (cf. alót).

_bulúg_, Dull, blunt, not sharp, not cutting well. (cf. mahábul).

_búl-ug_, A painful swelling of the testicles.

_búl-ug_, A kind of úbi.

_bulugáhay_, (H) See balagáhay.

_bulugásan_, (H) A receptacle, tin, basket or the like, where hulled
rice is kept for the use of a family. (cf. bugás).

_bulugasán_, (H) A rice-mill, a rice-hulling machine. (bugás).

_bulugasón_, (H) Rice to be hulled and prepared for
food. (cf. bilinhíon--grain to be reserved as seed).

_bulúgkáyog_, (B) Short-cropped, having one's hair cut short,
close-cropped. (cf. alót, bulúg).

_bulugsókan_, (H) A hole, place or piece of ground into which a post
or stake is to be driven for a house, bridge, fence, etc. (búgsok).

_buluhatán_, (H) Place where something is made,
work-shop. Buluhatán-tinápay. A bakery. Buluhatán-sapátos. A
shoe-maker's. Buluhatán-kálò. A hat-maker's shop. (cf. búhat: pábrika).

_buluhatón, buluháton_, (H) That is to be done, duty, task, work,
obligation. (cf. búhat, buháton).

_buluhinán_, (H) What is to be--, or should be--, diminished,
decreased. (cf. búhin, buluhinón).

_buluhinón_, (H) Diminution, decrease; the part, number or amount
that is to be taken from a larger whole.

_buluhísan_, (H) What is to be--, or should be--, taxed, a thing on
which a tax has to be paid; tax, duty, impost, levy. (cf. buhís).

_bulúk_, See bolók.


_bulúksan_, (H) What is to be--, or should be--, opened, as a door,
school, road, parliament, etc. (cf. bukás).

_bululákaw_, Meteor, meteorite, shooting-star, falling
star. (cf. bulalákaw, amorókpok).

_bululáwon_, (H) Liable to fall under a spell of sickness, amenable
to spells. (cf. buláw, mabululáwon).

_bulúlngan_, (H) Hospital, medical bureau, sanitary station, clinic,
office--, office-hours--, of a physician. (cf. bulúng).

_bulúlngon_, (H) A patient, sick person. (cf. bulúng).

_bulunakán_, (H) Laundry, place or room where clothes are
washed. (búnak).

_bulunál_, (H) Rod, whip, stick, riding-crop, cudgel, club,
cane. (burunál id. and both from búnal--to strike, beat, thrash).

_búlung_, (H) To spin, rotate, turn round swiftly; to admire, be
astonished, surprised. Nagabúlung silá sing búlak. They are spinning
cotton. Nabúlung akó nga walâ siá magabút. I was surprised that he
did not come. (cf. búrung id.).

_bulúng_, Medicine, physic, simple, drug, potion, draught, treatment,
nostrum, remedy for a wound or disease; to doctor, heal, physic,
cure, apply a remedy, treat a patient, give medicine. May bulúng
ikáw sa pilás? Have you a remedy for a wound? Ibulúng mo sa íya iníng
ilímnon. Give this draught to him as a remedy. Búlnga siá. Give him
medicine. Heal him. Treat him. Mapabulúng siá sa Ilóngílong. He is
going to see a doctor--or--to get treatment in Iloilo. Ipabulúng ko
siá sa hospitál. I shall send him for treatment to the hospital. Sín-o
ang nagabulúng sa íya? Who is treating him? Sa tanán nga mga balatían
may bulúng, ápang sa kamatáyón walâ. For all bodily ills there is a
remedy, but none for death. (Pamulúng--the Freq. of bulúng).

_bulungán_, (H) A spindle, spinning-wheel. (búlung: burungán id.).

_bulungkawayán_, A kind of tree.

_bulunyágan_, One to be baptized, a catechumen. Pilá ang mga
bulunyágan sang isá ka Sábado? How many baptisms were there on the
Saturday before last? Sín-o ang bulunyágan mo? Whom are you going to
baptize? (cf. binunyágan--a Christian; Christian or baptismal name).

_buluraón_, Gossip, chat, idle talk; to gossip, etc. (cf. búrà,
bura-án).

_bulurdáhan_, What is to be embroidered; embroidery. (cf. bórda,
palamugtákan).

_búlus_, The first onrush of water in a flooded river, a sudden rise
of water; also used as verb. Nabulúsan kamí. We were overtaken by the
flood. Dalî kamó sa pagtabók, agúd índì kamó mabulúsan. Be quick in
crossing the river, that the flood may not come upon you.

_bulús_, To take another's place, to succeed, substitute, take
one's turn. Magbulús ka sa íya sa pagarádo. Now, take his place in
ploughing. Sín-o ang nagbulús sa íya? Who succeeded him? Sa pituádlaw
nga mabulús. Next week. Búsli (bulusí) siá sa pagdalá sang bakág. Take
his place in carrying the basket. Nagbuslánay silá magbítbit sang
maléta. They carried the handbag by turns. (cf. tál-us, salíli).

_bulús_, A bale, full piece, roll of cloth or the like.

_bulús_, Dried leaves of the buri-shoot (ógbos sang burí) used for
making mats.

_bulúsbúlus_, Alternately, by shifts, by turns, turn and turn
about, to do by turns, take turns, to alternate. Magsímba kamó sing
bulúsbúlus. Go to church by turns. Nagbulúsbúlus silá magbayó--or--sa
pagbayó. They took turns at pounding rice. Bulúsbulúsan ta ang pagdalá
sang bakág. Let us carry the basket turn and turn about. Bulúsbulúson
mo ang itúm kag putî sa pagsámay sang ákon báyò. Make black and white
stripes alternate in the design for my jacket or dress.

_bulúsbúsan_, Surgery, operation; operating room; person to be operated
upon. (cf. búsbus--to cut open, dissect).

_bulutángan_, (H) Anything on which an object may be put or
placed. Bulutángan sang abó. An ash-tray. Bulutángan sang
botílya. Bottle-stand. (cf. butáng).

_buluthóan_, A place of reunion, where visitors come together;
a school. (cf. búthò).

_bulutlákan_, Sunrise; East. (cf. bútlak).

_bulutungón_, What is to be, or should be, pulled or drawn,
property to be confiscated: seizable, liable to be seized, taken or
confiscated. (cf. bútong).

_buluyayawón_, (H) Strong language, reproaches, insults, cursing and
swearing, vile or opprobrious terms, raillery; deserving a curse,
execrable. (buyáyaw).

_búlwag_, See búlwang.

_bulwágan_, An opening, a breach.

_bulwágas_, To disintegrate, fall to pieces, be smashed, be shattered;
to disperse. (cf. wás-ag, busáag).

_búlwang_, To open or break--a dam,--a bank,--a dyke,--a levee;
to make a gap in a dyke. Sín-o ang nagbúlwang sang púnud? Who made
the breach in the dyke? Ginbúlwang sang túbig ang pasákà. The water
made a gap in the irrigation dam. Bulwangí ang kahón sa tungâtúngà
sang talámnan. Make an opening in the dyke near the middle of the
field. (cf. búhang, búlhang).

_bulwásag_, See bulwágas.

_búlwat_, To wrench--tear--, drag--, pull--, out by force. Nabúlwat
ang íya nga bútkon. His arm was wrenched out, (was entirely separated
from the shoulder). Bulwatá ang pákpak sang manók nga iníhaw. Tear the
wings off the chicken that has been killed. Ibúlwat mo akó sang páa
sang manók. Please pull off the chicken's leg for me. Nabúlwat ang
bulî sang láta, kólon, etc. The bottom of the tin, kettle, etc. was
torn out.

_búlya_, (Sp. bolear) To pull--, drag--, by jerks, to jerk, push to
and fro. Bulyahá ang pangá túbtub nga masánggì ang sangá. Push and pull
the hooked pole till the branch breaks off the stem. Ginbúlya níya ang
ákon bútkon túbtub nga nangákig akó (túbtub nga nadalá níya akó). He
pulled my arm till I got angry (till he made me go along with him).

_búlya-búlya_, Dim. of búlya. Ginabulyabúlya ang bátà sang íya
nga ilóy. The child is being pulled--, dragged--, along by its
mother. Bulyábulyahá gid ang balágon túbtub nga mabúgtò. Jerk the
stem of the creeper till it breaks.

_bumalántay_, (H) Guard, sentry, sentinel, watcher, observer,
look-out. (bántay).

_bumalása_, Reader. Ang mga bumulása. The reading public. (cf. bása).

_bumaláton_, Recipient, receiver. (cf. báton).

_bumulúksing_, A boxer. (cf. búksing).

_bumulúthò_, (H) School-boy, school-girl; student,
scholar. (cf. búthò).

_bunâ_, (B) Loosely twisted or twined, having loose strands: to twine
loosely. Iníng kalát bunâ. This rope is loosely twisted. Bunaá ang
paglúbid sang kalát. Twist the strands of the rope loosely. (cf. polót,
porót--firmly twisted, twined tightly).

_bún-a_, To make audible exertions or efforts, as of one suffering
from a hard stool and having difficulty in evacuating.

_bún-ag_, (H) Birth, delivery; to bring to light, give birth to,
be delivered of.

_búnak_, To wash by beating water-soaked clothes. Bunáki ang panápton
ko. Wash my clothes. Panápton nga binunákan. Washed clothes. Ibúnak
akó sang ákon pányo. Kindly wash my handkerchief. (cf. labá).

_búnal_, To strike, beat, thrash, whip, flog, scourge, flagellate,
birch, cane, drub, lash, swinge. Bunála siá. Thrash him. Bunáli
siá sa likód. Give him a flogging on his back. Ibúnal mo akó ánay
siníng bátà mo, kay nangáwat siá sing kuárta nga báli napúlò ka
sentimós. Please give this child of your's a beating, for it has stolen
ten centavos. Ibúnal sa kabáyo iníng símsim. Use this bamboo-branch
to beat the horse with. (cf. hánot, lámpús, etc.).

_bunáng_, Yarn, thread. Bunáng nga inágpang. Yarn--in hanks,--by the
hank. (cf. hílo).

_bunáyag_, Open, simple, honest, truthful, true, candid,
straightforward, veracious, sincere, frank, outspoken, ingenuous,
artless, unreserved; kind-hearted, open-hearted. Bunáyag gid siá sing
pamatásan. He is very simple-hearted, simple-minded. (cf. bunáyon).

_bunáyon_, Straight, upright, erect, right, not bent, not curved;
of equal diameter throughout, not tapering; mild, gentle, soft,
simple, artless, guileless. Bunáyon ang íya láwas kag tangâ ang íya
ágtang. His body is straight and his forehead erect. (cf. tádlong,
tanús, bunáyag, bungáyon).

_búnbun_, Detritus, soft sand or mud near or under water, slime,
mire. (cf. bagónbon; lápok).

_búndak_, To thrust--, dig--, stick--, jab--, lunge--, strike--,
with the butt-end of a lance,--rifle,--stick, etc. Bundaká siá sang
bastón. Thrust at him with the end of the stick. Ibúndak sa haló ang
bagát. Jab the iguana with the pole. Ang ibulúndak sang bángkaw. The
butt-end of the lance. (cf. búgsak, púdag, púsad, púsdak, pundákpúndak,
bayó, totô, dúgkal, dúgdug, hárog).

_búndul_, Slow in any way, dull, stolid, deliberate; to be or
become slow, etc. Búndul nga táo. A slow man. Búndul siá magbása,
maglakát, magpangabúdlay, etc. He is slow at reading, walking,
working, etc. Nabundulán akó siníng táo. This man is too slow for
me. (cf. hínay, lágday, pákok).

_búnga_, Fruit; benefit, result, effect, consequence,
issue. (cf. pamúnga, himungá).

_búnga_, The betel-nut palm and its fruit. Búnga sang búnga. The
fruit of the betel-nut palm.

_bungád_, Bald, hairless: to be or become bald. Bungád nga táo. A bald
man. Sán-o pa ikáw magbungád?--Sang pagmasakít ko nagbungád akó. When
did you become bald?--When I was sick I became bald. (cf. upáw).

_búngag_, A hole or cavity in a tree made by insects.

_bungagón, bungágon_, Full of holes, having rotten parts and cavities,
said of a worm-eaten or insect-infested tree.

_bungálngal_, To be a chatterbox, to prate, prattle, chatter, talk
glibly or flippantly.

_bungalngálan_, Indiscreet, one who talks without restraint, letting
out secrets, etc.; a great chatterbox. (cf. buraán, hadakán).

_bungálon_, A kind of grass often cultivated and fed to horses, etc.;
zacate. (cf. kúmpay, sakáte).

_bungán-bungán_, To gush--, jet--, squirt--, spirt--, out, (as water
from a fountain). Nagabungánbungán ang túbig sa tuburán. The water
gushes out of the fountain. (cf. súmpit).

_bungán-bunganán_, Place where water gushes or spirts out, fountain,
source. Sa bungánbunganán sang tuburán. At the very fountain-head,
at the very place where the water gushes out of the ground.

_bungangínit_, Prickly heat, a slight skin-disease. (cf. búnga, ínit).

_bungansíso, bungansísò_, The whale. (cf. balyéna, dúyong).

_bungát_, (B) To utter, give expression to, tell, speak out, say, come
out with. Ibungát mo ang ímo kinahánglan. Say what you want. Bungatí
akó sang ímo nga ginapangáyò. Tell me plainly what you are asking
for. Ginbungát níya sa ákon ang íya nga katuyoán. He told me of his
intention. (cf. tikáb, silíng, púlong, etc.).

_búngaw_, An empty coconut, betel-nut or the like; to be or become
dull, brainless; idiot, fool, dunce, a brainless fellow. Ang mga
búngaw walâ sing pulús. Empty coconuts are of no use. Indì ka
magbinúngaw. Don't act as if you had no brains.

_bungáy-búngay_, The mane of a horse.

_bungáyngay_, Dishevelled, rumpled, in disorder, disarranged (of hair,
etc.). (cf. búkag, burungáyngay).

_bungáyon_, Straight; simple; not tapering. See bunáyon.

_bungáyon_, Not tapering, of equal diameter throughout (of a tube,
pipe, cigar, etc.). (cf. piyósan, payósan--tapering), (bunáyon id.).

_búng-bung_, Very full, brimful, crammed, full to overflowing; to fill
to overflowing, to be or make very full. Bungbungá ang gantángan. Fill
the gantang-measure brimful, full to overflowing.

_búng-bung_, (B) Punch; to punch, strike with the closed fist as with
a hammer. Indì mo siá pagbungbungón. Don't punch him. Ibúngbung mo
akó siní. Please hammer this with your fist. (cf. ómol, súmbag, patók).

_búngday_, To dangle, flow, to fall--, hang down--, loose, said
particularly of hair. Pabungdayá lang ang bohók mo. Simply let your
hair hang down loose. Nagabúngday ang íya bohók. Her hair hangs down
loose. Indì ka magpabúngday sang bohók mo. Don't let your hair down.


_bungdáyan_, Dangling, flowing--, hanging--, falling--, down free,
not bound up, not done up, said especially of hair; to dangle,
etc. Nagabungdáyan (bungdáyan) ang íya bohók or Nagabungdáyan
(bungdáyan) siá sang íya bohók. She wears her hair hanging down
free. Her hair is not bound up. (cf. búngday).

_búngga_, To jump at, charge, pounce--, swoop down--, upon, make a dash
for, but without actually touching the victim. Ginbúngga akó sang amô,
idô, báboy, etc. The monkey, dog, pig, made a jump at me. Bunggahá
siá sa pagpáhug sa íya. Jump at him in order to intimidate (frighten)
him. Binúngga sang talonón ang mangangáyam. The wild pig charged
the hunter.

_búnggit_, A children's game played with shells; to play at búnggit.

_búnggò_, To throw--, shove--, thrust--, push against--, something
hard with some force. Ibúnggò siá sa díngding. Push him against
the wall. Binunggoán ang lamésa sang íya ólo. He knocked his head
against the table. Nabúnggò siá sa bató. He was shoved against the
rock. (cf. súnggò, sántik).

_búnghay, bungháyan_, See búngday, bungdáyan.

_búnghay_, Troop, drove, division, sect, party; to form a division
or party, etc. Ang mga pumulúyò siníng bánwa nagabúnghay sing tátlo
ka partído. The inhabitants of this town form three parties. Ang
búnghay nga makihariánon kag makiangáyon. The royalist and the
democratic party.

_bungíl_, Hare-lip; hare-lipped. (cf. ongî, sungí, óngì, súngì).

_búngka_. An attack, onset, shock, collision, joining battle, first
impact; to attack, come together or meet in combat, to fight a battle,
engage in a quarrel or dispute. Sang úna nga búngka sang áway nga
malapúyut napílas siá. In the first opening of the hand-to-hand battle
he was wounded. Ginbúngka akó níya sa dakâ nga kaákig. He attacked me
with great fury. Indì mo siá pagbungkahón. Don't attack him. Don't
be the aggressor against him. Kútub sang pagdeklarár níla sang géra
nadúgay pa túbtub nga nagbungkahánay silá. From their declaration of
war it was a long time till they joined battle, (till they engaged
in actual fighting).

_búngkag_, To demolish, destroy, dismantle, pull down, take
down. Bungkagá ang baláy. Pull down the house. Dílì mo pagbungkagón ang
káro nga napunihán, kay may kinahánglan pa akó sinâ. Don't dismantle
the decorated car, for I need it again. Bungkagí akó sing isá ka
síya nga dáan, kay himóon ko nga balayán sang isá ka kwádro. Take to
pieces an old chair for me, because I am going to make a picture-frame
of it. Ibúngkag mo akó ánay sang entabládo. Please take down the
stage. (cf. gubâ, láglag).

_búngkag nga ítlog_, An egg that is not quite fresh, the white and
the yolk being mixed.

_búngkal_, To force an entrance, break in, smash in, break open,
a door, etc. See bíngkal id.

_bungkálas_, (H) To rise--, stand up--, suddenly, unceremoniously. Anó
ang ginabungkálas mo? Why are you rising so suddenly? Nagbungkálas
siá (binungkálas siá) sang pagkakítà níya sang mán-og. He rose
quickly on seeing the snake. Indì mo pagbungkalásan kag pagbayáan
ang mga bisíta. Don't rise so unceremoniously and leave your visitors
alone. (cf. bángon, búngkras).

_bungkát-búngkat_, (B) See
bulkát-búlkat. (Bungkátbungkatá--bulkátbulkatá).

_búngkol_, To prod, push--, poke--, thrust against--, dig--, jab--,
with the point of a stick, pole, or the like. Bungkolá ang gangháan
sang hál-o. Push the door to--, push the door open--, with the
rice-pestle. Ibúngkol ang hál-o sa ganháan. Push at the door with
the end of the rice-pestle. (cf. búntal, túmbok).

_búngkos_, A package, bundle; to pack, bundle up, wrap--, make--,
up in a bundle. Bungkosá ang panápton mo. Tie your clothes up in a
bundle. (cf. búgkos, baláhos, bágtong, putús).

_búngkoy_, Large-headed, thick-headed, chuckle-headed, with a swollen
or big head out of proportion to the size of the body; blockhead,
numskull, fool.

_búngkras_, (B) To rise, stand up, get on its legs, from a lying
or sitting position, chiefly applied to animals. Daw sa índì na
makabúngkras iníng kabáyo. It seems that this horse cannot rise
any more. Pabungkrasá ang karabáw. Make the buffalo get on its
legs. Ginbungkrasán kag ginlagás sang idô ang kánding nga nagsulúd
sa pamulákan. The dog rose and chased the goat that had entered
the garden. Búngkras ka. Get up. (Applied to persons "búngkras"
is considered impolite). (cf. bángon).

_búnglay_, A bunch, bundle, package, load (of cogon-grass,
etc.). (cf. búgkos, kólo).

_búngot_, Beard, whiskers.

_bungóton_, Bearded, whiskered, having a beard. (cf. bungtanán).

_búngsad_, To strike--, tap--, the floor with the point of a stick
or the like. Indì mo pagbungsarán (--adán) ang salúg sang ímo
bastón. Don't tap the floor with the point of your stick. Ibúngsad
ang ímo bastón sa salúg. Strike the point of your stick against the
floor. (cf. púsdak--to throw or drop with some force).

_búngsod_, An ant-hill, a little mound.

_búngsod_, To punch, etc. See búngbung. Bungsorá (--odá)--bungbungá.

_bungtanán_, Bearded, whiskered, with a beard. (cf. bungóton).

_búngug_, Mind, head, brain. (cf. bagô, bángog).

_bungúl_, Deaf, hard of hearing, without hearing; to be or become
deaf, lose one's hearing. Nagbungúl siá. He became deaf. He lost his
hearing. Indì ka magpakabungúl. Don't pretend to be deaf. Don't act
the deaf man. (cf. ongô).

_bungúl_, A piece of bamboo, or the like, with the small end cut off.

_bungúl_, To cut off piece by piece, cut--in pieces,--in
lengths. Bungulí sing mga pátdan ang tubó. Cut the sugar-cane in
pieces for planting. (cf. púnggul).

_búngyud_, High ground, plateau; island. (cf. bántud, búngsod,
bóklod, polô).

_búni_, A skin disease, tetter, ringworm. (cf. empéine).

_bunít_, Angle, hook (fish); to angle, hook. Bunitá iníng haroán. Hook
this mud-eel. Isdà nga nabunít (binunít). A fish that has been hooked
(caught by hook). Ipamunít iníng ákon bunít. Go and fish with this
fishing-line of mine. Pamunít--to fish with line and hook. Pamunití
iníng línaw, kay madámò sing ísdà. Angle with line and hook in this
quiet water, for there is plenty of fish in it. (cf. saláit).

_búnkras_, (B) See búngkras.

_búnlak_, The stalk of plants that are composed of various layers
like the banana-stalk. (cf. tinúb-an, úpas, ángkag).

_búnlaw_, To rinse, lave, finish washing or bathing by the use of
clean, fresh water. Bunlawí na lang ang bátà, kay nagakúrug na sa
katúgnaw. Finish off bathing the child by pouring fresh, clean water
over it, for it is trembling with cold. Nakapalígos na akó kag mamúnlaw
na lang akó. I have taken a bath and now I am going to rinse myself
with clean water. Ibúnlaw iníng túbig nga matínlò sa mga panápton
nga linábhan. Use this clean water for rinsing the wash.

_búnlaw_, A medicinal plant.

_búnlot_, To draw--, pull--, drag--, pluck--, lug--, out with some
force, to extract, wrench--, tear--, out. Bunlotá ang búlbul sang
manók. Pluck the chicken. Ginbúnlot níya ang dílà sang báboy, ang
gamót sang káhoy, etc. He tore out the pig's tongue, the tree-root,
etc. (cf. búgnot, húnus, hábnus, gábut).

_bunô_, To stab, prod, stick, pierce, with a sharp instrument. Bún-a
siá. Stab him. Bún-i siá sa kílid. Stab him in the side. Ibunô
ang bángkaw sa báboy. Use the lance to stick the pig with. Ang
binunô kahápon natabangán sa madalî kag naluás na sa katalágman sang
kamatáyon. The one who was stabbed yesterday was given assistance at
once, and is now out of danger of death. (cf. labô--to smite, slash).

_bunóan_, The inclosure in a fish-trap (punút) where the fish are
caught and killed, often by spearing them. (bunô).

_búnok_, Heavy, pouring, drenching rain; to rain heavily. Nagabúnok
ang ulán. The rain is falling heavily. It is pouring. (cf. bagókbok,
bókbok).

_bunót_, (H) The fibre of coconut husks used for making doormats, etc.;
the net-like integument at the bottom of the leaves of some palms.

_búnoy_, Drunk, fuddled; to be or become fuddled, drunk. (cf. hubúg,
lingín, balúng).

_búntal_, See búngkol. Buntalá--bungkolá.

_búntal_, A kind of grass whose fibre is used for hat-making, etc. Kálò
nga búntal. A hat made of the fibre of buntal-grass.

_buntalán_, A place or side of a thing open to blows, thrusts,
waves, etc. Ang buntalán sang subâ. The bank or side of a river
where the current is swiftest. Ang buntalán sang sakayán. The side
of a boat beaten against by the waves. The weather-side opposite the
lee-side. (cf. búntal).

_búntis_, In an advanced stage of child-bearing. See búntit.

_búntis_, Small tweezers for pulling out hairs, etc.

_búntit_, Pregnant, near delivery, big with child; to be pregnant,
be (big) with child at such a stage, that the true state of affairs
is quite noticeable. Búntit siá, índì na matágò. She is evidently
with child; it cannot be hidden any longer. Nagabúntit siá. She
is big with child. Pinabúntit siá ni Fuláno. She was with child by
N.N. (cf. búsong, mábdus, sámbol, búntis, búsyad).

_búntud_, Full, stuffed, crammed, replete, bloated, distended; to
be full, etc. Nagabúntud ang búsong ko. My stomach is (or feels)
full. Indì ka magkáon sinâ, kay básì índì makaúyon ang solóksolók
mo kag mabuntudán ka. Don't eat that, for it may not agree with your
stomach and you may become full of wind (flatulent).

_búntug_, A stye in the eye, a small inflammatory tumour on the edge
of the eye-lid. (cf. síng-it, bínggit).

_búntug_, To bite, strike, said of snakes. Binúntug ang karabáw sang
mán-og. The buffalo was bitten by a snake. Andam ka, agúd índì ka
pagbuntugón sang mán-og. Take care, lest you should be bitten by the
snake. (cf. kagát--to bite in general: sugúd--to sting (of insects).

_búntul_, To throw to the ground, throw another on his back (as in
wrestling). Buntulá siá. Throw him. Binúntul--or--ginbúntul níya si
Fuláno sa salúg. He threw N.N. on his back on the floor. Tilawí siá kon
makabúntul ka sa íya. Try him to see whether you are able to throw him.

_búnyag_, Watering, spraying, sprinkling; baptism, christening;
to water, spray, sprinkle; to baptize, christen. Bunyagí ang
mga tanúm. Sprinkle--, water--, the plants. Iníng bátà walâ pa
mabunyagí. This child has not yet been baptized. Ibúnyag iníng túbig
sa talóng. Sprinkle this water over the egg-plants. Binunyagán nga
bátà, tanúm. A baptized baby, a watered plant. (cf. bautisár).

_búog,_ To be pensive, sad, downcast, despondent, thoughtful,
moping, dejected, heavy-hearted, down-hearted, down-in-the-mouth,
melancholy. Anó ang ginabúog mo? What are you despondent about? Pírme
lang siá nagabúog. He is always downcast. (cf. bórò).

_bupánda,_ (Sp. bufanda) A cloth worn round the neck, a muffler,
comforter. (cf. abláy, ambílay, kúnop).

_búrà,_ To talk much, prate, prattle, be loquacious, to chatter. Indì
mo pagburáon ang mga waláy pulús nga halambalánon. Don't be always
wagging your tongue in useless conversations. Indì mo akó pagburáan
siníng mga kabutigán. Don't din these lying stories into my ears. Anó
na man ang íya nga ginbúrà dirâ? What was he prating about again
over there?

_búrà,_ (B) See búla--to foam (at the mouth etc.); foam, froth.

_burá,_ A children's game played with dalógdog--or búgtong--seeds.

_buraán,_ A chatterbox, prater, prattler, babbler. (cf. diláan,
babáan, hambaléro, hadakán, wakalán).

_burâ-burâ, burâ-búrà,_ Dim. and Freq. of búrà--to chatter, etc.

_burá-búra,_ To hurry, quicken, hasten, urge to be quick. Buráburáha
ang mga bátà, agúd magbulúthò, kay sa madalî na lang mabúksan ang
kláse. Tell the children to make haste to school, for class will open
very soon. (cf. apurá, dalîdálì).

_burághal,_ Coarse, rough, not fine, mean, low, uncultured. (cf. manól,
bástos, barághal, barúbal, bául, bukískis).

_buragós,_ (B) Faded, chafed, fretted; destitute (of
hair). (cf. búdhaw; ugís).

_burágwit,_ To spirt, spurt, squirt (said especially of the evacuations
of one suffering from diarrhoea). (cf. buganóy, bugít-bugít).

_búrak,_ (B) See búlak--cotton, etc.

_burakínta,_ Ill-humoured, bad-tempered, hot-tempered, quick-tempered,
irascible, choleric, testy, touchy, quarrelsome; a termagant, an
irascible, angry, excited woman, an ill-humoured female, a great
and troublesome chatterbox. (cf. búrà, buraán; pikón, kutóskutós,
tarádyon, ádyò).

_burángkol_, See borángkol. Also: Clogs, coarse slippers, boots with
large, unsightly uppers.

_burángos_, Beard, whiskers. (cf. búngot).

_burangóson_. Bearded, whiskered, with a beard. (cf. bungóton,
bungtanán).

_burántoy_, Pregnant, big with child (during the last stage of
child-bearing). Burántoy--or--nagaburántoy na ang búsong níya;
madalî na lang magabátà siá. She is big with child; she will soon
give birth. (cf. sámbol, búsyad, búntis, búntit, mábdus, búsong).

_buráskal_, Rough, unchecked, unrestrained, unbridled (of speech);
to talk without restraint, have an unbridled tongue. Indì
ka magbinuráskal. Don't talk without restraint. Bridle your
tongue. (cf. alád-ad).

_buráw_, (B) To take to oneself, to grasp, grab, appropriate. Burawí
lang ang tanán. Just grab all for yourself. Indì mo pagburawán ang
tinápay, kóndì hatágan mo man ang mga útud mo. Don't grab all the
bread for yourself (Don't hog all the bread), but give some to your
brothers. (cf. pangunyádì, hugákom, ángkon, karipón, kayába).

_búraw_, To make--sleepy,--drowsy, to overcome by sleep. Nagpuláw siá
kagáb-i, búsà binúraw siá nga ádlaw na magmatá. He was up all last
night; therefore he was overcome by drowsiness, and rose very late.

_búrhot_, To fizz out, etc. See búlhot.

_burí_, A kind of large palm.

_burígal_, Very noisy, boisterous, rowdy; to be very noisy,
etc. Anó ang ginaburígal nínyo? Why are you so boisterous? Indì kamó
magburígal--or--magbinurígal. Don't make a racket. Don't be rowdy. Indì
akó nínyo pagburigálan. Don't disturb me with your noise. (cf. gáhud,
galúng, buríghul).

_buríghul_, Noise, din, racket, uproar; to be noisy, rowdy, uproarious,
boisterous; also adjective: boisterous, etc. (cf. burígál)

_buríkat,_ To open, pull asunder, draw apart, unclasp, as a purse,
etc. Burikáta ang mga ilalakúb sang íya matá kag usisáon mo kon sa
diín ang púling. Press his eyelid open and see where the mote is. (In
an obscene sense--aperire vulvam; cf. bíkat, busíkad, busíksik).

_burikínta,_ A termagant, etc. See burakínta.

_burínga,_ See bulínga--roe, spawn.

_buringót,_ See bulingót--to frown, etc.

_buríraw,_ See bulílaw--a kind of thornless bamboo.

_búr-it,_ Boasting, bragging; a boaster, braggart, bluffer; to boast,
bluff, brag, swagger. (cf. kabúr-it, búlhit, wákal, hádak, agrót).

_búrnil, burníl,_ (Sp. bruñir) To polish, burnish, shine, clean,
cleanse. Burnilí ang kandeléro, ang mga sapátos, etc. Polish the
candlestick, the boots, etc. (cf. púlug, híning, bitón, nísnis,
núsnus).

_burnílyo,_ (Sp. bruñidor) Polish; stirring rod; leather-beater.

_buróka,_ Row, riot, noise, trouble, disorder, tumult, excitement;
to be turbulent, noisy, excited, cause a commotion, etc. May buróka,
konó, kagáb-i. Nakabatî ka? There was some excitement (brawl,
riot, tumult, or the like) last night. Did you hear it? Anó ang íla
ginaburóka (ginabinuróka)? Why are they so excited? What is their
trouble? Yádtong hitabô naburokáhan sing dakô. That event caused
great excitement. (cf. gáhud, gamú).

_burokínta,_ A termagant, etc. See burakínta.

_búros,_ To distend, bloat, cause flatulence or cramps in the
stomach by taking beverages in too large quantities, or with food
with which they do not agree. Binúros siá. He is suffering from
flatulence. Kon magkáon ka síng maís nga binóog índì ka maginúm
sing tubâ nga lakás, kay básì buróson ka. When you eat roast
corn don't drink too much toddy, for it may give you cramps in
the stomach. (cf. gúrus. N.B. "búros" and "gúrus" are often used
promiscuously, but "búros" is properly used of an indisposition caused
by drinking too much, whilst "gúrus" applies to an indisposition
caused by eating too much).

_burúblag,_ (B) To disperse, etc. See bulúblag.

_burugáhay_, (B) To flow copiously or profusely, said of tears,
perspiration, etc. Nagaburugáhay gid lang ang íya nga bálhas. He
is pouring with perspiration. (cf. balagáhay, talabirís, tulalágay,
ágay, ílig, áwas).

_burulághot_, (B) To be overwhelmed with work. See bololághot.

_buruláwon_, (B) See bululáwon.

_burunál_, (B) Whip, etc. See bulunál.

_búrung, burungán_, (B) See búlung, bulungán.

_burungáyngay_, (B) Dishevelled. See bungáyngay. (cf. búkag, bukágkag,
págpag).

_búrus_, See búros.

_búrus_, Small blisters, as those raised by prickly heat, by nettles,
by the hairs and seeds of some plants or the like. (cf. gúros).

_burusánggal_, (B) Packed, stuffed, crammed, chock-full,
choke-full; slovenly, untidy, fastened carelessly (of a skirt,
etc.). Burusánggal ang pamatádyong níya. She fastens her skirt
untidily, carelessly. Burusanggalá lang ang ubít mo. Fasten your
skirt anyhow (by tucking in the upper end of the "patádyong" very
quickly and carelessly).

_burusángsang_, (B) See burusánggal).

_burút-búrut_, To bubble, hiss, boil, seethe. (cf. akálakál, sindakál,
bórò, borótbórot).

_burúy-an_, (B) An open pasture, etc. See buhián.

_búsà, búsa_, (H) Therefore, for that reason, on that account. Iníng
hénero mahál, búsà índì akó magbakál siní. This cloth is dear,
therefore I will not buy it. Nagulan, búsà walâ akó makakarí. It
rained and for that reason I could not come.

_busáag_, To smash, shatter, burst, split, tear to pieces. (cf. gubâ,
wás-ag, láglag, ránggà).

_busál_, (Sp. bozal) Muzzle, bit of a bridle; to bridle, muzzle. Busalí
ang kabáyo. Put the bit in the horse's mouth. Pabusalí ang
kabáyo. Provide the horse with a bit. (cf. bokádo).

_busalían_, Charming, enchanting, a spell-binder, one possessing
powers or influence over others; a famous man, a hero.

_busaliánon_, Bewitching, charming, fascinating, captivating,
enchanting; brave, intrepid, heroic.

_busángsang_, To be crammed, stuffed, tight, choke-full, chock-full;
Also adjective: crammed, etc. Nagabusángsang ang sulúd sang bólsa
mo. Your pockets are stuffed with things. Indì mo pagpabusangsangón
ang bólsa mo, kay básì mabíkrat. Don't cram the pocket, for it may
burst. Nabusangsangán ang sáko sang kamúnsil. The bag is crammed--,
bursting with--, choke-full of--, chock-full of--, the fruit of the
camunsel-tree. (cf. báknal, bát-al, gutúk).

_búsaw_, A vegetable poison; the poisonous juice of some plants
like káyus, támbò, kamotingkáhoy, etc. Also verb. Indì ka magkáon
sinâ, kay básì mabúsaw (busáwon) ikáw. Don't eat that or you may
get poisoned. Bás-on ang támbò nga kinídkid (kiníhad) kag púg-an,
agúd makúhà ang íya búsaw. Soak the sliced bamboo-shoot in water and
squeeze it to press out the poison.

_busawák_, To spirt, jet, squirt, flow out with some force, as water
from a tap, blood from an open artery, etc. Nagabusawák gid lang ang
dugô. The blood is spirting out in a stream. (cf. butaróg, búswit,
súmpit).

_busawít_, Dim. of busawák. To spirt slightly, splutter, gurgle.

_busáy_, A precipice, cliff, scarp, steep mountain side, cataract,
water-fall, abyss.

_búsbus_, To cut open; perform the Caesarian operation, etc. See
bósbos.

_búsdik_, To split, burst open, applied to crammed sacks, stuffed
pockets, too tight clothes, etc. Nabúsdik ang sáko. The sack burst
open. Abáw, kabusúg ang ákon, daw sa mabúsdik ang tiyán ko. Why, I am
so full, that my stomach feels like bursting. Sa lakás nga paghingamó
mabúsdik ang sáko. Through too much greed the sack will burst open,
i.e. too much greed leads to misery and poverty.

_busíkad_, To part, press--, pull--, apart, said of hair when searched
for lice, etc., to open--, unclasp--, a purse, etc. Busikára ang ímo
púyo. Open your purse. (cf. buríkat, busíksik, bíkat).

_busíksik_, See busíkad id. Also: to be curious. (cf. busísì).

_busílak_, A hard lime-stone, marble.

_busisáw_, An affection of the urinary organs, causing a person to
urinate frequently, but very little at a time. Ginabusisáw siá. He
has the infirmity busisáw.

_busísì, busîsî_, Curious, inquisitive; prying; to be curious. Busísì
nga táo. A curious or inquisitive man. Indì ka magbusísì or
magbinusísì. Don't be curious. (cf. kutíkutíhon).

_búskad_, (H) To open out, spread, expand, extend, unfold. Ibúskad
or buskará ang pányo. Open the handkerchief. Ginbúskad ko ang
panápton, kay nabasâ. I spread out the clothes, for they had become
wet. Nagabúskad ang búlak. The flower opens. (cf. búkad, bukád, bukâ).

_búskag_. See búskad id.

_búskay_, (B) Small sea-shells, often used by children at
play. (cf. sigáy, mángay, búli).

_búsla_, To remonstrate with, expostulate with, ask an account of,
investigate, demand an explanation of one's conduct, etc. Buslahí
siá sang íya nga ginhímò. Ask him to explain his doings. (cf. súknà,
súkmà).

_búslan_, From bulús. Búsli siá sa pagdalá sang bakág. Take the basket
away from him and carry it yourself.

_búslo_, Prolapsus ani; prominent, goggling (of eyes); to be
prominent (of eyes), to protrude (of the anus, etc.). Búslo ang íya
mga matá. His eyes are prominent, he has goggle eyes. Nagabúslo ang
íya nga ginábut. His anus is (hic et nunc) protruding.

_búslog_, To throw--, thrust--, fling--, down missiles from
above. Buslogí siá sang hál-o. Hurl the rice-pestle down at
him. Ibúslog yanáng kawáyan sa idô. Throw that piece of bamboo down
at the dog. Binuslogán níya akó sang íya bastón. He flung his stick
down at me.

_búslot_, (H) Hole, aperture, opening, rent, gash, fissure,
burst, tear. (cf. lubút, tohók, búhò; though these terms are used
promiscuously for any kind of hole, still they do not properly mean
the same thing. Tohók should be used for a hole made by a piercing
instrument, búhò for holes in the ground, búslot and lubút for
holes in floors, sacks, baskets, etc.) To make a hole, break a hole
through something. Nabúslot ang tabíg, ang sáko, ang pinutús, etc. The
rice-harvesting basket, the sack, the parcel, etc. has a hole in it,
has had a hole broken through it.

_buslutón_, Full of holes. Bakág nga buslutón. A carrier's basket
that is full of holes. (cf. búslot; tohóktohók).

_búso_, (Sp. buzo) A diver.

_bús-og_, Pure, unadulterated, unalloyed, undefiled; solid, not
hollow. (cf. lubús, bilóg, búg-os, túnay, lúnsay, púro, hímpit).

_busón_, (Sp. buzón) Post office box, box for receiving letters,
letter-box, letter-drop, drop-box. Ihúlug ang sulát sa busón. Drop
the letter into the letter-box (cf. sulúdlan sang sulát).

_bústo_, (Sp. busto) A bust.

_busú_, To detect, find out, discover (tricks, cheating, malversations,
etc.). (cf. sapó).

_busúg_. Cramp in the stomach; to cause pain or cramps in the stomach,
etc. Gindúnggò siá sang busúg. He had an attack of cramps in the
stomach. Táo nga binusúg. A man that has stomach cramps. Ang banóg,
ngípon, etc. nagabusúg. The ulcer, tooth, etc. causes pain, gives
agonizing pain. Binúsgan siá. He is suffering from cramps.

_busúg_, Filled, replete, satiated, satisfied, not hungry; to fill,
stuff with food, satisfy one's hunger. Busúg pa akó. I am not
hungry. Nabusúg na akó. I have eaten quite enough. Indì ka magkáon
sing busúg. Don't eat to repletion or satiety.

_búsug_. Very smarting, agonizing, excruciating, painful. Ang kagát
sang iwí-íwi támà kabúsug, kag ang kinádtan magabusúg gid. The sting
of the scorpion is very painful and the place bitten by it gives
great anguish.

_busug-busugán_, The calf of the leg. (cf. batíis, pusupusuán.

_búsuk_, Throw--, drive--, plunge--, hurl--, fling--, cast--,
into. Ginbúsuk níya ang íya lúthang sa túbig. He threw his rifle into
the water. (cf. búgsak; pilák).

_búsung_, (B) Stomach, abdomen; uterus, womb; to be pregnant, be with
child. Nagabúsung siá. She is pregnant, is with child. Masakít ang
búsung ko. I have stomach-ache. (cf. tián, tiyán, solóksolók).

_busúngan_, (B) One with a fat or protuberant stomach, pot-bellied;
big with child, pregnant. (cf. boy-ónan).

_búswang_, To break or burst and discharge, said of swellings and
ulcers. Nagbúswang na ang banóg ko. My ulcer has burst and discharged
its matter. Butangí sing bulúng ang ákon púgsa agúd magabúswang sa
madalì Put some medicine on the ulcer on my back to make it break
soon. Ginpabúswang níla ang púgsa. They forced the ulcer on the back
to break and discharge, they made the ulcer burst.

_búswit_, To spurt, spirt, jet, squirt, gush forth. See busawít,
busawák.

_búsyad_, Near delivery, big with child, (cf. burántoy, sámbol,
húyad, mábdus).

_búsyad_, To fasten loosely, secure untidily (one's dress, especially
applied to a "patádyong"). (cf. buyâ).

_butá_, Blind, sightless; to become totally blind. Nagbutá na
siá? Has he gone quite--, totally--, blind? Has he quite lost his
sight? (cf. lamón).

_butâ_, (B) Full, filled, replenished, charged. Butâ na ang láta. The
can is full. Sang piésta butâ gid ang simbáhan sang mga táo. On the
feast-day the church was quite filled with people. (cf. punô).

_bútà_, (B) To fill, charge, replenish. Butáa ang báso. Fill up the
glass. Ginbútà níya ang ákon báso sing tínto. He charged my glass with
red table-wine. Ibútà mo akó siníng báso. Please fill this glass for
me. (cf. punô).

_butá-búta_, Blindman's buff. Nagahámpang silá sang butábúta. They
are playing blindman's buff. Sín-o ang butábúta? Who is the blind
man? (cf. butá).

_butâ-bútà_, Dim. of butâ. Nearly full; to nearly fill.

_butád_, Dark brown, dun-colored, brown turning nearly black.

_butádo_, Full, satisfied, satiated, replete, not hungry. (From butâ
with a Spanish suffix).

_butáka_, (Sp. butaca) A comfortable, commodious chair, a good seat
in a theatre, etc.

_butakál_, A boar, especially one that is kept for breeding
purposes. (cf. nayón--sow; idík, orók--piglet).

_bút-an, bút-on_, etc. From buút--will, etc.

_but-ánan_, Prudent; wise, intelligent; well-behaved, modest,
docile. (cf. buút; kalágan).

_butáng_, Thing, entity, object, transaction, matter, circumstance,
event, anything that exists or is conceived to exist, as a
separate entity; substantive, noun (grammar). Amó iní ang isá ka
butáng nga ----. This is a thing (an entity, object, etc.) that
----. (cf. walâ--nothing; búhat--verb; ngálan--name; noun).

_butáng_, To put, place, lay. Ibutáng mo ang líbro sa lamésa. Put
the book on the table. Butangi ang lamésa sing pagkáon. Put some
food on the table. Ginbutangán kamí níla sing madámò nga mga
kalisúd. They brought many troubles upon us,--caused us many
difficulties. (cf. atáng, túngtung).

_butáng-bútang_, Slander, calumny, libel; to slander, calumniate,
libel, backbite. Dî mo pagbutángbutángan ang ímong isigkatáo. Slander
not your neighbour. Dî mo pagibutángbútang sa íya inâ. Don't bring
that false accusation against him. (cf. libák--to detract).

_butánhan_, A missile thrown by hand and used in various
games. (cf. batúnhan, máno, manohán).

_butánwan_, (B) To drop, let fall. Andam ka, kay básì mabutánwan mo
ang pínggan. Be careful not to drop the plate. Indì mo pagibutánwan
ang pínggan. Don't be careless and drop the plate. (cf. dágdag, húlug).

_butaróg_, (B) To gush, jet, spurt, spirt, squirt, stream. Nagpámbo
si Fuláno kag nagbutaróg gid lang ang dugô sa íya ilóng. N.N. bled
from the nose and the blood streamed out. Nagabutaróg ang túbig
sa tuburán. The water leaps from the spring in a jet. (cf. súmpit,
busawák, busawít, búswit).

_butás_, (B) Weaned. (cf. lutás).

_bútas_, (B) To wean. Binútas na ang bátà. The child is weaned. Butása
ang bátà. Wean the child from the breast. (cf. lútas).

_búthò_, To visit, frequent; go to school. Buthoá ang masakít, ang
buluthóan, ang ímong tíyò, etc. Visit the sick person, go to school,
pay a visit to your uncle, etc. Nagabúthò siá sa ámon dirí sing makaisá
sa tágsa ka simána. He visits us here once a week. Ibúthò akó ánay
sang ákon nánay. Please pay a visit to my mother. (cf. dúaw, bisíta).

_butí_, (H) Small-pox. (cf. bág-as, hánggà).

_butí_, To frolic, play, gambol, jump about, as dogs, children,
etc. Nagabutí or nagabulutí ang mga bátà. The children are
frolicking. (cf. hámpang, hinúgyaw, sipál).

_butî_, Cracked, split open, burst; to pop, burst with a sound,
as maize when roasted in a pan, etc. Nagbutî ang maís. The maize
burst. Pabutiá ang maís. Let the maize burst. Pop the corn. Buót
ka magkáon sing butî sang maís? Do you like to eat popped
corn? (cf. bitî).

_butî_, A film on the eye, cataract. (cf. bitî; bítlig, kúlap).

_bútiag_, To tell others, make public, let out--, betray--,
secrets, divulge. Indì mo pagibútiag ang mga sekréto. Do not divulge
secrets. Ibútiag sa íla ang íya nga ginhámbal. Tell them what he
said. Ginbútiag níya ang íla kasugtánan nga tinágò. He announced
their secret agreement. (cf. bantálà, pahibaló, paháyag, pabántug,
pabalahúbà).

_butî-bútì_, Dim of butî. To pop, burst, said of corn, etc., when
roasted.

_butíg_, A kind of white pimple or small swelling. Madámò ang
butíg nga nagtúbò sa íya láwas. Many white pimples appeared on his
body. (cf. púnggod).

_butíg_, A lie, falsehood, untruth, deception, invention, fabrication,
perversion of the truth, prevarication, fib; to lie, tell lies,
misstate, misrepresent, belie, pervert, distort, prevaricate,
palter, shuffle, fence, mince the truth, invent, fabricate,
trump up, concoct. Indì ka magbutíg. Don't tell lies. Indì mo akó
pagbutigán. Don't lie to me. Indì mo pagibutíg sa íya ang imo nga
ginhímò. Don't tell him lies about what you did. Ginbutíg lang
níya inâ. He simply told a lie about that. Butíg gid iní; índì akó
magpáti. This is certainly a lie: I don't believe it. (cf. bákak).

_butígis_, Lies, untruths, invented stories. Butígis lang ang
íya nga sinúgid. What he told were mere stories, inventions,
fabrications. (cf. butíg).

_butigón_, A liar, prevaricator, story-teller, fibber; lying,
misleading. (cf. butíg).

_butihón_, (H) Pock-marked, pitted with the scars of small-pox,
suffering from small-pox. (cf. butí; bag-asón, hanggaón).

_butín_, (Sp. botín) Buskin, brogue, halfboot; gaiter, spatterdash;
booty of war, spoils. (cf. butítos).

_butíngting_, Very full or satisfied after partaking of a hearty meal;
to be full, satiated, gorged, glutted. Butíngting na akó. I have
eaten my fill. Nagabutíngting na akó. I am quite full. Pabutingtingá
ang búsung mo. Eat your fill. (cf. busúg).

_bútiog_ To jump, spring, strike (as a snake). Ang mán-og nagbútiog
sa ákon, ápang walâ makaábut. The snake made a jump at me, but did
not reach me. Binutiogán kag binúntug siá sang isá ka mán-og. A snake
struck at him and bit him.

_butíti_, A small poisonous fish; a balloon-fish. It has the
peculiarity of becoming inflated or distended like a balloon, when
attacked or caught and brought out of the water. Hence it is often
used to designate fat, stout, fleshy, large-bellied people. Daw butíti
siá. He is as fat as an inflated butíti-fish.

_butítos_, (Sp. bota, botito) Small boots or shoes; children's
footwear.

_bútkon_, Arm. See bótkon id.

_bútlà_, (B) To cause loathing or nausea, to nauseate, turn one's
stomach, make one's stomach queasy. Ang támbok nagpabútlà sa ákon. The
fat turned my stomach. Binutlaán akó sináng báboy. That pork upset
my stomach,--made me feel queasy. (cf. súm-od, sumó, taká, dígwà).

_bútlak_, To rise (of the sun). Nagbútlak na ang ádlaw. The sun has
risen. Nabutlakán kamí sang ádlaw sang árà kamí sa alipokpokán sang
búkid. The sun rose when we were on the top of the mountain. Indì
pa akó maglakát, kóndì mapabútlak pa akó ánay sang ádlaw. I will
not go yet, but will wait for the rising of the sun. (cf. murâ,
dilág; subáng).

_bútlog_, Protruding, prominent, shining, blazing, lustrous (of eyes);
to have protruding eyes, etc. Nagabútlog ang íya mga matá. His eyes
are lustrous. Ginpabútlog níya sa ákon ang íya mga matá. He looked
at me with blazing eyes. He glared at me. (cf. búdlò).

_bútò_, Membrum virile. (cf. pisót, pitóy).

_butók_, A bundle or bunch tied together, as of vegetables,
tobacco-leaves, etc. (cf. búgkos, búngkos).

_butók_, To make--, force--, (an animal, etc.) to lie down on its
side. Ibutók ang karabáw, kay markahán ta. Force the buffalo down on
the ground, for we are going to mark or brand it. Butokí iníng lugár
sang karabáw. Force the buffalo down in this place.

_butók-bútok_, Dim. of butók. Also: to be constantly at it, do much,
be diligent, assiduous. Indì ka magbutókbútok sang kádlaw, hibî, káon,
óbra, etc. Don't laugh, weep, eat, work, etc. so much. Butókbutóki
ang pagtahî. Be very diligent in sewing. (cf. úkud, písan, bákas).

_butóng_, Coconut milk, the liquid contents of a fresh coconut;
in some places the butóng includes also the meat. Magainúm kitá
sing butóng. We are going to drink coconut milk. Magakáon kitá sing
butóng. We are going to eat coconut meat. Makaúyon akó gid maginúm
sang butóng sang lubí nga limbáhon. I like very much to drink the
milk of the limbáhon-coconut.

_bútong_, To draw, pull, tug. Butónga ang kalát. Pull the
rope. Ginbútong níla ang káble. They pulled the cable. Ibútong akó
ánay siníng písì. Kindly pull this string for me. (cf. gúyud--to drag;
tulúd--to push; dusô--to shove).

_bút-ong_, A dish of rice wrapped in banana leaves and
stewed. (cf. íbus).

_butóng-bútong_, Dim. and Freq. of bútong. Also: A kind of
sugar-candy. It is made from thick molasses and repeatedly drawn out
till it turns white. Hence the name.

_bútse_, (Sp. buche) Crop, craw, maw, first stomach in
chickens. (cf. balón-balonán; kolokotón, batikólon--the gizzard).

_bútse_, A kind of cake made from flour.

_bútud_, Not well cooked, said especially of rice, if too little
water has been used. (cf. alibútdan; balotanóg).

_butúd_, (H) Swollen, inflated, bloated, distended; to be or become
bloated, distended, suffer from wind or flatulence. Nagabutúd
ang búsung ko. My stomach is full of wind. I am suffering from
flatulence. (cf. búntud).

_butúng_, A kind of bamboo. (cf. gutúng).

_bútwà_, To emerge, to rise to the surface from under water. Nalumús
siá, kay nagsálum kag walâ na makabútwà. He drowned, for he dived
and did not rise to the surface again. (cf. útwas, bútwas).

_bútwas_, To raise--, bring up--, to the surface; to rise to the
surface. Butwasá ang taón nga gintágub ko kahápon. Take out of the
water the small fish-trap I put there yesterday. (cf. bútwà).

_bútyag, bútyog_ See bútiag, bútiog.

_buúl_, The heel. (cf. sikí, tikúd).

_buúl_, (B) To take, fetch, bring, carry away, take along with. Búl-a
ang pílak. Take the money. Sín-o ang nagbuúl sang pínggan? Who took
away the plate? Búl-i akó sing túbig. Bring me some water. Búl-i
ang alhíbi sing túbig. Take some water from the tank. Ginbúlan or
binúl-an akó níla sing humáy. They took some rice from me. Indì ka
magbuúl sinâ kon waláy túgut sang tagíya. Don't take that without
permission of the owner. Ibuúl mo akó dídto sang ákon pinutús. Kindly
fetch me my parcel from there. (cf. kúhà).

_buúng_, Broken, smashed, shattered to bits, dashed to pieces, broken
into fragments (said of glass, pottery, etc.).

_búung_, To break into fragments, dash to pieces, shatter to bits,
smash. Nabúung ang kólon. The rice-pot was broken into fragments. Indì
mo pagbuúngon ang garápa. Don't break the decanter. Nabuúngan kamí
sing tátlo ka pínggan. We had three plates broken or three plates
of ours were smashed. Binúung níla ang túbo sang kínke. They broke
the lamp-globe, lamp-chimney. Nabúung ang íya dungúg, pagkadalága,
etc. His reputation was severely injured, her good name was lost, etc.

_buút_ Will, intention, mind, reason, understanding, intelligence;
to will, want, desire, wish, intend, direct, do as one pleases, set
one's heart upon. Anó ang buút mo? What is your will, intention? What
do you want? Iníng bátà walâ pa sing buút. This child has not yet come
to the use of reason. Maáyo siá sing buút. He has good intentions,
has a kind heart. Ang buút ko nga magmaáyo ang ákon anák. It is my
wish that my child should become good. Ginabút-an níya ang tanán nga
kadapátan sa sulúd sang baláy. Everything in the house is subject to
his will or direction. Bút-a na lang siá. Now, just accept him (as your
bridegroom). Ginbút-an níya ang pagpuní sang simbáhan. He directed--,
looked after--, superintended--, the decorating of the church. Nagágaw
siá sang ákon dútà, kay ginbuút níya. He took possession of my land,
because he had set his heart on it. Bátok inâ sa ákon buút. That is
(was) against my wishes (cf. kabubút-on).

_búut_, To quicken--, hasten--, the ripening of fruit by wrapping it up
in leaves or the like and putting it in a sheltered place. Buúta ang
ságing. Quicken the ripening of the bananas by the búut-method. Ibúut
akó ánay sing mga páhò. Kindly ripen some mangoes for me by the
búut-method. Iníng tabungós amó ang pagabuútan ko sing mga páhò. I
shall use this basket for quickening the ripening of mangoes.

_buyâ_, (B) Loose, not well tied or fastened, tied below the waist;
to come loose, etc. Buyâ ang íya nga patádyong. Her skirt is loosely
tied. Nagbuyâ ang íya patádyong. Her skirt came loose. Ginpabuyâ níya
ang ubít sang íya nga patádyong. She loosened the fastening of her
skirt. Indì mo pagpabuyaón ang ímo nga patádyong. Don't loosen your
skirt. (cf. labóy, halúg).

_buyágyag_, To show up, expose, tell others, betray, divulge, make
public, bruit about. Indì mo pagibuyágyag yanáng mga butáng. Don't tell
everybody such things. Ginbuyágyag níya ang kasaypánan ni Fuláno. He
exposed in public N.N.'s mistakes. (cf. bútiag, bútyag, buyásyas).

_búy-an_, See buhían from búhì--to escape, get free, get away. Búy-i
ang mga báka. Let the cattle roam about free. Búy-i ang líbro. Put the
book away. Let go the book. Release your hold on the book. Binúy-an
níya ang ákon kamót. He let go my hand. He unclasped my hand.

_buyán-búyan_, To neglect, postpone, put off, procrastinate,
disregard, pay no attention to. Dílì mo pagbuyánbuyánan
ang ímo mga tulumánon. Don't neglect the performance of
your duties. (N.B. This term is mostly used with the prefix
pa-. Nagpabuyánbúyan siá sa pagkompesár. He neglected--, put off--,
going to confession. Pinabuyánbuyánan níya ang pagtúman sang íya
mga katungdánan. He shirked doing his duty. (cf. patumbáyà, pahámak,
palántang, pasalipótpot).

_buyásyas_, To publish, divulge, etc. See buyágyag.

_buyáyaw_, Cursing, swearing, foul--, strong--, bad--, vituperative--,
language, malediction, malison, imprecation, vituperation, scurrility;
to abuse in strong language, curse, swear, imprecate, scold severely
in opprobrious terms. Nagabuyáyaw siá sa íya nga bátà. She is giving
her child a good scolding. Ginbuyáyaw níya akó. He cursed and swore
at me. Indì mo siá pagbuyayáwon. Don't abuse him in scurrilous
language. Daláyon gid lang silá nagapamuyáyaw dirâ sináng baláy. In
that house over there they are always scolding. (cf. panóloy, panolóy;
pangárà, pamúlag, pamúsa, pamulúgso, púyas).

_búyhan_, (H) _búywan_, (B) From buyó--to accustom, inure.

_búylog_, To accompany, go along with; to sympathize with, share
in. Buylogí siá. Accompany him. Ginbuylogán kamí níla sa ámon mga
kalisúd. They sympathized with us in our difficulties. Madámò nga
mga isigkabanwahánon ang nagbúylog sa íla kasubô. Many of their
townsmen shared in their sorrow. Ibúylog ang ímo hunâhúnà sa ímo
trabáho. Let your thoughts go along with your work i.e. attend to
your work. (cf. upúd).

_búyò_, A kind of vine and its leaves. The latter are chewed together
with the betelnut.

_buyó_, To accustom, inure, habituate, form a habit. Nabuyó
na siá dirâ. He is now accustomed to the life--, the work--,
there, he is now acclimatized. Nabuyó siá sa paginúm sing mga
ilímnon nga makahulúbug. He is in the habit of taking intoxicating
liquors. Pabúyhon (Pabúywon) mo siá dirâ. Get him to feel at home
there. (cf. ánad, hánas).

_buyó-búyo_, Dim. of buyó, mostly constructed with pa--. Indì ka
magpabuyóbúyo sang inúm sing bíno. Don't get in the habit of taking
strong liquors. Pabuyóbuyóha na nga daán ang pagbulág mo sang ímo
ginikánan, kay kon káslon ikáw bayáan mo man. Try to accustom yourself
to living away from your parents, for if you marry you have to leave
them in any case.

_búyok_, To bend, curve, incline, cause to lean; be
prone to, have a--propensity for,--tendency towards,--leaning
to,--proneness,--predisposition,--inclination,--bias,--bent,--set,--turn,--warp.
Buyóka ang lipák. Bend the piece of split bamboo. Ginbúyok níla
ang sangá sang káhoy. They bent the branch of the tree. Mahapús ang
pagbúyok sang kandílà. It is easy to bend a candle. Nabúyok na siá sa
maláut nga batásan. He is now inclined to evil ways, is prone to--,
has a propensity for--, vicious habits. Sang ulíhi nabúyok ang íya
hunâhúnà sa Diós. Finally his thoughts were turned to God. Ibúyok mo
akó siníng baníslak. Kindly bend this lath for me.

_búy-on, buy-ónan_, See bóy-on, boy-ónan.

_búyot_, To grasp firmly, cling to, hold fast, clutch, grip. Buyóti
siá. Cling to him. Ang bátà nagbúyot sang bútkon sang íya amáy. The
child clung to its father's arm. Binuyótan níya ang gamót sang
káhoy. He held fast to the root of the tree. (cf. kápyot, kapút).

_buyótan_, Hold, grasp, grip; something to hold on to, an advantage
or superiority of any kind. Walâ gid akó sing buyótan sa íya. I have
no hold on him. I have no influence with him. (cf. búyot; kaláptan).

_buyúg_, A wasp.

_buyún_, Foolish, ill-mannered; ungrateful.

_buyúng_, Robber, highwayman, brigand, freebooter, bandit, marauder.

_búyung_, To spin, rotate, turn, go round, as a wheel on its axle. Ang
ruéda nagabúyung. The wheel is turning. Pabuyúnga ang galingán sang
maís. Set the maize-mill--going,--in motion. Ipabúyung akó siníng
alíling. Kindly turn this wheel for me. Ang mga bátà nagapabúyung sang
íla mga kasíng. The boys are spinning their tops. (cf. túyub, tíyog).

_buyúy_, Ignorant, uneducated, boorish. (cf. pákok, kagúng, waláy
tinón-an, dílì maálam, binukídnon, umánhon, etc.).




C


_c_, This letter was formerly used after the manner of the Spanish
"c". It had a "k" sound before a, o, u, l, r, and at the end of
syllables and words and an "s" sound before i and e.
In conformity with modern usage "k" and "s" are employed in this
dictionary instead of "c", except in the spelling of some foreign
expressions. Even words of foreign origin are now quite frequently
adapted to suit the modern Visayan orthography and terms like consul,
acacia, concejo, etc. become kónsul, akásya, konsého, etc. Hence
words written with "c" under the old spelling will be found in this
dictionary under "k" or "s".
All historic and sentimental reasons that can be brought forward for
the letter "c" have apparently no weight with the present generation,
whose ideals are uniformity, standardization and practical results
in preference to other considerations.




D


_d_, The letter D in Visayan is pronounced as in English. D after
various prefixes such as pan-, hi-, ha-, etc. is very frequently
either elided, or changed into N, e.g. panáhon (dáhon--leaf); panílap
(dílap--to lick); hinangát (dángat--to reach); hanúmdum (dúmdum--to
remember), etc.
D followed by a suffix is often (especially in Hiligáynon) turned
into R, e.g. tahúron, katahurán, matinahúron (táhud--to respect);
ginsugúran (súgud--to commence); palabuarán (búad--to breed), etc. See
also padóng--paróng; dadâ--darâ; tádung--tárung; tudúk--turúk, etc.

_da_, A particle without very definite meaning. It stands for
"daw"--as, perhaps; for "ta"--so, then, now, well; for "dan"--so it
is, indeed, really, now you have got it, now you understand it, etc.

_dâ_, (H) There, over there, that there. Amó inâ dâ. That there
(is it). (cf. dirâ, dián).

_dáab_, To flame, blaze, flare up. (cf. dábdab).

_dáad_, (B) May it be so, would to God that----, it were well, if--,
etc. (cf. ráad, ráan, kúntà, kuntánì, úntà, untánì).

_dáan_, Old, ancient, antiquated, used, worn, out of date or fashion,
behind the times, primitive, archaic. Dáan na iníng baláy. This is
an old house. Ginhámbal ko iní sa ímo nga dáan. I told you this
before or long ago. Mga dáan na kitá sa kalibútan. We are a long
time in the world, are getting old. Ang Dáan nga Katípan. The Old
Law or Testament. Sa walâ pa nga dáan ----. Beforehand, before it
happened or came about ----. Walâ silá magpahibaló sinâ sa ákon nga
dáan, kóndì karón lang. They did not tell me that before, but only
now. Sang dáan nga mga tinúig dáan man ang mga batásan. In ancient
time there were also ancient customs. Ang dáan ko nga panápton. My
old or worn out clothes. (cf. dumáan, mál-am, tigúlang, sádto ánay,
kinarágto, sinádto, minál-am).

_dáay_, A lump or clod of earth. (cf. pugá, dúl-ay).

_dabá-dába, dabá-dabá_, To flame, blaze, flare up, be on
fire. Nagadabá-dába (nagadabádabá) ang kaláyo. The fire is flaring
up. The flames of fire are shooting up. Padabádabáha ang kaláyo. Stir
the fire, make it burn bright. Padabádabáhi ang kólon sang kaláyo. Make
the fire burn well under the rice-kettle. Ipadabádába akó siníng
kaláyo. Kindly stir this fire for me. (cf. dáab, sáblab; hará-hará,
karábkárab).

_dábdab_, To flare up, etc. (of fire). See dabádába. Ang kaláyo kon
húypon (huyúpon) sing mabáskug magadábdab. Fire, if blown strongly,
will blaze.

_dabó-dábo, dabó-dabó_, (H) Mizzle, drizzle, light rain;
mizzly, drizzly; to drizzle, fall in small drops. Nagadabódábo
or may dabódábo. It drizzles. There is a light rain. Ulán nga
dabódabó. Drizzly rain, mizzle. (cf. talíthi, taríthi, apókapók).

_dábok_, (H) To light--, kindle--, a fire. Dabóka ang kaláyo. Light
the fire. Dabóki akó sing kaláyo sa dapóg. Kindle a fire for me on
the hearth. Idábok mo akó sing kaláyo sa digamohán kay magatíg-ang
akó. Please kindle a fire for me in the kitchen, because I am going
to boil rice. (cf. dáig; túngab, panúngab).

_dabók_, (H) Fire, flame; burning, blazing, afire, on fire. May dabók
sa idálum sang baláy. There is a fire under the house. Ang dabók sang
kaláyo. The flame of fire. (cf. daíg).

_dabokán_, Hearth, fire place, stove, cauldron, boiler,
kettle. (cf. dapóg, abohán, sun-adán, digamohán, lulutoán).

_dabóng_, Stunted, not growing to maturity, not ripening; to become
stunted, etc. Ang humáy nga gintánum námon sang Húlyo nagdabóng, kay
walâ sing ulán. The rice we planted in July was short in the straw,
because there was no rain. (cf. arí-arí, agíl-agíl).

_dábong_, Dense foliage; to be shady, leafy, thick with leaves,
dense with foliage. Ang páhò nagadábong. The mango-tree is thickly
set with leaves, is shady. Padabónga ang káhoy sa pagpulúd sang
iya mga sangá. Make the tree grow thick foliage by pruning its
branches. (cf. gápà).

_dáb-ot_, To make a long arm, stretch out one's arm, to reach something
hanging on a peg or the like. Dab-otá ang báyò sa lánsang. Reach down
the jacket from the nail. Dab-otí akó siníng búlak sa káhoy. Reach
up and pluck me this flower from the tree. Malúyag siá magkúhà sang
estámpa sa díngding, ápang índì siá makadáb-ot. He would like to take
down the picture from the wall, but he cannot reach it. Idáb-ot mo akó
sa madalî sináng mga panápton nga hinaláy sa salabláyan, kay magaulán
sa dílì madúgay. Please take in at once those clothes hanging on the
line, for it is coming on to rain. (cf. lámbut, dángat).

_dadâ_, Aunt. (cf. darâ, tíà, tíyà; batâ--uncle).

_dádà_, (B) To eat, take food. Dadáa ang ságing. Eat the
banana. Ipadádà sa íya ang kán-on. Give him the rice to eat. (cf. káon,
laód).

_dadô_, A young mud-eel, a small haroán.

_dádol_, (B) To use recklessly, handle without regard or consideration,
treat roughly. Gindádol gid lang níya ang bág-o nga mga sapátos sa
mga kabatohán. He wears his new boots quite recklessly in places
where there are rocks. Indì ka magdádol sang diótay mo nga bátà sa
mabúdlay nga dálan. Don't take your small child along over difficult
roads. Indì mo pagdadólon kón diín ka makádto ang bátà nga may hilánat,
kóndì ibílin mo siá sa baláy. Don't take with you wherever you go the
child with the cold, but leave it at home. Gindádol níya sa lúnang
ang matahúm níya nga sinélas. He dragged his beautiful slippers
(regardlessly) through the mud. (cf. gánoy, gúyud).

_dadól-dádol_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of dádol. Ginadadóldádol níya ang
káro nga íya ginhulám. He is using roughly the cart he borrowed.

_dáet_, Peace, friendliness, amity, concord, harmony, amicableness,
good social relations; to be at peace with, have good social relations,
be on good terms with, etc. Kon magdaétay kamó masádya kamó. If you
live together in peace you will be happy. Walâ sing dáet sa siní nga
baláy, daláyon gid lang silá nagasulúay. There is no peace in this
family, they are always quarrelling. Daéti si Fuláno. Be friendly
towards N.N. Make peace with N.N. Dî mo pagdaétan ang mga maláut
sing pamatásan. Don't enter into friendly relations with men of bad
habits. (cf. hidáit).

_dága_, (Sp. daga) Dagger, poniard, stiletto. (cf. íwà, súndang,
pinútì).

_dágà_, Clay, clayey soil.

_dágà_, A sacrifice to idols; human sacrifice; the killing and eating
of pigs, chickens, etc. by the superstitious; to sacrifice to idols or
in superstitious practices. Dákpa ang kánding, kay idágà sa minahán
(dulangán). Catch the goat, for we will sacrifice it for the success
of the mine. Ang íla pándut gindagáan níla sing duhá ka báboy. They
sacrificed two pigs at their feast. (cf. hálad).

_dagâ_, A victim, sacrifice, immolation. (cf. dágà, hálad, hinálad).

_dagáang_, Scarlet, bright red, glaring red, visible from a great
distance; to be scarlet, be of a bright red colour, be conspicuous,
be visible from afar. (cf. dagángdang).

_dagáas_, To murmur; purl; sough, etc. See dagánas. (cf. hugánas).

_dagâ-dágà_ Dim. of dágà--clay. Also: Wet, moist, damp, dank, humid,
well watered. (cf. basâ, mabasâ, dágnà).

_dagâ-dagáon_, Wet, etc. See dagâ-dágà id.

_dagáhay_, To flow or boil over. (cf. sagáhay).

_dagáhay_, (B) A rumbling sound caused by wind in the intestines,
borborygmus, borborygm; to emit such a sound, to have a
barking stomach. Nagadagáhay ang íya solóksolók. His stomach is
rumbling. (cf. dagóok, dághob, dagúob, dagúbdub).

_dagáldal_, To clatter, rattle, rumble, as a cart over stones or the
like. Ang káro nagadagáldal sa kabatohán. The cart is clattering
over the stony ground. Indì mo pagpadagaldalón ang káro, kóndì
ilikáw mo siá sa mga bató. Don't make the cart rattle so much, but
keep it off the stones. Dílì mo ipaági ang káro sa mga bató, agúd
índì magdagáldal. Don't drive the cart over stones, lest it should
rattle. (cf. kadálkadál, rungkádul, tumbôtúmbò, dagóldagól, dagóldol).

_dagámi_, Straw, especially rice-straw.

_dagánas_, Murmur, babble, purl, the noise of rushing water; to murmur,
rush, babble, purl, run by noisily (of water); to sigh, sough, whistle,
moan, howl (of wind; to rustle (of dry leaves, etc.). (cf. dagáas,
hugánas).

_dagándan_, A fence of horizontal split bamboo fastened to posts
about a yard apart; to make such a fence. Dagandaní ang sa idálum
sang baláy, ang pamulákan, etc. Make a dagándan-fence around the
lower part of the house, around the flower-garden, etc. Dagandaná
iníng mga kawáyan. Prepare this bamboo for a dagándan-fence or make
a dagándan-fence of it. Idagándan iníng mga kawáyan. Use this bamboo
for making a dagándan-fence. Diín si tátay mo?--Nagadagándan siá sang
talámnan. Where is your father?--He is making a dagándan-fence round
the field. (cf. síklat--a fence of vertical split bamboo).

_dagándan_, To step quickly down a ladder, run quickly
down-stairs. (cf. dalándan).

_dagangbúlan_, March, the month of March. (cf. márso).

_dagángdang_, Bright red, scarlet, etc. See dagáang id. Nagadagáang gid
(nagadagángdang gid) ang íya báyò, bisán kon tan-awón sa malayô. Her
dress is conspicuously red, even if seen from a great distance.

_dagangkáhoy_, February, the month of February. (cf. pebréro).

_dágas_, (B) To gather fruit with pole and hook, to hook and shake
down fruit. The kalawít is mostly used for the purpose, which, in
plucking mangoes, etc. that might be injured in falling, has a little
sack or bag (dawín) attached, into which the fruit drops. Dagása
ang mga páhò. Pluck the mangoes with pole and hook. Dinágas níya
ang dúldul. He collected the pods from the cotton-tree with pole and
hook. (cf. dúgus id.).

_dagás_, Fallen, dropped from the tree, wind-fall (of fruit).

_dagasâ_, To run over, knock down. Ang bátà nahúlug sa hágdan, kay
gindagasâ sang idô. The child fell down-stairs, for it was knocked
over by the dog. (cf. dalasâ).

_dagásà_, Plentiful, abundant, galore; to be or become plentiful,
etc. Ang ísdà dagásà or nagadagásà karón. Fish is abundant at
present. (cf. dagáyà, bugánà, abúnda).

_dagásan_, See dagánas.

_dagasánan_, The channel of a river, that part of a river-bed which
the river occupies when the water is not in flood. (dagánas, dagásan).

_dágat_, Sea, ocean, main, deep, salt water. (cf. lawúd).

_dagát_, To make seasick. Ginadagát akó. I am seasick. Ang madagatón
dagatón gid, bisán hagánhágan ang linggílínggi sang sakayán. One very
liable to get seasick will get seasick, even if the boat should roll
only a little.

_dagátnon_, Pertaining to--, of the--, sea, coloured like the sea,
sea-green, (dágat).

_dágay_, To show, expose, display, exhibit, bring forth, produce,
set out or forth, put out, place so as to be seen. Idágay ang
mga pagkáon, ang mga balalígyà, etc. Put the food on the table,
display the merchandise, etc. Dagáyi akó sing mga lápis. Show me some
pencils. (cf. kúyang, pakítà).

_dág-ay_, See padág-ay--to indulge, humour, let one have--his
will,--his own way.

_dágay_, To rise, go to the head, said of alcoholic liquors or the
like. Nagdágay na sa íya úlo ang tubâ. The toddy has gone to his head.

_dagáyà_, Plentiful, swarming, teeming, etc. See dagásà, bugánà. Dagáyà
or nagadagáyà na ang humáy. Rice is now to be had in abundance.

_dagáyday_, Straight on, in an even or continuous line; to do something
in straight or regular lines, (when rubbing, massaging, etc.); to rush,
roar, murmur in a continuous flow (of water), (cf. daláyday).

_dág-dag_, To let fall, drop, tumble or plump down. Indì mo pagdagdagón
ang pínggan. Don't drop the plate. Nadágdag ang martílyo sa lamésa. The
hammer fell off the table. Dagdagí ang idô sing bató. Drop a stone
on the dog. Idágdag sa ákon ang bóla. Throw me down the ball. Dagdagá
siá sa listáhan. Drop him from the list. (cf. húlug, táktak).

_dághob_, A rolling, rumbling, echoing sound, a boom, reverberation;
to emit such a sound, to boom, rumble, roll, thunder, bellow,
roar. Ang dagúob nagadághob. The thunder rolls. Indì mo pagpadaghobón
ang ímo tíngug. Don't speak with a hollow voice. Don't bellow or
roar. (cf. dagúbdub, dagáhay).

_dágià_, See dagáyà, dagásà, bugánà--plentiful, etc.

_dágiaw_, To work--, help in work--without wages,--for
nothing,--without pay,--voluntarily,--gratuitously. Nagadágiaw silá
sa pagpatíndog sang ermíta. They are working without wages at putting
up the chapel. Gindagiawán níla ang baláy sang kalasálon. They worked
without pay at building the house for the marriage couple. Dagiawí
akó sing duhá ka ádlaw sa pagóbra sa simbáhan. Help me by working at
the church two days without pay.

_dágil_ (B) Speech, utterance, what one says; to speak, say, tell. Ang
dágil níya nga ----. He said that ----. Anó ang ginadágil mo? What are
you saying? Dagíli siá. Tell him. (cf. hámbal, púlong, silíng, súgid).

_dagíng_, To improve, pull through, come round, get well, get better,
heal, said of a wound or a disease. Nagdagíng ang íya pilás, balatían,
etc. His wound got better, his sickness left him, he got over his
sickness.

_dagíng-dagíng_, Dim. and Freq. of dagíng.

_dagínit_, Gentle, tender, soft, warm (of wind or the like). Hángin
nga dagínit. A gentle breeze. Also: A sharp, harsh, grating sound;
to crack, creak. (cf. ragínit).

_daginót_, (B) To be--, do--, at one's leisure,--in no hurry, perform
slowly, take one's time, step by step. Daginót na kitá. Let us now be
on the move. I think we must be going now. (A polite leave-taking). Anó
man gid ang ginada-ginotán mo dídto? Why are you going so slowly
there. (cf. búndul, amát-amát).

_dagínot_, (H) See daginót. Madámò kuntánì ang ámon mga páhò, ápang
nadaginótan námon sang káon. We should have many mangoes, but we have
been dipping into them.

_dágit_, To pounce--, swoop down--, upon, to clutch or grab (after the
manner of a bird of prey). Ang ámon pisô gindágit sang salagiáwan. Our
chicken was pounced upon by the hawk. Nadagítan kamí sang salagiáwan
sing duhá ka manók. The hawk seized two of our chickens. (cf. tukúb).

_dágkut_, To stick to, adhere to, be glued to. (cf. dákot, dokót,
pilít).

_dágmay_, A vegetable plant.

_dágmit_, To acquire a habit or custom of, be used to, be quick at,
be an old hand at, be good at, to be addicted to, fall into the
way of. Indì ka magdágmit sa paghámbal--or--índì mo pagdagmitón
ang paghámbal sing mga púlong nga maláw-ay. Don't get into the
habit of using bad language. Magdágmit ka sa pagtrabáho sing
mapísan kag mabinalákon. Accustom yourself to work diligently and
carefully. (cf. hánas, ánad, ábtik, buyó).

_dágmit_, Emphasis, stress, accent; to emphasize, accentuate, stress,
put an accent on. Ang katapúsan nga bokál nga nadagmitán. The last
accentuated vowel. Dagmití ang "a". Put the accent on the "a".

_dágmit_, To act impulsively, do something carelessly or thoughtlessly,
act on the spur of the moment. (cf. hinalî, tabinás).

_dágnà_, Wet or rainy season, time free from drought; to have no lack
of rain. (cf. tingulán).

_dagnás, dágnas_, To scour, rub, scrub. Dagnasí ang salóg. Scrub
the floor. Idagnás akó siníng salúg. Kindly scrub this floor for
me. Dinagnasán na níla sing maáyo ang salúg sang balatonán. They have
scrubbed well the floor of the reception room. (cf. lampáso).

_dagól-dagól_, To rattle, clatter. See dagáldal, kadálkadál.

_dagól-dagól_, Desultory, careless, negligent; to perform carelessly,
etc. Gindagóldagól mo lang ang pagplántsa sang ákon báyò. You ironed
my jacket very carelessly. (cf. dakúldakúl).

_dagóldol_, See dagóldagól.

_dág-on_, For daugón from daúg.

_dág-on_, (B) Season, year, date, epoch, period, term. (cf. panahón,
túig).

_dagón-dágon_, (B) To step out, walk briskly, walk with quick
steps. Nagadagón-dágon siá sa íya paglakát. He is walking with rapid
strides. Dagóndagóna ang ímo pagtikáng. Hasten your steps. Quicken
your pace. (cf. dalîdálì).

_dagóok_, A rumbling, rolling sound; borborygmus, borborygm; to emit
such a sound. Abáw, kabáskug sang dagóok sang tián mo! Oh, how loud
your stomach is rumbling! (cf. dághob, dagúbdub, dagúob).

_dagósò_, To throng, swarm, move in crowds. See dalagósò.

_dagótdot_, Debris, refuse, rubbish, weeds, roots, small pieces of
wood, etc. lying on the beach. (cf. dágsà).

_dagótdot_, A continuous, steady, but not very heavy, rain; to rain
a long time, but not in heavy showers, to rain--steadily,--without
a break.

_dagótdot_, A kind of grass; a weed growing in barren soil; barren,
waste.

_dágpà_, To fall prone, to fall face downwards. Nakadágpà siá. He
fell on his face. He fell prone on the ground. Padagpaá siá. Throw him
down on his face. Dagpaí siá. Throw yourself down on him. (cf. dúsmò).

_dágpak_, Matting coated with pitch added to a dug-out to give the
boat depth, weather-board; keel, bottom, hold (of a vessel). Sinulúd
sang túbig ang sakayán nga may dakô nga búhò sa dágpak sa idálum. The
water entered the ship through a large hole in its side (below the
water-level).

_dágpì_ To rap, fillip: to tap, pat. (cf. lágpì).

_dágras_, To be thoughtless, act recklessly or without
reflection. (cf. dalás, dágmit, tabinás hinalî).

_dágsà_, Drift-wood: to drift, float, carry--, bear--, afloat. Ang
túbig nagadágsà sang káhoy. The water carries along the wood. Kon may
bahâ madámò nga mga káhoy ang ginadágsà sang subâ sa báybay. When there
is a flood, much wood drifts down the river to the beach. Iníng mga
káhoy pulús gid mga dinágsà sang paglubás sang bágyo sang tinalíkdan
nga búlan. All this wood was--drifted,--floated, here, when the storm
passed last month. (cf. rórok).

_dágsang_, To fester, suppurate, gangrene, become septic or infected,
to gather or form pus, discharge matter. Nagadágsang ang íya hubág,
pilás, etc. His boil, wound, etc. is festering.

_dágtà_, Stain, blot, blotch, splash, smut, smudge, grime, spot, smear,
daub, smirch, blemish; to stain, blot, mar, foul, etc. Ang dágtà sang
salâ. The stain of sin. Nadagtaán siá sing lúnang, tínta, etc. He
got stained with mud, with ink, etc. Idágtà mo sa íyang báyò iníng
tínta. Stain his jacket with this ink. Ang kalág sang Mahál nga Birhen
walâ madagtaí sang salâ nga panublión. The soul of the Blessed Virgin
was not stained by original sin. Dinagtaán níya ang kadunggánan sang
íya panimaláy. He besmirched the honour of his family. (cf. músing,
bulíng, hígkò).

_dagtaón_, Stained, blotched, sullied, slurred, soiled, contaminated,
polluted. (cf. dágtà; bulingón, mahígkò).

_dagúbdub_, To rumble, boom, etc. See dághob. Ang mga bagón sang
perokaríl nagadagúbdub. The railway wagons are rumbling past.

_dagulás_, To wear out by constant use, etc. See dagumák, saguláy,
sarabóg. Also: To take without ceremony, make use of another man's
property without his permission. (cf. lámang, lábni, kúhà, buúl).

_dagúldul_, See dagóldol.

_dágum_, Needle.

_dagumák_, To use up, wear out, spoil by frequent use. Dagumaká
lang ang bág-o mo nga sapátos. Just wear out your new boots. Indì mo
pagidagumák iníng matahúm mo nga bestído. Don't spoil this beautiful
frock of yours by too frequent use. (cf. pasaburát, pasaburák,
patúyang, saguláy, sarabóg).

_dag-únan_, Seasonable, seasonal, ripening,--happening--, being done--,
in due time or season. Humáy nga dag-únan. Rice ripening in its proper
season. (cf. dág-on).

_dagúndun_, Straight on, plain, without any special design (of
weaving); to weave straight on, make plain cloth or simple wicker-work;
hence: to perform quickly, expeditiously, carelessly. (cf. padagúndun).

_dagúnò_, Boom, reverberation, rumbling, etc. See dághob, dagóok,
dagáhay, dagúbdub, dagúob).

_dagúob_, Thunder; boom, roar, rolling, peal, reverberation;
to thunder, etc. May dagúob or nagadagúob. It thunders. That's
thunder! Dakô ang dagúob, dalágkò ang mga dagúob. The thunder-clap
is (was) loud, the peals of thunder are (were) loud. (cf. dagúnò,
dághob, etc.).

_dagútdut_, See dagótdot.

_dágway_, (H) Form, figure, image, likeness, appearance, outline,
shape, species, conformation, cut, contour, look, aspect,
phase, seeming, guise, semblance. Sa dágway sang ----. In the
form,--figure,--etc., of ----. Sa idálum sang dágway sang tinápay
kag bíno nga nakonsagrahán nahámtang ang matúod nga láwas kag dugô
ni Hesukrísto. Under the species,--appearances,--forms,--etc. of
consecrated bread and wine there is present the true body and blood
of Jesus Christ. (cf. báyhon).

_dágyà, dágyaw_, See dágià, dágiaw.

_dágyang_, To make merry, etc. see dinágyang.

_dáhà_, To cook. See ráhà, lútò, digámo.

_dahák_, To dare, presume, make bold to, venture, take the liberty of,
be--impertinent,--presumptious,--impudent,--forward,--daring,--venturesome,--cheeky,--pert,--brazen,--audacious,--froward,--bold.
Indì ka magdahák sa pagkádto dídto. Don't you dare to go
there. (cf. dahás, ahás, aháng, káhas).

_dahák-dahák_, Dim. and Freq. of dahák.

_dahál_ Haughty, insolent, proud of speech, overbearing, impudent,
arrogant, bumptious, overweening; to talk proudly, make oneself
important, take--, put--, on airs. Indì ka magdahál sa ímo
nga paghámbal. Don't talk so proudly. Don't take--, put--, on
airs. (cf. bugál, hádak, hámbog, wákal, ándak).

_daháldahál_, Dim. and Freq. of dahál. Also: A mean fellow, a rascal.

_dáhan_, To invite, think of, treat with consideration. Ang mga
dináhan kag dinápit. The invited and bidden guests. (cf. ágda, hágad,
kángay, dápit).

_dahán-dáhan_, To be quick, make haste, put one's best foot forward;
to quicken, hasten. Dahándahána ang ímo paglakát. Walk faster. Anó
gid ang ginadahándahánan mo sa paglakát? Why are you walking so
fast? Gindahándahánan níya ang íya pagtikáng. He quickened his
pace, hastened his steps. (cf. dagóndágon, dalîdálì, hakónhákon,
dahángdáhang).

_daháng-dáhang_, See dahándáhan.

_dahás_, To dare, presume, venture, be bold, intrepid,
audacious, venture some, cheeky, impertinent, have
the--nerve,--cheek,--pluck,--hardihood. Gindahasán níya ang pagsulúd sa
kwárto nga walâ ánay magpanóktok. He dared to enter the room without
knocking. Also adjective. (cf. káhas, dahák, etc.).

_dahî_, (B) Forehead, front, brow. (cf. ágtang, ádtang).

_dáhig_, To implicate, etc. See daláhig. (cf. úmid).

_dahíl_, To use as a pretext, to pretend, put forth as an ostensible
reason; to impute. (cf. malí, pasúni; pahanungúd, pabangúd).

_dahílan_, Pretext, sham, pretence. Sa dahílan nga ----. Under the
pretext of ----. Dinahilán lang níya inâ kag ang íya nga dahílan
amó ----. He put that forth as an ostensible reason (motive) and
his pretence (claim) is ----. N.B. Dahíl and dahílan seem to be of
Tagalog origin. (cf. balíbad).

_dahilî_, A kind of coconut palm. It is smaller than the ordinary
variety. (cf. guyúd).

_dahô_, (H) To receive, accept, take from, take hold of. Nagdahô silá
sang íla diplóma. They received their diplomas. Idahô akó sinâ. Kindly
accept that for me. (cf. dawô, dáwat, dáwhat, báton).

_dahóg_, Shoot, tendril (of a vine, creeper, etc.).

_dahóg, dáhog_, Sliding, skidding, skating; selling well, much
in demand. Dahóg gid ang ámon mga páhò, ságing, etc. Our mangoes,
bananas, etc. are selling well. (cf. dáhog; mabákal, maáka--in the
sense of selling well).

_dáhog_, To slide, glide, skid, skate, slip, move or shoot
along. Magdáhog ka sa kalát, lapgósan, etc. Slide down the rope,
the may-pole, etc. Ipadáhog lang ang káhoy sa bánglid. Simply slide
the tree down the incline.

_dahól-dahól_, (B) Pretty well, rather much, satisfactory, average,
tolerable; to be pretty well off, to do or act in a satisfactory
manner. (cf. bolobáyhon, dawâdawâ, hingánhingán, gáwa).

_dáhon_, Leaf, petal, blade, frond. Ang mga dáhon. Leaves, foliage,
leafage.

_dahón-dahón_, A kind of green insect; mantis, prayer fly, praying
mantis.

_dáhop_, (B) To urge, occupy, keep busy, ply with work, give much to
do. Dahópa ang táo sa pagóbra. Keep the man busy at work. Gindáhop
níya akó sa pagarádo, sa pagbáyad sang ákon útang, etc. He urged me
to plough vigorously, to pay my debt at once, etc. (cf. sákò).

_dahúm-dáhum_, To think about, muse upon, reflect upon, imagine,
ponder. Anó ang ginadahúmdáhum mo? What are you thinking about? Walâ na
akó sing pinadahúmdáhum (ginapadahúmdáhum) sa íya. I have now no longer
anything to remind me of him. I have no reason to occupy my thoughts
with him. I know nothing of his present whereabouts. (cf. hunâhúnà,
dúmdum, panúmdum).

_dahúmon_, Idea, thought, inkling. Walâ gid siá sing dahúmon. He knows
nothing about it. It's none of his business. He hasn't an inkling or
idea of it. (cf. dahúmdáhum, dinahúmdáhum).

_dái-a_, To drift, float; bear, carry. (i.e. water
bears,--carries). Gindái-a sang balúd ang sakayán nga nalúnud sa
binít sang báybay. The waves floated the foundered boat to the
water-edge. (cf. dágsà).


_dai-áhan_, Shore, beach, water-side, coast, sea-side,
strand. (cf. báybay, baybáyon).

_dáig_, (B) To light, kindle, ignite. Daíga ang kaláyo. Light the
fire. Daígi akó sing kaláyo. Kindle a fire for me. Idáig mo akó
ánay sang kaláyo sa dapóg. Please kindle the fire on the hearth for
me. (cf. dábok).

_daíg_, (B) Kindled, lighted. (cf. dabók).

_daígon_, Christmas-song,--carol,--waits; to sing Christmas-carols,
etc. Nagakánta silá sing daígon--or--nagadaígon silá. They are
singing Christmas-carols. (Formerly there was a custom of lighting
fires along the road for the carol-singers, hence the name daígon
from dáig--to light).

_daíl_, (B) To train, discipline; form, ground, habituate, familiarize
with, prepare, coach; qualify. Dailá siá. Train him. Gindaíl ko siá
gid sa pagpangúma. I prepared him well for the work of a farmer. Idaíl
akó ánay siníng bátà sa pagpangabúdlay. Please do me the favour of
making this boy used to work. (cf. hánas, ánad).

_dáit_, Peace, etc. See dáet.

_dakál-dákal_, Gravel, pebbles, small stones. Láktan mo ang seménto
sing pitó ka párte nga dakáldákal kag tátlo ka párte nga balás. Mix
the cement with seven parts of gravel and three parts of sand.

_dakáldakál_, To bubble, boil, seethe, hiss, fizz. (cf. akálakál,
sindakál, sórò, bórò, borótbórot).

_dákdak_, To provide amply with, give much or plenty of
anything. Dakdakí siá sing mga pagkáon. Give him plenty to
eat. Dinakdakán akó níya sing láygay. He gave me a long instruction,
a lengthy harangue, a long admonition. Indì mo siá pagdakdakán sing
trabáho, kay bág-o pa lang siá nagáyo sa balatían kag malúya pa
siá. Don't give him much work to do, for he has only just recovered
from a sickness and is still weak. Idákdak lang sa íya iníng mga
buluhatón. Simply let him tackle these jobs. Keep him busy working
at these jobs.

_dakí_, A dark-coloured or black spot, as often seen on the skull of
a new-born infant; dandruff, scurfiness. (cf. adíkdik).

_dákin_, (B) To gather up, collect, bring--, get--, put--, lump--,
draw--, scrape--, rake--, together. Dakína ang mga linagárì. Gather
the sawdust. Dakíni akó sang mga átis nga nadágdag sa káhoy. Collect
for me the atis-fruit fallen from the tree. Dinákin na sang mga bátà
ang mga panápton nga nabulád sa ínit. The children have gathered up
the clothes spread in the sun. (cf. típon, tingúb).

_dakín-dákin_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of dákin. Also: To be quick,
hasten, hurry, do quickly or with despatch. Dakíndákin ka sa
paglakát--or--dakínkína ang ímo paglakát. Quicken your pace, walk
quickly. (cf. dalîdálì, dagóndágon, hakónhákon).

_dákmol_, Thickness; to thicken, become thick, said of flat
substances like boards, sheets, clothes, etc. Dakmolá ang paghímò
sing bibínka. Make the bibinca-cakes thick. Indì mo pagdakmolón ang
pagtápa sang kárne, kóndì nipisón mo lang. Don't cut thick slices of
meat, but carve thin ones. Utdon mo ang tápì sa nadakmolán. Cut the
board at its thick part. (cf. dámol).

_dákot_, To stick, adhere to (as mud, plaster, glue or the
like). Nagdákot sa tángon ko ang kalamayháti. The kalamayháti stuck
to the roof of my mouth. Padakóta ang sílyo sa sóbre. Stick the
stamp on the envelope. Ginpadakótan ni Fuláno ang ákon delárgo sing
lalaó. N. N. daubed my trousers with mud. Ipadákot iníng papél sa
puertáhan. Paste this paper on the door. (cf. pilít, dokót).

_dakô_, (H) Large, great, big, important, vast, massive, ample,
voluminous, huge, bulky; to be or become large, etc. Dakô nga
táo. A great man. Dakô nga butáng. An important thing. Nagdakô
na ang bátà. The child has grown big. Dakuá ang ákon báhin sang
tinápay. Increase my share of the bread. Gindakô níla ang baláy
nga sádto ánay diótay. They enlarged the house that formerly was
so small. Padakuí akó sing isá ka bílog nga báboy, kay kon dakô
na pagabáklon ko sa ímo. Raise a pig for me, for when it is of a
good size, I will buy it from you. Ang láswa amó ang íya nadák-an
(nadakuán). He was reared or brought up on vegetables. (cf. hánggud,
dalágkò).

_dakô_, (B) Flame, light. Ang dakô sang kandílà. The light of the
candle. (cf. dábdab).

_dakô_, (H) A large copper coin, now out of circulation; a one-centavo
piece.

_dakúl-dakúl_, Careless, heedless, indifferent, inattentive, unmindful
slovenly, hurried, negligent, routine, perfunctory, off hand, without
proper care or attention; to scamp, perform carelessly, etc. Dakúldakúl
nga pangóbra. Careless, slovenly work. Indì ka mag dakúldakúl sa
pagpangadî. Don't pray distractedly, without attention. Indì mo
pagdakúldakulón ang ímo trabáho. Don't perform your work in a hurried
or careless manner. Gindakúldakúl gid lang sang pánday ang pagbúhat
sang lamésa, The carpenter made the table in a careless manner, too
quickly. Nagadakúldakúl gid lang siá sang íya mga katungdánan. He
scamps the performance of his duties. (cf. dagóldagól).

_dakúp_, To catch, snare, trap, capture, take, seize, get hold
of, hook, nab, arrest, lay hands on. Dákpa ang makáwat. Catch the
thief. Dákpi akó sing píspis. Snare a bird for me. Idakúp akó ánay
sang ákon báboy nga nakabúhì sa tángkal. Kindly capture for me the
pig that has got out of the sty. Ipadakúp ang kabáyo nga nagsulúd
sa ákon talámnan. Get someone to seize the horse that has entered
my field. Nadakúp na ang buyóng. The robber was arrested. Padákpa
na lang siá sa ímo. Just let yourself be caught by him. (cf. húnong;
kapút, kápyot--to catch hold of; ábut-to catch up with).

_dalá_, (H) Anything carried, brought, taken, conveyed or
transported; to carry, transmit, bring--, take--, along, bear,
convey, transfer, transport, cart, ship; support; to influence,
gain over to one's side, persuade. Anó ang ginadalá mo? What are you
carrying,--bringing,--taking along? Diín mo iná (dál-on) dálhon? Where
are you taking that to? Dálhi akó sing isá ka báso nga túbig. Bring me
a glass of water. Padálhi akó sing isá ka páres nga sapátos. Send me
a pair of boots. Ipadalá sa íya iní. Send him this. Pinadalá níya iní
sa ákon. He sent me this. Anó ang dalá mo? What is it you are bringing
(taking) with you? Daw sa índì mo siá madalá. You will scarcely be
able to move, influence or persuade him. Pinadálhan níya akó sing sulát
gíkan sa Manílà. He sent me a letter from Manila. Nagabút na dalá sang
sakayán ang káhoy nga binakál ko. The wood I bought has now arrived
by boat. Dinalá níya ang ákon kálò. He brought my hat. Makadalá ka
siní? Can you carry or transport this? Nagabáton na siá sing binúlan
nga duhá ka púlò ka mángmang dalá ang pagkáon. He is receiving now
twenty pesos a month and his board. (dará id.).

_dála_, (H) To bear fruit; to be pregnant, be with child, be big with
child. Ang lubí nagadála (nagadalá) na sing bókol. The coconut palm
is now bearing fruit. Nagadála siá. She is with child. (cf. pamúnga;
mábdus, búsung, sámbol, búntis, dára).

_dalâ_, (H) To form--pus,--matter, to suppurate, gather, fester,
discharge purulent matter. Nagadalâ ang íya hubág. His boil is
festering. Nagdalâ ang dalúnggan sang bátà, kay tinohógan. There was
a gathering on the child's ear, because it was pierced. (cf. dágsang).

_daláag_, A nipa-swamp, a morass overflowed by tidal water, a tidal
swamp. (cf. katúnggan, kanipaán).

_dalá-dála_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of dalá.

_dala-dalahón_, (H) One who can be moved, influenced, carried along
or drawn over to one's side or point of view.

_dalág_, (H) Yellow, orange colour; to be or become yellow. Nagdalág
ang íya nga báyò. His jacket turned yellow. (cf. darág).

_dalága_, (H) Maid, maiden, lass, lassie, girl, miss, damsel, young
lady, unmarried female, virgin, colleen. Dalága nga laón. An old
spinster. (cf. dalagíta, darága, dumalága, hinalagá).

_dalágan_, To run, rush, dart, dash, scamper, bolt, tear along, scud,
scour, scurry, fly, race. Dalágan ka--or--dalagána. Run. Dalagáni
ang púnò sang káhoy. Run to (towards) the tree-stump. Padalagána ang
kabáyo. Make the horse run. Gallop the horse.

_dalág-an_, A winning chance, advantage, superiority; anything that
assures the victory or guarantees the desired outcome. (daúg).

_dalagángan_, Conspicuous, famous, prominent, outstanding, in
the front row or rank; mighty, strong, powerful, brave, heroic;
a hero. (cf. isganán, gamhánan, lutáw; busalían).

_dalág-dalág, dalág-dálag_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of dalág. Also: A kind
of bird; kind of fish.

_dalagílon_, Saying, maxim, adage, saw, proverb, aphorism, apothegm,
apophthegm, refrain; conversation. (cf. dágil; sugilánon, hurubáton).

_dalagíta_, (H) Dim. of dalága with a Sp. diminutive suffix. Dalagíta
is mostly used in connection with girls between 13 and 16 years of
age. (cf. dumalága; hinalagá).

_dalágkò_, (H) The plural form of dakô--large, great, etc.

_dalagmíton_, (H) That is to be, or should be, practised, emphasized,
accentuated, paid quick attention to, etc. (cf. dágmit).

_dalág-on_, (H) Conquerable, surmountable, vincible, superable;
that is to be, or can be, overcome; stake, premium, reward, guerdon,
prize to be won. (cf. daúg).

_dalagósò_, (H) To swarm, throng, move about, as a crowd. (cf. dagósò).

_dalágsay_, To happen upon, come--to,--upon, chance upon,
appear. (cf. daláng, típlang).

_dalagyáan_, (H) A place of abundance or plenty; abundant,
plentiful. (cf. dágyà; madámò, dagásà, dagáyà, abúnda).

_daláhig_, To involve, implicate, drag into, take in. Nadaláhig
kitá nga tanán sa salâ ni Adán. We were all involved in the sin
of Adam. Gindaláhig akó níya sa kasábà. He implicated me in the
lawsuit. Dalahíga siá. Implicate him. Sín-o ang nagdaláhig sa ímo sa
siníng maláut nga búhat? Who involved you in this bad deed? (cf. úmid,
dáldal).

_dalahúmdahúmon_, (H) Memorable, worthy to be recorded or written
about; reverie, meditation, reflection, musing. (cf. dahúmdáhum).

_dalákpon_, (H) That is to be, or should be, caught. Makáwat nga
dalákpon. A thief to be apprehended, arrested or caught. (cf. dakúp).

_dalalóon, dalaloón_, (H) Lovable, amiable, attractive, pleasing;
that is, or should be, cherished, petted, caressed. (cf. dálò).

_dalamgohánon_, (H) Dream, sleep; vision, shadow, man in the moon,
castle in the air, vagary, fiction, utopia. (dámgo)

_dalámhà_, To act rashly, impulsively, do light-heartedly, perform
thoughtlessly. Indì ka magdalámhà sa pagsákà sa baláy ni Fuláno, kay
básì kágton ka sang íya idô. Don't light-heartedly enter the house
of N.N., for his dog may bite you. (cf. dalás, tabinás, patarásak).

_dalamugán_, (H) Feeding-bowl, trough, swill-basin. (damóg;
cf. balahogán).

_dalamúnon_, Lingering, tarrying, stopping; delaying, staying on,
protracting one's stay, remaining at peace, having one's mind at
rest. Indì akó dalamúnon dirí, kay may bisíta akó sa baláy. I cannot
tarry here, for I have visitors at home. (cf. daramúnon, darámnon,
ogkánan).

_dálan_, Road, street, way, course, route, track, pathway, causeway,
highway, thoroughfare, path, passage. (cf. bánas, baginás, alágyan).

_dalán_, Line, row, tier. Isá ka dalán nga maís. One row of maize (on
the cob). Pilá ka dalán ang isá ka kayán? How many rows of corn are
there on a cob? Walâ siá magsulát sa ákon sing bisán isá ka dalán. He
did not write me a line. (cf. dinalán).

_dalándan_. See dagándan.

_dalándan_, To descend quickly, hurry--down stairs,--down a
ladder, fly down stairs. Nagdalándan siá sa pagpanáug. He went down
quickly. Nagadalándan siá sing daláyon kon manáug. He always goes
down the stairs in a hurry.

_dalandanón_, (H) Naughty, wayward, frivolous, restless, fidgety,
very lively. (cf. harásharás, diwal-ogán, darándarán, etc.).

_daláng_, To happen, chance, come to a place (for the first
time). Nakadaláng siá dirí kahápon. He happened to come here yesterday
(for the first time). (cf. típlang).

_daláng-dálang_, Dim. and Freq. of daláng.

_daláng-dálang_, To lose oneself, lose one's way, miss the road,
take a wrong turning, stray, go astray. Nagdalángdálang silá sa
paglakát. They lost their way on their walk. (cf. talángtálang).

_dalángpan_, (H) Refuge, asylum, sanctuary, shelter. (dangúp;
cf. apútan, paaliwánsan, sáp-an, aláypan).

_dalanón_, Road, etc. See dálan. Indì ka mahádluk magkádto dídto,
kay madámò ang mga táo nga nagalakát sa amó nga dalanón. Don't be
afraid to go there, for there are many people walking on the same road.


_dalapitón_, A guest (to be invited); one that is to be--, should be--,
is worthy of the distinction of being--, invited. (cf. dápit).

_dalapúgan_, Hearth, fireplace, kitchen, stove. (cf. dapóg, digamohán,
lulutoán, sun-adán).

_dalarohón_, Arable, tillable (of soil; cf. dáro).

_dalás_, To be quick, precipitate, impulsive, thoughtless, impetuous,
hasty. Indì ka magdalás sa paghámbal. Don't be precipitate of
speech. Gindalás gid níya ang pagbúhat sinâ. He did that--on the spur
of the moment,--under the first impulse or impression,--in thoughtless
haste. (cf. dalî, tabinás).

_dalasâ_, Collision, impact; to collide, run into, run against
something with force, cause an impact, knock down. Gindalasâ siá sang
áwto. He was knocked down by the automobile. Andam ka, agúd dílì mo
siá pagdalasaón. Be careful not to run into him. (cf. dagasâ).

_dálat_, Nonsense, bosh, twaddle; to prate, prattle, talk
nonsense. Hinúgay na sang dálat sang ímo sugilánon. Stop this kind
of bosh. Don't talk such nonsense. (cf. búrà, lásang, dampúrat,
wákal, etc.).

_dálaw_, To visit, to pay a visit of condolence. (dáraw id.).

_daláwat_, (H) To buy cereals, especially rice or corn. Dalawáta
ang bugás ko. Buy my hulled rice. Dalawáti akó sing isá ka gántang
nga bugás. Buy me a ganta of hulled rice. Indì ka makadaláwat dirí
sing humáy, kay walâ sing makapadaláwat. You cannot buy rice here,
because nobody can sell it. Idaláwat akó ánay sing tátlo ka gántang
nga maís. Please buy for me three gantas of corn. Iníng písos idaláwat
mo sing maís. This peso is for buying corn. This peso is to buy corn
with. Walâ akó sing ikadaláwat. I have no means to buy rice (corn,
etc.) with. Padalawáta akó sang ímo humáy. Sell me your rice.

_daláwdaw_, To extend, stretch out, creep along the ground, as
creepers. Ang biká nagdaláwdaw. The bica-vine has spread over the
ground. Nagadaláwdaw ang mga ógbos sang mga balágon. The shoots of
the vines are creeping along the ground.

_dalawháton_, (H) Obtainable, receivable; wages, earnings; chance,
scope. (cf. dáwhat, dalayháton).

_dalawídaw_, A kind of bird. (darawídaw id).

_dalay-áhan_, (H) Beach, sea-shore, coast, strand,
sea-side. (cf. dái-a, dáy-a, báybay, baybáyon).

_dalayán-dayánan_, (H) Promenade, walk, esplanade, park for recreation
and promenading. (dayándáyan).

_daláyap_, A kind of Philippine orange tree with small fruit, whose
sour juice is pressed out and made use of for cleaning the hair and
scalp, for taking stains out of clothes, and the like. Butangán mo
sing daláyap ang ímo báyò agúd magtínlò. Apply daláyap to your jacket
to clean it.

_dalayáwon_, (H) Praiseworthy, estimable, meritorious, laudable,
commendable. (dáyaw).

_dalayawón_, (H) Amenable to flattery, one who likes to be flattered
or praised; pompous, self-important. (dayáw, apót).

_dalayháton_, Obtainable, etc. See dalawháton. (cf. dáyhat).

_daláyday_, To stroke, rub, massage slowly,--gently,--in even,
regular strokes, plain, simple (of speech). Idaláyday akó ánay sang
ákon likód, kay ginasíkmat akó. Please rub my back gently, for I have
rheumatic pains. Daláyday--or--dinaláyday nga hámbal. Prose, plain
(not poetical) speech. (cf. dagáyday).

_daláyon_, (H) Pl. form of dáyon. Nagdaláyon silá sa ákon baláy. They
stayed at my home. Also adjective: Continuous, constant, persevering;
always. Daláyon gid lang nagagáhud iníng mga bátà. These children
are always so noisy. (dáyon).

_dalayonán_, (H) Residence, house, inn, hostel, hostelry,
lodging-house, hotel, lodgings, any place where one can stay or remain
for sometime. (cf. dáyon).

_dáldag_, An adze; to use or apply an adze. Daldagí ang káhoy. Use
an adze to trim the wood. (cf. wásay--hatchet).

_dáldal_, To carry or take along with, push on, push into, involve,
implicate. Gindáldal siá sang kusúg nga índì makítà. He was carried
along by an unseen force. Indì mo siá pagdaldalón. Don't involve or
implicate him. Nadáldal siá nga walâ sing salâ. He became implicated
through no fault of his. (cf. úmid, daláhig).

_dálhag_, To creep, crawl, wriggle, along the floor, as small
children not yet able to walk. Ang bátà nagadálhag sa salúg or
ang salúg ginadalhagán sang bátà. The baby is crawling along the
floor. (cf. ígod, íwos, híwos),

_dálhag_, To slip, skid, slide sideways. (cf. dalín-as, dúpyas, wárik).

_dálhit_, Fear, apprehension, dread, misgiving, trepidation, funk;
to be fearful, to dread, fear, frighten, fill with apprehension. May
dálhit siá or ginadalhitán siá. He is full of dread. He is filled
with apprehension. Nagadálhit ang ginháwa ko. I am afraid. Anó ang
nagapadálhit sa ímo. What makes you afraid? What is frightening
you? Padalhitá siá. Make him afraid. Intimidate--, scare--, alarm--,
him. Ipadálhit mo sa íya inâ. Make use of that--to put fear into
him,--to dismay--, terrify--, him. (cf. hádluk).

_dálhog_ The edible shoots and tender leaves of vines or creepers,
particularly of the balátong (hántak).

_dálhog_, To be slippery, etc. See dánlug.

_dálhon_, (H) For dalahón from dalá--to bring, etc. (cf. dál-on).

_dalî_, To be quick, prompt, fast, swift, speedy, rapid; to hasten,
hurry, skurry, make haste, quicken, speed up, accelerate. Tungúd sa
anó nga nagadalî ikáw? Why are you in such a hurry? Nagdalî siá sa
pagpaúlì, kay masakít si nánay níya. He hurried home, because his
mother is sick. Daliá! Be quick! Hasten! Make haste! Gindalî níya ang
pagsulát sa kay Fuláno. He wrote N.N. without delay. Dinalián níla
ang baláy sang trabáho. They set to work on the house with despatch,
without delay. Padaliá ang íya paglakát. Tell him to walk fast.

_dália_, (Sp. dalia) Dahlia, a kind of flower.

_dáliang_ To be sludgy, muddy, slushy, wet and soft, (as mud or the
like). Nagadáliang ang lúnang, lílang, etc. The mud, the pickled fish,
etc, is wet and soft.

_dalî-dálì_, Dim. and Freq. of dalî. Anó ang ímo nga
ginadalîdálì--or--anó ang ginadalîdalián mo? Why are you in such a
hurry? What is the reason of your haste?

_dálig_, (B) To be or become nice, beautiful, fine, good. Nagdálig na
iníng páhò. This mango-tree has grown into a fine specimen. Nadaligán
akó siníng simbáhan, ápang ang ákon mga kaupdánan walâ pagdaligí
siní. I considered this church beautiful, but my companions did not
think so. Note the accent. Padalíga ang mga puní. Make the decorations
attractive. (cf. tahúm, ányag, áyo, gayón, ámbong).

_dalígdig_, (B) To flow, run freely, stream, sweep along, (said of
water). Ang túbig nagadalígdig. The water is flowing. Padaligdigá
ang túbig sa ákon umá or padaligdigí ang ákon umá sing túbig. Let
the water flow over my field. (cf. ílig).

_dalihát_, See dalikát, which is the more usual form.

_dalíhig_, (B) To flow, etc. See dalígdig, ílig.

_dalikát_, To find time, do at once or promptly, perform without
delay. Indì akó makadalikát sa pagdúaw sa ínyo. I have no time to pay
you a visit at once. Dalikatá ang maís dídto, kay malapít ang ulán. Be
quick with the corn there, for the rain is near. Dalikatí akó sa
pagbakál sing tátlo ka abáno. Buy me quickly three cigars. (cf. dalî).

_dalíkdik_, To walk along the border, walk at the side
of. (cf. alíhid).

_dalíkdik_, Dandruff. See adíkdik, alíkdik.

_dalimasô_, (B) To form pus, gather, discharge matter, etc. See
dágsang, dalâ. Nagdalimasô ang íya pilás, hubág, etc. His wound
festered, his boil gathered to--, came to--, a head, etc.

_dalimúos_, A gust, flaw, flurry, blast (of wind); a fit of anger or
passion. (cf. unús).

_dalín-as_, To slip, slide, skate, skid. Nakadalín-as akó. I
slipped. Padalin-asá siá. Make him slip. Ang kadánlug sang dálan
nagpadalín-as sa ákon. The greasiness of the road caused me to
slip. Pinadalín-as ang áwto sang ulán. The rain caused the automobile
to skid. (cf. dúpyas).

_dalíngag_, A prickle, spine, spur, sharp thorn or prick sticking
out of the ground, sharp, prickly shoots near the ground peculiar
to some creepers and very painful to the bare foot, if accidentally
trodden upon.


_dalípì_, Rock, cliff, crag; headland; rocky island.

_dalipúngut_, Rage, passion; to fly into a rage, etc. See alipúngot,
id.

_dalísay_, Strong in every sense. Dalísay nga bíno, baláy, táo,
káhoy, bató, balatiágon, gúgma, etc. A strong wine, house, man,
tree, stone, feeling, love, etc. Nagdalísay ang íya kabubút-on. His
resolution strengthened. (cf. mabáskug, maísug, mapúrus, hámrus,
matíg-a, mapág-on, mabákud, malíg-on, makúsug, etc.).

_dálit_, Poison, venom, bane, (especially of animals like snakes,
scorpions, certain fishes and insects), (cf. hilô--poison that
contaminates food or drink).

_dalítan_, Poisonous, venomous, baneful. Mán-og nga dalítan. A
poisonous snake.

_dálò_, To fondle, dandle, pet, caress, treat tenderly. Dalóa
ang bátà. Fondle the baby. Idálò akó siníng bátà. Please pet the
baby. (cf. álò, arôárò, ánggà).

_dalô-dálò_, Dim. and Freq. of dálò. Also: To flatter, cajole, coax,
wheedle.

_dalôdô, dalódò_, The first swelling or a rising of a river coming
down-stream after a heavy rain, first onrush of a flood or freshet,
the crest of a flood; to swell, rise, become flooded (of rivers,
etc.). Nagadalôdô ang subâ. The river is rising. Dalî kamó sa pagtabók,
kay may dalôdô sa ilayá. Be quick in crossing, for there is a flood
coming down from further up river. Nadalôdoán kamí. We were overtaken
by the flood. (cf. búlus).

_dalógdog_, A kind of thorny shrub; its fruit. (cf. búgtong).

_dalogdogán_, A place where dalógdog grows--or--a field overgrown
with dalógdog.

_dalóhog_, To slide--, glide--, slip--, skid--, down
a--chute,--waterfall,--hill-side, etc. Ang káhoy nagdalóhog lang
sa dululhúgon. The tree slid down the slope. Ipadalóhog lang ang
ímo karósa. Let your sledge slide down. Padalohógi akó sing isá ka
nahót nga kawáyan. Slide down for me one piece of bamboo. Indì mo
pagidalóhog ang káhoy sa bánglid, kay básì malitík. Don't slide the
timber down the incline, for it may split. (cf. dáhog).

_dalók_, Greedy, gluttonous; a glutton, gourmand; to be or become
greedy, etc.; pagdinalók--to gorge, over-eat oneself, gourmandize,
stuff oneself with food, eat greedily, voraciously, ravenously. Dalók
nga bátà. A greedy child. Mahínay siá sa pagkáon sádto ánay,
ápang karón nagdalók. He used to eat slowly, but now he has become
greedy. Nagadinalók siá sa pagkáon. He eats ravenously. (cf. kágud).

_dál-ok_, A blister, pustule; to form pustules, blister, raise
blisters. Nadalokán ang ákon kamót. My hand was blistered. Dinal-okán
ang íya nga dílà sang lakás nga ápog sang malám-on. His tongue
was blistered by too much lime being mixed with his betelnut
chew. (cf. láp-uk).

_dálpot_, (B) Use, usefulness, profitableness, (cf. águd, agúdagúd,
pulús, ásoy, kapuslánan).

_dál-on_, (H) From dalá. (cf. dálhon id.).

_dalúkut_, (H) See baríri id.

_dálum_, Depth, profundity, deepness: to deepen, make--, become--,
deep. Nagdálum ang lúblub tungúd sang madámol nga ulán. The defile
deepened on account of the heavy rain. Ginpadálum níla ang búhò. They
dug the hole deep. Padálma (Padalúma) ang búhò sang lusóng. Deepen
the cavity of the rice-pounding mortar. Ginpadálman (Pinadálman,
Pinadalúman) níya ang amó nga butáng sang íya painóíno. He
thought profoundly over it. He pondered long and deeply over that
matter. Nagapadálum siá sang íya nga painóíno. He is thinking deeply,
profoundly. (cf. nábaw--to be shallow, etc.).

_dalúndun_, See padalúndun--to carry--, push--, along.

_dalúng_, (B) To frown upon, scowl at, look darkly at. Indì
ka magdalúng (magpadalúng) sa ákon or índì mo akó pagdalungán
(pagpadalungán, pagpadálngan). Don't scowl at me. N.B. The Caus. form
padalúng is more in use. (cf. lárong, pasíblong, pamúdlat).

_dalúngdung_, A feeble--, mild--, soft--, light, as the light of
the moon; to shine--mildly,--feebly. N.B. The Freq. panalúngdung is
commonly used.

_dalúnggan_, (H) Ear, sense of hearing, organ of hearing, audition;
ear (of a pot or kettle, etc.); handle, loop, grip, any projecting
part from the side of a thing. (cf. talínga, dulúnggan, idulúngug,
dungúg; kaláptan, uluyatán, buyótan).

_dalúnghan_, (B) Hearth, open fire-place for cooking
purposes. (cf. dapóg).

_dalúpang_, The mallow, a kind of plant.

_dalupanî_, A small white fish with a flattish body, resembling
somewhat the bilóngbilóng.

_dalupápan_, To be confluent, meet each other, flow together, said
especially of boils, eruptions, pimples, small-pox, etc. Nagadalupápan
ang íya mga hubág. His boils are confluent, are so near together
that they merge into one another. Nadalupapánan akó sang ákon mga
hubág. My boils ran together.

_dalupíngan_, A fresh-water fish. It is flat, and grows to a length
of about five inches.

_dál-us_, To singe, scorch, burn; to harm, injure (in
general). (cf. pásò, súnug; dáut).

_dalusó_, To scratch, excoriate, strip the skin from, scrape off,
abrade, rub open, tear off a piece. Nakasúnggò akó sa isá ka bató kag
nagdalusó ang pánit sang ákon bútkon. I stumbled against a stone and
some of the skin of my arm was scraped off.

_dalusó_, To become worse through heat, applied to wounds, ulcers,
etc. Nagdalusó ang íya nga pilás. His wound became worse on account
of the heat.

_dalús-us_, To glide--, slide--, skid--, down, etc. See alóg-og
id. Nagdalús-us lang siá sa kawáyan. He simply slid down
the bamboo. Gindalus-usán níya ang halígi. He slid down the
post. (cf. kalós-os).

_dalútang_, To be muddy, sludgy. See dáliang id.

_dalwásì_, A large pan, kettle, bowl, used for boiling purposes,
but not quite as capacious as a káwà.

_dályang, dalyáng_, See dáliang--to be slushy, etc.

_damá_, To overcome, beat, conquer, etc. See daúg, bagít. Indì
akó kadamá sa íya sa súngka. I cannot beat him at the game of
"súngka". (súngka--a game played with stones).

_dáma_, (Sp. dama) Lady, gentlewoman, dame; game of draughts or
checkers; to play draughts,--checkers. Mahámpang kitá sang dáma. Let
us play draughts. Damáhi siá. Play a game of draughts with him. Idáma
ta lang iníng mga dakáldákal. Let us use these pebbles as draughtsmen.

_damágan_, A kind of small fish.

_damahán_, A draught-board, checker-board; queen in the game of
draughts. (cf. dáma).

_damahuána_, (Sp. damajuana) Demi john, carboy, large wicker-bottle
containing about twenty quarts.

_damák_, Slovenly, dirty, untidy, slatternly, sluttish, bedraggled,
draggletail; to become slovenly, etc. Sádto sang dalága pa siá mahípid
siá kaáyo, ápang karón, kay kasáda na, nagdamák. Formerly, when she
was single, she used to be very tidily dressed, but now that she is
married, she has become a slattern. (cf. sáprat).

_damán_, To talk in one's sleep. Ginadamán (Nagadamán) siá. He talks in
his sleep. Ginadamán siá sang íya nga sugilánon kaína. He is repeating
in his sleep his conversation of a short while ago. (cf. súmat).

_damáng_, (H) A spider.

_damáng-dámang_, (B) Dim. of damáng. Also: Anything resembling
a spider.

_damáso_, (Sp. damasco) Damask, figured silk stuff; a kind of very
thin and transparent cloth; fine thread or yarn.

_dámgo_, A dream; to dream. Anó ang dámgo mo or anó ang gindámgo
mo? What was your dream, what did you dream? Gindámgo níya ang íya
pagkabátà. He dreamt of his childhood. Gindámgo lang níya inâ. He
merely dreamt it. It is only his fancy. (cf. dalamgohánon).

_dámgot_, To begin to eat or graze, start taking other food than
milk, said of a baby and of a young animal. Nagadámgot na ang bátà,
tínday. The baby, the calf, is now commencing to take other food than
milk. (cf. lánggot).

_dámhag_, To fall--headlong,--on one's face,--head foremost,--head
first,--prone,--heels over head,--head over heels. Nakadámhag
siá. He fell head foremost. Dinamhagán akó níya. He fell on me
prone. (cf. dágpà, dúsmò, sukámod, kulúb).


_dámhag_, To fall upon, attack with one's arms, etc. See hámag.

_dámhuy_, To lick, lap, draw or pass the tongue over, take in with
the tongue. (cf. dílap, láklak).

_damhúyan, damhuyán_, That is to be licked or taken in with the
tongue. Walâ gid silá sing damhúyan (damhuyán). They have nothing
to eat.

_damíg_, Cold, stiff; to be or become cold. Nagdamíg na ang
minatáy. The corpse has become cold. Damíg na siá. He is cold and
stiff. (cf. ramíg).

_damíl_, Savour, taste, relish; to relish, taste. (cf. lalím, dímdim).

_damílhay_, To be preoccupied, engrossed so as to neglect one's
personal appearance, have no time to attend to dress or convention on
account of overwork, etc. Nagadamílhay gid lang siá. He is so engrossed
that he pays no attention to dress. He neglects his appearance,
is slovenly or carelessly dressed.

_damilí_, Quick, fast, indistinct (of speech); to speak fast and
indistinctly, babble, gabble, jabber. Damilí ang íya nga hámbal or
damilí siá sing hámbal. His speech is fast and indistinct. Nagadamilí
siá kon maghámbal. He speaks indistinctly. Walâ akó makasáyod sang íya
nga gindamilí. I could not understand his babble, jabber. (cf. garót).

_damílit_, Farewell, valediction, goodbye, leave-taking; to take
one's departure, take one's leave, say adieu, bid goodbye. Nagdamílit
(nagpanamílit) siá sa ákon. He took his leave of me, said goodbye
to me. Nagpamanílà siá nga walâ gánì magdamílit sa ákon. He went to
Manila without saying goodbye to me. (cf. paadiós, paálam).

_damílmil_, Crust, clot, daub, plaster of mud or dirt on clothes,
etc.; to be or become encrusted; plastered, clotted, daubed, with
mud or dirt. Ang buling mo sa líog nagadamílmil. The dirt on your
neck is quite thick. (cf. ákmol, ápol).

_damílot_, See damílmil. Nagadamílot gid ang lúnang sa nawóng sang
bátà. The mud on the child's face is quite thick. Indì ka magpadamílot
sang ímo báyò. Don't let your jacket become covered with dirt.

_damiság_, A pile of grain, heap of rice, collection of cereals,
rice or other cereals gathered in a heap; to collect grain in a
heap, etc. Sín-o ang nagdamiság sang humáy? Who put (heaped) the
rice together? Damisagá ang humáy, agúd índì maglápta. Gather the
rice in a heap so that it may not be dispersed. Ang tambóbo amó ang
ginadamisagán sang humáy. The rice-shed is the place in which rice
is stored (in a heap). (cf. túmpok, túmpi, típon).

_damísol_, A kind of small fish.

_damít_, Frequented, much resorted to, haunt of many, visited by
many; to frequent, haunt, resort to, visit often. Dílì gid damít
sang táo iníng lugár. This place is but seldom visited by human
beings. Nagadamít siá sa ámon baláy. He is a frequent visitor at our
house. He often calls on us. (cf. daní, gamít).

_dámla_, To anoint--, oil--, sparingly, apply only a little oil,
ointment, pomade, etc. Damlahá lang sing lána ang ímo bohók. Put on
your hair just a little coconut oil. (cf. híso, háplas, bányos).

_dámlag_, Perhaps, possibly, perchance. Buás dámlag. Possibly
to-morrow. To-morrow perhaps. (cf. básì, áyhan, turán).

_dámlag_, The day after to-morrow, two days hence.

_dámlag_, To appear on the scene, visit, chance upon. Nakadámlag
siá sa ámon kagáb-i. He came to us (for the first time) last
night. (cf. daláng, típlang).

_dámlot_, To suck (one's finger, etc.). Indì ka magdámlot, kay
maláw-ay. Don't suck your finger, it is unbecoming. Indì mo pagdamlotón
ang ímo túdlò, kay mahígkò nga batásan inâ. Don't suck your finger,
for it is a dirty habit. (cf. yúpyup, súyup, sópsop, lótgot).

_damô_, (B) To clean, wash, wipe (one's face). Damoí ang nawóng
mo. Wash your face. Dinamoán mo na ang ímo písngi sang túbig? Have
you wiped your cheeks? (cf. panghilám-os).

_dámò_ (H) To be--, become--, many, augment in numbers, increase,
multiply. Nagdámò ang mga táo, háyop, etc. The people, cattle, became
numerous. Kon buót ka nga magdámò ang ímo mga ábyan, tabángan mo
sing malolóy-on ang mga nalísdan. If you wish to have many friends,
compassionately assist those that are in trouble. Damóa ang mga
mamumugón, bató, kawáyan, etc. Increase the number or get a large
number of workmen, stones, bamboos, etc. Nadamóan or nadám-an akó
sing mga páhò sa karón nga túig. This year I had many mangoes.

_damóg_, Wash, mash, swill, food for animals especially mixed food
as given to pigs and dogs; to feed animals, particularly pigs and
dogs. Idamóg na lang iníng kán-on nga pán-os sa idô. Just give this
stale rice to the dog. Nagtámbok gid ang íya báboy, kay dinamogán
níya sing madámò nga maís. His pig got very fat, for he gave it much
corn. Padamogí ang idô. Get somebody to prepare the food for the
dog. (cf. dalamugán--feeding-trough,--bowl)

_damókol_, To lie about in disorder, pell-mell, put in a disorderly
way, disarray, jumble, litter, mess, huddle, muddle, higgledy-piggledy,
topsy-turvy. Nagadamókol gid lang ang íya mga panápton. His clothes
are lying about in great disorder. Husáya ang ímo panápton sa maléta,
índì mo pagdamokólon. Arrange your clothes neatly in the handbag,
don't throw them in anyhow, higgledy-piggledy. (cf. dúm-ok, hál-id,
lághit, háb-on).

_damókol_, A scuffle, tussle, broil, fray, shindy, confused
fight or tumult; to scuffle, tussle, fight tumultuously or
confusedly. Nagadamokoláy silá. They are having a free fight. Tambagí
ang mga bátà nga nagadamokoláy. Separate the boys that are quarrelling,
scuffling, mixing in a fight. (cf. pakigáway nga malapúyot).

_dámol_, Thickness (of a board, sheet, etc.); to be or become
thick. Nagdámol ang búnbun dirí, kay nagbahâ ang subâ kagáb-i. There
is quite a thick layer of alluvial sand here, because the river was
in flood last night. Utda ang tápì sa nadamólan. Cut the plank at its
thickest part. Ginadamólan akó siníng hénero. This cloth is too thick
for me or appears to me rather thick. (cf. madámol, kadámol, dákmol).

_damót_, Any sort of vegetable. Bisán anó lang nga damót ginakáon
níya. He eats any kind of vegetable. Anó nga damót ang ginatigána mo
sa áton panihápon? What are you preparing for our supper in the way
of vegetables? (cf. útan, ulutanón, láswa).

_damót-dámot_, Dim. and Freq. of damót. Also: To collect, gather
(vegetables, one's thoughts or ideas, etc.). (cf. panuláon).

_dámpal_, To beat, strike, slap, etc. See dapál, sámpal, sámpay.

_dámpi_, Near, hard by, close to, in the vicinity of; towards; in
the direction of. (cf. dapít, dámpit, náyon, lapít).

_dámpig_, Help, aid, assistance, succour, support; to help, aid,
succour, support, assist, side with, take sides with, take the part of,
vote for, second, lend a hand, render assistance. Dampigí siá. Go to
his--help,--assistance. Side with him. (cf. dápig, ámpin, ápin, búlig).

_dámpit_, See dápit--to invite.

_dámpit_, Towards, in the direction of. See dapít, náyon, áyon, dámpi.

_dámpon_, To join, associate with, etc. See dápon.

_dámpug_, A dark cloud, shadow; phantom, anything the presence of
which intimidates or inspires fear; to pursue, follow or be present
at (ready to take sides or interfere), dispirit, discourage, daunt,
check. Walâ silá makamáy-om nga sa malayô nagapaháyag na ang maitúm
nga dámpug sang kalisúd. They could not guess that in the distance a
dark cloud of impending trouble was appearing. Nagdámpug siá sa íla
nga pagsúay, pakigáway, etc. He was present (and acted as a check) on
their quarrelling, fighting, etc. Dampugí silá. Go after them. Pursue
them. Be present at their meeting (in order to daunt them, interfere if
necessary, etc.). (cf. gál-um, pangánod; túgpa, támbong; lagás, páhug).

_dámpug_, Of extraordinary size or strength, terrific, enormous,
gigantic, huge. May napúlò pa lang kag tátlo siá ka túig, ápang daw
dámpug na. He is only thirteen years old, but looks like a giant.

_dampúgan_, Overshadowing, lowering, threatening, terrible,
fearful, awful, terrific, gigantic; of evil omen or impending
misfortune. (cf. dámpug; makahahádluk, makakulúgmat, makalilísang).

_dampúrat_, Foolish talk, nonsense; to utter nonsense, talk like
a fool, drivel, prate, prattle. Indì ka magdampúrat. Don't talk
nonsense. Anó na man ang íya gindampúrat? What bosh or trash did he
utter this time? (cf. lásang, búrà, lamádà, etc.).

_dámò, damô, damúg, damúkol_, (H) etc. See dámò, damô, damóg,
damókol, etc.


_damulága_, Any female animal nearing the age of
bearing. (cf. dumalága).

_damúli_, To soil, dirty, mess, muss, besoiled, dirtied, messed,
mussed, stained. Nagadamúli gid ang íya mga panápton. His clothes are
very dirty. (cf. búlit, damúlit, hígkò, dágtà, músing, táp-ing, etc.).

_damúlit_, (H) To stain, soil, etc. See damúli, búlit, etc. Nadamulítan
akó sang lúnang. I was covered with mud.

_dan_, An exclamation of frequent use equivalent to: Yes, that is
it. Here you are. Now you have got it--or--have understood it. So it
is. So far so good. Now you see the point. Did'nt I tell you. (cf. tê,
tî, nâ).

_danáw_, Pool, puddle, piece of swampy soil, small collection of
water in a hole or depression as seen after a heavy shower of rain;
to form puddles or pools. Nagadanáw ang túbig sa dálan or ang dálan
ginadanawán sang túbig or may mga danáw sa dálan. The water is making
puddles on the road.

_dándan_, To weave plain cloth without cross-stripes and consequently
without the necessity of changing the colour of thread in the shuttle;
the method of weaving without cross-stripes. Ang paghabúl níya sang
patádyong dándan gid lámang. Her weaving of the skirt is (was) done
without cross-stripes i.e. just straight on, quickly. Dandaná lang ang
paghabúl, agúd madásig. Simply weave the cloth straight on without
cross-stripes, so that it may soon be finished. (cf. dalándan--to
fly down-stairs).

_dangál_, Dull, blunt (of edged tools). (cf. hábul, mahábul, umál).

_dangál_, Fool, ass, simpleton, ninny, booby, zany, goose, gaby,
nincompoop, looby. (cf. tampuháw, kalúndong, kólò, kóloy, kolôkolô,
úmang, búang, lóko, tónto). Dangál siá. He is a fool. Dinangál gid
lang ang íya nga sinúgid. What he said was bosh, he talked nonsense.

_dángas_, To strike, blow--, beat--, upon with full force (said of
wind, etc.). (cf. ábong, dánggas, dángkal, yásyas, dásdas).

_dángat_, To reach, obtain, acquire, get at, receive, take hold of,
win, procure, secure, gain. Makadángat ka balá sinâ or madangátan
mo balá inâ? Do you think you can obtain--, secure--, that? Amó na
inâ ang makaloló-oy nga kahimtángan nga dinangátan níya. That is the
pitiable plight he is reduced to. Idángat mo akó siní. Kindly obtain
this favour for me. Walâ siá makadángat sang íya katuyoán. His plan
did not succeed. Buháta iní túbtub sa ímo madangátan. Do this according
to the best of your abilities. Do it as well as you can. (cf. lámbut,
dáb-ot, ámbit).

_dángaw_, The span of the hand between the tip of the thumb and the
tip of the middle-finger. (cf. balángit--the span between the tip of
the thumb and the tip of the fore-finger).

_dangáw_, To swim; ford a deep river, etc., using one's arms and
hands somewhat like an oar in alternate strokes on the left and right.

_dangáw-dángaw_, Dim. of dángaw. Also: A kind of insect that is not
poisonous; a wasp-like insect.

_dáng-dang_, Bright, conspicuous, visible from a far distance, gaudy,
garish, showy, flaunting, glaring, flaring, vivid; to be bright,
etc. Nagadángdang ang íya báyò, ang mga búlak siníng káhoy, ang duág
sang íya baláy etc. His jacket is of a bright colour, the flowers of
this tree are very showy, the colour of his house is visible from a
great distance, etc. (cf. dagáang, dagángdang, dánggà).

_dánggà_, See dángdang.

_dánggas_, To blow or beat upon with full force, drive against without
obstruction, said of wind. Ang hángin nagadánggas sang baláy. The
wind strikes the house with full force. Ang ámon kamálig sa umá
ginadanggasán sang hángin. Our field-hut is being buffeted by the
wind. (cf. ábong).

_danggásan_, Open to the wind, unsheltered, having no screen or
wind-break, exposed to the wind. Ang ámon baláy danggásan. Our house
is exposed to the wind. (cf. dángkal).

_dánggot_, To be weaned, begin to take solid nourishment. See
dámgot id.

_dánghos_, To be busy, have much to do, be much occupied, have
one's hands full, have one's time taken up with. Ang mga táo
karón nagadánghos sang tánum. People at present are busy planting
rice. (cf. dúlup, sákò).

_dángkal_, To be open or exposed to (rain, wind, heat, etc.). Ang
ímo hulút ginadangkalán sang ínit. Your room is exposed to the heat
of the sun. (cf. ábong, dánggas).

_dangkálan_, A kind of tree.

_dánglay_, A kind of small salt-water fish.

_dangô_, To remain near or at the side of, watch, tend or be constantly
present at a sickbed or the like. Indì ka magságad dangô sa masakít
nga táo. Don't be always near the sick man. Ang bátà nagadangô sa
íya ilóy nga nagamasakít. The child is constantly tending or watching
her sick mother. (cf. tangó).

_dángog_, Scales, scab, scurf, forming on wounds or ulcers, during
the healing process. Hugási ang dángog sang ímo butí. Bathe the scabs
of your smallpox. (cf. kugán).

_dangól_, See padangól.

_dangúp_, To take--refuge,--covert,--sanctuary,--shelter, seek--an
asylum,--safety,--protection,--relief, have recourse to, approach--,
go to--, for help. Dángpi siá. Go to him for protection. Have recourse
to him. Nagdangúp siá sa ákon. He took refuge with me, came to me for
help. Dinángpan sang masakít nga táo ang hospitál. The sick man sought
relief in the hospital. Ipadangúp mo ang lalúng sa hospitál. Have
the injured man seen to at the hospital. (cf. áyop, pakitábang).

_dangúsal_, To use profane--, indecent--, language; to prate,
prattle. (cf. ngálngal, ngásal; dúpak, bástos).

_dángyas_, A fish-basket. (cf. alát, kupitón).

_daní_, (B) Frequented, often visited, resorted to; to resort to,
frequent, haunt. Ang daní dirí makasáyod sinâ. Those who often come
here know that. Ang mga nagapangúma nagadaní sa tiénda. Farmers often
visit the shop, store or market. Magdaní ka sa bánwa. You should
often come to town. (cf. damít).

_dánlag_, To come to for the first time, to chance, happen,
etc. Ngáa man nga nakadánlag ka dirí? How did you chance to come
here? (cf. daláng, dámlag).

_dánlak_, To be soft and flabby as fatty animal tissues, to be
slippery, flaccid. Nagadánlak ang támbok sang báboy. Pork fat is soft
and flabby. (cf. dánlug).

_dánlug_, Slipperiness, greasiness; to be or become slippery,
greasy. Nagdánlug ang dálan tungúd sang ulán. The road has become
slippery on account of the rain. Padanlugá ang lapgósan, agúd
mabúdlay ang pagsákà. Make the pole greasy, so that it may be hard to
climb. Nadanlugán akó siníng dálan. This road is too slippery for me.

_dánò_, See padánò--to tell stories, lies, etc.

_dán-ok_, To shove, push, thrust, throw. Idán-ok siá sa kalóg. Push
him into the ditch. (cf. balún-ok, tulúd, tíklod, dís-og).

_dapâ_, Snubnosed, flatnosed, simous. (cf. kulapâ, kurapâ).

_dapá-dapá_, The sole of the foot. (cf. ilalapák).

_dápal_, A hand breadth, a palm, the width of the palm of the hand
or of the four fingers.

_dapál_, A handful; to eat by handfuls; to slap with the open hand or
palm. Idapál lang ang kán-on. Just eat the rice by handfuls. Ihátag mo
sa íya ang isá ka dapál nga kán-on. Give him a handful of rice. Hípus
ka; kay kon dílì dapalán ko ang bábà mo. Be silent or I will slap
you on the mouth.

_dápat_ Fit, meet, due, right, proper, becoming, that should or
ought to be done as a moral obligation, frequently to be translated
simply with: should, ought; to fit, adapt, use, apply, befit, beseem,
become, behoove, be right, be one's due, be expected, be the proper
thing to do. Dápat ka magbúhat sinî. You should do it. You ought to
do it. Inâ ígò kag dápat. That was (is) fit and proper or as it should
be. Dílì gid dápat iní. This certainly is not--becoming,--proper,--the
right thing to do. This is wrong entirely. Idápat nímo iní sa ímo
kinahánglan. Apply this to your need. Dapáti sing salúg ang ímo
kosína. Have a floor laid down in your kitchen. Gindápat níya ang
ganháan sing maáyo. He closed the door altogether. Gindápat sang pánday
ang ganháan sing maáyo. The carpenter fitted the door well. Dapáta
ang puertáhan. Shut the door close. (In this last sense cf. ángkop,
háop, háom) Gindápat níya ang ísa ka plántsa nga sin sa atóp. He put
a sheet of galvanized iron on the roof. (cf. ígò, ángay).

_dápat_, Use, usefulness, advantage. Walâ gid sing dápat ináng ímo
sugilánon. What you said--is of no use,--serves no good purpose. Táo
nga waláy dápat (dapátdapát). A useless man, a good-for-nothing,
loafer, idler. (cf. ásoy, átsoy, águd, agúdagúd, pulús).

_dapát_, Fitted, adapted, accommodated, furnished or trimmed with,
adjusted, closed well, joined well. (cf. dápat).

_dapát-dapát_, Dim. of dápat--usefulness, etc. (cf. agúdagúd).

_dápaw_, A small insect often to be found in hens' nests and causing
a peculiar itch, if it gets on human skin. Also verb. Butangí sing
ádgaw ang pugarán sang ímo manók, agud índì pagabután sang dápaw or
agúd índì pagdapáwan. Put some adgao--leaves into your hens' nests,
so that the dápao-insect may not infest them.

_dapáy_, The hawk, any rapacious hawk-like bird, a bird of
prey. (cf. banóg).

_dapáy-dápay_, To rub or massage lightly, apply gentle friction,
stroke. (cf. daláyday.

_dáp-dap_, A kind of tree with red flowers. Its wood is worthless
even for fuel.

_dápgan_, For dapogán, etc. from dapóg--to smell.

_dápî_, To hang on to, hold on to, keep near, take hold of one's
arm. Gindápì ko gid siá. I kept near him, hung on to him, held fast
to his arm. (cf. úyat, bútkon).

_dápia_, To waft, bear--, carry--, along (of wind). Ang hángin
nagadápia sang kahumút sang mga búlak sa ámon baláy. The wind wafts
the fragrance of the flowers to our house. (dápya id.).

_dapî-dápì_, Dim. and Freq. of dápì. Nagadapî-dapíay silá nga duhá. The
two of them are walking--arm in arm,--side by side,--hand in hand.

_dapî-dápì_, To applaud, clap hands, strike the palms of the hands
together. (cf. palákpak, pamalákpak).

_dápig_, To help, aid, assist, second, stand by, side with,
be a partner, associate or auxiliary; companion, mate, partner,
second. Dapígi siá. Second him. Stand by him. Sín-o ang dápig mo? Who
is your partner or companion? (cf. dámpig, ápin, ámpin).

_dapíg_, A pair, couple, brace, two of the same class or kind, as
a pair of gloves, cuffs, ear-rings, etc. Dapíg nga arítos. A pair
of ear-rings.

_dáp-ig_, Oppression, vexation, distress; to compress, oppress, vex,
pinch. (cf. dapíig, dapíog, dapíol; ipít, ipíip, lígpit).

_dapíig_, See dáp-ig. Ginadapíig silá sang íla mga kaáway. They are
being hard pressed by their enemies.

_dapíog_, To press, squeeze, oppress, trouble, put in
straits. (cf. dáp-ig, dapíol).

_dapíol_, To push, press, squeeze, crowd, shove, wedge against. Indì
mo akó pagdapiólan. Don't push or press against me. Gindapíol akó níya
sa díngding. He squeezed or wedged me against the wall. (cf. dáp-ig,
aróod, oróod).

_dápios, dapiós_, To slip, stumble, fall to the ground by making a
false step or through slipping. Nakadápios akó sa bató nga lumúton. I
slipped on the mossy stone. (cf. dúpias, dalín-as).

_dápiot_, To hold fast to, cling to, hang on to, grasp (as children the
skirt of their mother or the like). Ang bátà nagadápiot sa patádyong
sang íya ilóy--or--ginadapiotán sang bátà ang patádyong sang íya
ilóy. The child is holding fast to its mother's skirt. (cf. kápyot,
kapút, úyat).

_dapít_, Hard by, near, close by, close at hand, in the direction of,
towards, close to, adjoining, adjacent. Diín dapít ang ímo baláy? Sa
amínhan dapít ukón sa bagátnan? Whereabouts--, in what direction--,
is your home, towards the North or South? (cf. áyon, náyon).

_dápit_, To invite, call to, request one's presence or company;
to lead by the hand, guide, help along a road or the like. Dapíta
siá. Invite him. Dapíti ang kalasálon sang isá ka bánda nga
músika. Engage a band for the marriage-feast. Idápit akó ánay
sa íya. Please invite him for me or in my name. Sa tanán nga mga
dinápit diótay lámang ang mga nagtalámbong. Of all those that were
invited only a few attended. Dinapítan níla ang íla pándut sing
madámò nga mga Párì. They invited many priests to assist at their
feast. Gindápit níya ang bátà. He led the baby or child by the
hand. Dapíta iníng tigúlang nga táo sa íya paglakát sa dálan. Help
this old man along the road. Guide--, lead--, support--him on his
way along the road. (cf. ágda, kángay, hágad).

_dáplak_, Flat; to be flat; to drop flat to the ground. (cf. háplak;
dapâ, kurapâ).

_dáplang_, To splutter, sputter. Ang ákon plúma nagadáplang. My pen
is spluttering. Indì mo pagdaplangón ang ímo plúma. Don't make your
pen splutter.

_dáplas_, To smear--, plaster--, over, coat, daub, surface, give a coat
of paint or plaster, anoint with salve, ointment or the like. Daplasí
sing bárnis ang kwádro. Coat the frame with varnish. Give the frame
a coat of varnish. Gindaplasán níya ang íya likód sing búyò. He
plastered his back with buyo-leaves. Idáplas iníng pínta sa lamésa. Use
this paint to paint the table. Dinaplasán níya ang íya hubág sing
támbal. He put a medicinal plaster on his ulcer. Daplasí ang padér sing
ápog. White-wash--, lime-wash--, the wall. (cf. háplas, dámla, pálhit).

_dáplay_, To lie--, lean--, sit--, on another as children on the hip
or on the lap of their mothers. Ang bátà nagadáplay sa dúghan sang íya
ilóy. The baby is lying on the breast of its mother. Ginadaplayán sang
bátà ang íya ilóy. The child sits astride on its mother's hip. Daplayí
siá. Rest at his side.

_dáplì_, (B) Meat, fish, poultry, etc. as side-dishes to rice; to
have or eat such side-dishes. Anó ang gindáplì nínyo sa panyága? What
side-dish have you got or prepared for dinner? Idáplì mo iníng ísdà
sa panihápon. Prepare this fish as a side-dish for supper. Daplií ang
kán-on kay malás-ay, kon walâ sing daráplì. Provide a side-dish for
the rice, for without a side-dish it is unpalatable. Padaplií akó
sing kárne. Get me some meat as a side-dish to rice. Nagdáplì siá
sing manók sang pagpanyága níya kaína. He had or ate a chicken when
he took his dinner a short while ago. (N.B. Bread, biscuits, pies,
tarts, etc. are called kalan-ónon; vegetables in general are called
útan in H and láswa in B; cf. daráplì, súd-an, ikáon).

_dáplì_, To join, attach to, connect with, associate with. (cf. ímpon,
símpon, abáy; daráplì).

_dáplos_, To slip. See dápios, dúpias, dalín-as. Nakadáplos akó sa
salúg, tápì, kawáyan, etc. I slipped on the floor, on the plank,
on the bamboo, etc. Anó ang nakapadáplos sa ímo? What made you slip?

_dápnan_, (B) See dápon--to join, etc.

_dápò_, To come upon, attack, invade, approach, gather around,
beset. Ang mga subáy nagdápò sa ákon. Ants invaded--, attacked--,
me. Kon may patáy nga sápat ang mga idô kag úlud magadápò. When there
is a dead animal, dogs and insects will gather and attack it. Dinapóan
sang mga subáy ang tánga nga patáy. The dead cockroach was beset by
ants. (cf. amág, palapít, típon, dápon).

_dapóg_, Hearth, fireplace; kitchen. (cf. dalúnghan, digamohán,
lulutuán).

_dapóg_, (B) Smell, odour, scent, emanation, exhalation, fume,
redolence; to give out or emit an odour, to smell, be redolent,
etc. Iníng bíno may dapóg nga gas. This wine smells of petroleum. Iníng
bíno tínto nagadapóg sing tandúay. This red table-wine has a smell
of tandúay. Ang dapóg siníng mga bátà dáw kánding. These children
smell like goats. Nakadapóg akó sang pagsánlag sang kapé. I smelled
the roasting of coffee. Nadápgan ko ang áhos nga ímo kináon. I smelt
the garlic you had eaten. (cf. báhò, panimáhò, sínghot, panínghot).

_dápol_, See ákmol, ápol--to coat with, incrust.

_dápol_, To tire, fatigue, exhaust, spend, weaken, enfeeble, weary,
knock up. Ginadápol akó sang paglakát, sang pangabúdlay, etc. I
am getting tired of walking, am fatigued with work, etc. Dinápol
akó. I became weak, feeble, exhausted, jaded, done up. (cf. kápoy,
lúyà, pául).

_dapólas_, To apply a--salve,--ointment,--plaster, etc. to rub,
stroke, scratch. Dapolása ang hubág, ang bútkon, etc. Put a plaster
on the boil, the arm, etc. Dapolási siá sa likód. Put a plaster
on his back. Idapólas iníng bulúng sa íya pilás. Use this medicine
to treat his wound. (cf. háplas, hapúlas, hámpul, támbal, dáplas;
apóhap, kálot).

_dápon_, (B) To join, unite, associate with, to lay--, put--,
lump,--hang--, clap--, together. Idápon mo ang ákon báka sa ímo
nga karabáw sa pagpahálab. Take my cow along with your buffalo
to the pasture. Dápni (dapóni) ang íya bugás sang ímo, kay íya
tig-angón sa panyága. Put your rice with his, for he is going
to boil it for dinner. Dinapónan kitá níla sa áton kalípay. They
joined us in our merriment. Indì mo pagpadapónan ang ímo bátà sing
kaupdánan nga maláut. Don't permit your child to associate with bad
companions. (cf. ímpon, símpon, tingúb, dápò).

_dapón_, To do jointly with somebody else (using his tools,
etc.). Nagdapón akó sang ákon talahíon sa íya nga baláy. I did my
sewing together with her in her house (using her sewing machine,
etc.). (cf. dápon).

_dapúlay_, To stroke, caress, fondle, dandle, wheedle, cajole,
coax. (cf. apóhap, hapóhap, dalôdálò).

_dáp-ung_, To cast--, throw--, heap--, put--, on the fire. Idáp-ung
na lang sa kaláyo iníng gabúk nga káhoy. Throw this rotten wood on
the fire. Dap-ungí ang kaláyo siníng mga inágsap. Feed the fire with
these chips. Cast these chips on the fire.

_dápya, dápyos, dápyot_, See dápia, dápios, dápiot.

_darâ_, Aunt. (cf. tíà, tíyà, mánding).

_darâ_, (B) See dalâ;--to fester, etc. Nagadarâ ang talínga sang bátà,
kay natohógan sang arítos. The child's ear is festering on account
of the ear-ring hung from it.

_dará_, (B) See dalá. Dárha, dárhi, etc.--dálha, dálhi, etc.

_dára_, (B) See dála--to bear, etc.

_daraákan_, (B) To prattle, prate, gab, gabble, rattle on, talk
much, be loquacious, garrulous, so that nobody has a chance to
put in a word. Nagadaraákan siá. He talks incessantly, is a great
chatterbox. Gindaraakánan níya akó túbtub sa kataká or túbtub nga
naták-an akó. He rattled on till I got sick of it. (cf. búrà).

_darába_, Uneasiness, anxiety, worry; to be or become uneasy,
etc. Hinúgay sang darába, kay índì man mabúg-at ang pagbátì sang ímo
anák. Do not worry, for your son is not seriously ill. (cf. dalamúnon).

_darabáhan_, Uneasy, worried, fluttered, nervous, anxious,
disturbed, having misgivings or apprehensions. Also verb. Darabáhan
siá (nagadarabáhan siá) tungúd sang balatían sang íya amáy. He is
worried over the sickness of his father. Darabáhan (ginadarabáhan siá)
sináng tabô. He is made uneasy by that event. (cf. darába, dalamúnon,
darámnon, índì malibútay, etc.).

_daragílon_, (B) See dalagílon id.

_darak-ónon_, (B) The thumb. (cf. kamomóo, kumalágkò).

_darákot_, (B) A kind of plant.

_darámhak_, Naughty, wicked, rude; uncultured, unpolite, uncivilized;
mean, dirty; to be or become naughty, etc. (cf. damák, sáprat, bástos).

_daramíhay_, To neglect one's personal appearance, etc. See damílhay
id.

_daramílay_, See daramíhay, damílhay id.

_daramíli_, Unable to pronounce distinctly, muttering, mumbling,
talking unintelligibly; to pronounce very defectively, etc. (cf. pihít,
hát-on, pítlà, kúnlà, damilí).

_darámnon_, (B) See dalamúnon.

_darampúrat_, (B) To talk glibly,--flippantly,--lightly, be a great
chatterbox, (cf. dampúrat, lamádà, lásang, búrà, wákal, hádak, etc.).

_daramúnon_, (B) See dalamúnon.

_darán_, To cause--, bring on--, a fit, especially a fit of insanity,
produce a recurrence of mania. Ginadarán na man ang búang. The lunatic
is having one of his fits again. Indì mo siá paghambalón, kay básì
daranón siá. Don't talk to him, for he may get another fit of madness.

_darán-darán_, Naughty, restless, ill-mannered, mischievous,
troublesome, misbehaving, always ready for mischief and never quiet;
to be naughty, etc. Nagadarándarán gid iníng mga bátà. These children
are very mischievous, naughty, noisy, troublesome or the like. Indì
akó nínyo pagdarándaranán. Don't disturb me with your noise or
mischief. Darándarán nga bátà. A lively, restless, troublesome
child. (cf. harásharás, dingkalogán, diwal-ógan, karandagán).

_dárap_, To rave, talk nonsense, be delirious. (cf. dálat, lásang,
dampúrat, sála, wákal, búrà).

_darapálang_, Blot, grime, dirt, stain, blotch; to stain,
etc. Nagdarapálang ang pínta sa delárgo mo, kay nagpúngkò ka sa isá
ka síya nga bág-o pa lang napintahan. You have got some paint on your
trousers, because you sat down on a newly painted chair. Nadarapalángan
ang íya báyò sang dugô. His jacket was stained with blood. (cf. dágtà,
mánsa, búlit, músing).

_daráplì_, A side-dish. See dáplì.

_dáraw_, To pay a visit of condolence on occasion of death in a
family. Gindaráwan kamí níya, kay napátyan kamí. He paid us a visit
of condolence, for we were bereaved. Magdáraw ka sa íla--or daráwi
silá. Pay them a visit of condolence. (cf. dálaw).

_darawídaw_, A kind of bird. Daw darawídaw ikáw. You are like a
darawidaw-bird, i.e. an incessant talker, a great chatterbox.

_daráy_, To impart fear, to scare, alarm, startle, raise apprehension,
excite or inspire fear. Ginadaráy siá kay mahádluk man ikáw. He is
getting scared, because you also show fear. Indì ka magpáti kag índì
ka magpakúlbà sináng mga súgid nga maabút ang mabáskug nga línog, kay
kon ikáw makulbaán ang ibán darayón man. Don't believe, and don't be
alarmed at, those stories about a violent earthquake that is to happen
soon, for if you become nervous about it, others will be afraid also.

_daríri_, To induce, persuade, move, coax, wheedle, cajole, talk over,
(mostly used with a negative). Indì mo siá madaríri sa pagpahulám sa
ímo sing kwárta. You will not be able to coax him into lending you
money. Indì ka makadaríri sa íya sa pagkádto dídto. You won't be able
to get him to go there.

_daróos_, A severe, continuous cough. Also verb. Ginadaróos siá. He
is constantly coughing, has a severe cough. (cf. balókoy).

_dárwa_, (B) Two, twain, couple, brace, pair. (cf. duhá).

_darwampúlò_, (B) Twenty, score. (cf. duhá ka púlò).

_dasâ-dasâ_, To
act-thoughtlessly,--light-heartedly,--foolishly,--impetuously; to walk
noisily over boards, stamp the feet on the floor, etc. (cf. dalás,
dasôdasô, tabinás, hinalî; dásdas, yásyas, pundágpúndag, pusádpúsad).

_dásay_, To be quick, swift, fast, rapid, speedy, expeditious,
do quickly, hasten, make haste. Dasáya ang ímo paghámbal. Speak
faster. Come to the point quickly. (cf. dásig, dalî, ábtik).

_dasáy-dásay_, Dim. and Freq. of dásay. Ginadasáydásay níya
ang íya paglakát, pagarádo, etc. He walks, ploughs, etc. rather
quickly. (cf. dalîdálì, dasíg-dásig, dakíndákin).

_dás-das_, Second rice-pounding; to pound rice a second time;
to strike, beat, rush upon. Dasdasí ang ginúmà nga humáy. Pound
a second time the rice that has been pounded for the first
time. Figuratively: Gindasdasán níya akó sing buyáyaw. He cursed and
swore at me most violently. Dasdasí siá sing básol. Give him a sound
scolding. (cf. yásyas).

_dasiâ_, To put--, impose--, upon, trick, cheat, swindle,
defraud, deceive, bluff. Indì ka magdasiâ sa akon--or--índì mo akó
pagdasiaán. Don't cheat me. (cf. dáyà, límbong; lág-it, agóng).

_dásig_, To be quick, do something with speed or promptness, hasten,
etc. Dasíga ang paglakát mo. Walk quickly. Quicken your pace. Gindásig
níya ang íya trabáho. He performed his work with despatch. Nagadásig
na siá sang íya pagtikáng. He is now stepping out briskly, walking
fast. (cf. dásay).

_dasíg-dásig_, Dim. and Freq. of dásig--to be quick, etc.

_dás-il_, To injure, lacerate, etc. See dús-il.

_dáskan, dáskon_, From dasók--to cram, etc.

_dásmà_, (H) To fall prone, fall on one's face. Nakadásmà siá. He
fell on his face. (cf. dágpà, dúsmò, sukámod).

_dásmag_, To attack, fall upon, strike, fell--, throw--, to
the ground. Dasmagá siá kag ibutók. Fall upon him and get him
down. (cf. dámhag, hámag).

_dasô_, To risk, hazard, venture, chance, expose oneself, to rush into
danger without reflection, be rash, foolhardy, reckless, thoughtless,
temerarious. Indì ka magdasô sa mga karabáw nga nagasúngay. Don't
be foolhardy going near buffaloes that are fighting. The Dim. and
Freq. dasôdasô is more in use.

_dasô-dasô_, Dim. and Freq. of dasô. Kon magdasôdasô ikáw magkádto
dídto ambót kon anó ang mahanabô sa ímo. If you are reckless enough
to go there, I don't know what will happen to you.

_dás-og_, To impel, push, poke, shove, thrust, crowd, wedge,
squeeze. Gindás-og akó níya sa díngding. He squeezed me against
the wall. Idás-og lang sa higád ang mga panápton nga mahígkò. Shove
the soiled clothes into the corner. Dasogí lang ang kátre sang mga
ulúnan. Just poke the pillows into the bed. (cf. dís-og).

_dasók_, To cram, ram, wad, stuff, fill, pack, press--, squeeze--,
in. Dasoká ang sulúd sang maléta. Pack the contents of the suitcase
tight. Dáski (for dasokí) ang ulúnan ko sing dúldul, kay buút akó sang
matígdas. Stuff the pillow tight with cotton, for I like a hard one.

_dasón_, Following, subsequent, coming after; to ensue, succeed,
follow as a sequence or in succession; to come--after,--later,--next,
etc. Magadasón ka balá sa ákon sa pagkádto sa Ilongílong? Shall
you follow me later in going to Iloilo? Nagadasonáy silá. They are
following each other. Dasón siní ----. After this ----. Ipadasón
mo sa íya ang káro. Send the cart after him. Ang kátay dinasonán
(dinásnan) sang isá ka matahúm nga beláda. The parade was followed
by a beautiful entertainment, play. (cf. sunúd).

_dáta_, (Sp. data) Expense, expenditure, outlay, out-go, disbursement;
to expend, spend, pay out. Idáta ko lang iníng isá ka búlig nga ságing
sa ákon útang sa ímo. I will give you this bunch of bananas as part
payment of my debt to you.

_dáta_, Use, usefulness, worth. Táo nga may dáta. A useful man. Táo
nga walâ sing dáta. A worthless fellow. (cf. águd, pulús, ásoy).

_dátà_, To extend, abound, prolong, last long, spread over a long
time or large district. Nagdátà kahápon ang ámon sugilánon dídto sa
íla baláy. Our conversation yesterday at their house lasted a long
time. Nagadátà karón ang pagdinayaáy sa pagpiniliáy. Nowadays cheating
is very common at elections.

_datág_, A wide valley, a plain, extensive grounds. (cf. latagón,
wayáng, patág).

_datagón_, See datág.

_dát-an, dát-on_, From dáut--to injure, harm.

_dátay_, (B) To scream, shout, yell, howl (as children). Ang bátà
nagadátay. The baby is screaming. Indì mo pagpadatáyon ang bátà. Don't
make the baby scream. (The form datáydátay is more in use).

_datáy-dátay_, Dim. and Freq. of dátay--to scream, etc.

_dátdat_, To stand, endure, be able to put up with, make head
against. Kon mabáskug ang mga balúd, ang baróto índì makadátdat
sa báybay. When the waves are high, the (small) boat cannot make
the shore. Katámà sang asín siníng sópas; índì akó makadátdat
sa pagkáon. This soup contains too much salt; I cannot eat
it. (cf. saráng, batás; át-at, ít-it).

_dátilis_, (Sp. datil) Date, date-palm, a kind of tree with cherry-like
fruit.

_datíng_, To obtain, receive. Nagpaúlì na ang bátà, kay nakadatíng sing
tinápay. The boy went home after receiving some bread. (cf. báton).

_datíng_, Well versed, experienced, expert. (cf. batíd, sagád, etc.).

_datíng-datíng_, To step out,
walk--briskly,--nimbly,--quickly. Nagadatíng-datíng siá. He walks
briskly. (cf. dalîdálì, dakíndákin).

_dátò_, (Sp. dato) Chief, chieftain, especially among the Moros;
title of a high dignitary in Oriental countries.

_dát-og_, (H) To put--, place--, set--, upon (as on a block or
some similar support). Idát-og ang líog sang manók sa tapalán, kag
laboón. Place the chicken's neck on the block and chop it through. Kon
magbíal ikáw sing gatóng, dat-ogí iníng káhoy. When you split firewood,
lodge it on this piece of timber. (cf. dát-ol id.).

_dát-ol_, See dát-og. Nadat-olán siá sing mabúg-at nga káhoy. A heavy
piece of timber--fell upon him,--pressed him down,--crushed him.

_dát-on_, A plate, a dish. (cf. pínggan, tulánhan).

_daúg_, To overcome, win, be victorious, be superior, master,
defeat, lick, conquer, vanquish, put down, overthrow, outdo, rout,
gain the ascendancy or mastery of, get the best of, get the upper
hand, get over difficulties; gain, winnings; conquered, vanquished,
etc. Sín-o ang nagdaúg? Who won? Who came out victorious? Dág-on ko
ikáw sa trabáho. I can beat you at work. Gindaúg níya akó. He overcame
me. He defeated me. Dág-a siá sa pagsulát. Prove yourself his better
at writing. Ang pagbása sang ininglés amó ang pagdaúg ni Pédro sa kay
Hosé sang silá ang nagpadag-ánay (sang íla pagpadag-ánay). In English
reading Pédro showed himself superior to José, when the two of them
were competing. Makapilá nagdaúg siá? How often did he win? Pilá
ang daúg mo? How much did you win or gain? Sín-o sa íla nga duhá ang
daúg? Which of the two lost or was beaten?

_daúl-daúl_, Stunted, kept back in growth, underdeveloped; to be or
become stunted. (cf. aríarí, agílagíl).

_dáup_, To become hollow, etc. See gáop, gáhuk, gáuk.

_daúp_, Hollow, cavity. See gaóp, gahúk, gaúk.

_dáut_, To injure, hurt, harm, damage, impair, spoil, mar,
do--harm,--mischief, cause detriment. Nagdáut siá sa ákon or gindaútan
(gindát-an) níya akó. He did me an injury. He caused me loss or
damage. (cf. hálit, láut).

_daw_, Like, as, similar to, as it were, as if, about, resembling,
having the semblance of; it seems, appears, may. Iníng káhoy matíg-a
nga daw salsálon. This wood is as hard as iron. Daw butíg ang íya nga
ginsúgid. What he said seems to be untrue. Daw sa dílì na akó makabatás
sinâ. It appears to me that I can stand that no longer. Daw sa magadaúg
siá. It looks as if he may win. Kon daw sa walâ gid ikáw sing lúyag sa
pagdúaw sa iya, ----. If you really shouldn't like to pay him a visit,
----. Daw lángit. Like heaven. (cf. súbung, bílang, ánggid, apít-ápit).

_dawâ-dawâ_, Satisfactory, middling, pretty well off, rather well to
do, having enough, neither rich nor poor. (cf. dirâ-dirâ, ayádayád,
hingánhingán, maáyo gáwa).

_dáw-an, dáw-on_, etc. From dawô--to accept, receive, take.

_daw-ánay_, To give and take, reciprocate, exchange, interchange;
salute one the other, shake hands with. (cf. dawô, dawoánay).

_dáwat_, To accept or receive something from the hand of
another. Dawáta iní, kay ginadóhol ko sa ímo. Accept this, for
I am offering it to you. Take this, as I am holding it out to
you. (N. B. dáwat has often also the meaning of receiving something
unpleasant or injurious, to get it, catch it. Nakadáwat siá sang
sílot, balatían, kárà, etc. He was punished, contracted a disease,
got a scolding, etc.). (cf. dáwhat, dawô).

_dawát_, To relish food again, begin to eat again, get back one's
appetite. (cf. hawát).

_dawát_, A kind of shell-fish.

_dawatán_, A receptacle, especially the bamboo receptacle used in
the collection of toddy from the coconut palms. Ang sulúd sang salúd
ginawaní sang mananggéte sa íya nga dawatán. The palm-wine collector
empties the contents of the vessel attached to the fruit-stalk of
the coconut palm into his collecting-receptacle. (cf. kawít, pasók).

_dawát-dawát_, Dim. and Freq. of dawát. (cf. hawáthawát).

_dáwdaw_, To turn round, spin, whirl, twirl. (cf. búyung, túyub,
tíyog).

_dawdáwan_, Machine, engine, mill. (cf. dáwdaw; galingán, pábrika).

_dáwhat_, To receive, etc. See dáwat, dawô, dáb-ot. Dawhatá iní. Take
hold of this. Receive this in your hand.

_dawín_, A small basket used in gathering various fruits as kadiós,
maní, maize, mangoes, etc.

_dawô_, To take hold of with one's hand, accept, receive. See dáwat,
dáwhat. Dáw-a iní. Take this in your hand. (cf. dahô).

_dáwog_, The fruit-stalk of a coconut palm. Iníng isá ka
dáwog may napúlò ka lubí. This fruit-stalk is bearing ten
coconuts. (cf. balayóbay, báwog).

_dawóg_, Vine-shoots or branches going off in all directions; to
creep, spread or extend over the ground, said of vine-shoots or
the like. Nagadawóg na ang kamóte or may dawóg na ang kamóte. The
sweet-potato is pushing its runners along the ground.

_dáyà_, Trick, cheat, wile, cheating, trickery, fraud; to cheat,
trick, do, diddle, take in, defraud, overreach, swindle, impose--,
practise--, play--, put--, palm--, foist--, upon. Nagdáyà siá sa ákon
or gindayáan níya akó. He cheated me. He defrauded me. He played a
trick on me. Ginaanó mo pagdáyà (Anó ang ginadáyà mo)? What tricks
are you up to? (cf. dasiâ, limbong).


_dáy-a_, See dái-a--to drift, etc.

_dayág_, Visible, manifest, public, open, exposed, perceptible,
discernible, apparent; to be or become manifest, etc. Nagdayág na ang
baláy, kay gintapás námon ang páhò nga naglipúd ánay. The house is now
visible, for we have cut down the mango-tree that hid it before. Dayág
inâ. That is clear, manifest, known publicly, apparent.

_dayáhan, day-áhan_, See dai-áhan--beach, etc.

_dayán_, To walk or stroll about, promenade, saunter; to take out
for a walk, give an airing to. Nagadayán siá sa plása. He is taking a
stroll in (on) the public square. Ginadayán sang ilóy ang íya bátà,
kay nagahibî. The mother is taking the baby out for a walk, for an
airing, because it is crying. (cf. lágaw).

_dayán-dáyan_, Dim. and Freq. of dayán. Indì ka magságad batáng,
kóndì magdayándáyan ka. Don't be always lying down, but take a
walk. (cf. lagáw-lágaw).

_dáyaw_, To praise, exalt, extol, esteem, appreciate, magnify,
glorify, make much of, speak well of, honour, admire, laud, think
or speak highly of. Dayáwon ang Diós. Praised be God. Blessed be
God. Ginadáyaw níla ang bág-o nga simbáhan. They are full of praise
for the new church. Dayáwa siá, kay dalayáwon. Honour him, for he is
worthy of honour. Gindáyaw ko siá, kay nakasáyod akó nga dalayawón
siá, kag iniháwan akó níya sing manók kag ginpainúm sing tubâ. I
flattered him, because I knew that flattery goes down with him, and
he killed a chicken for me and gave me some toddy to drink. Idáyaw
sa íya ang íya bág-o nga baláy, ang íya kaálam, etc. Speak well of
his new house, of his learning, etc. Gindáyaw níla siá tungúd sang
madámò níya nga pagkasampáton. They exalted him on account of his
many accomplishments. (cf. padungúg).

_dayáw_, Dandy, coxcomb, fop, dude, masher, exquisite, swell; to
be or become a dandy, etc., to deck oneself out for show, dress
ostentatiously. Nagadayáw siá, kay dalagíta na. She is dressing
herself for show, because she is now growing out of her girlhood. Abáw,
kadayáw gid sa íya! Why, he is quite a dandy! (cf. padayáw).

_dáyday_, To form--, follow--, keep--, in line, stand--in a row,--in
file,--in rank, walk in Indian file. Nagadáyday ang mga táo sa
prosesyón. The people in the procession are keeping in line. Daydayá
ang mga bátà. Draw up the children in line. Daydayí ang binít sang
dálan sang mga eskwéla. Make the school-children stand in a row at
the side of the road. Padaydayá ang mga bátà. Make the children form
in line. (cf. ídas, andána, kóro).

_daydayán, daydáyan_, Place for a line-up, where people or things
are formed in lines or rows. (dáyday).

_dáyhat_, To receive, obtain, lay hands on. (cf. dáwat, dáwhat;
báton, dángat).

_dayók_, Salt-fish, salted fish. (cf. ginamós, lílang, patís, lamayó).

_dáyon_, Continuous, permanent, lasting, perpetual, eternal, at all
times, evermore, constantly, always, everlastingly; to continue,
go on with, last, stay for some time, lodge, sojourn, visit or call
upon for an extended period, spend some time. Dáyon ang kabúhì sang
kalág, umalági ang íya sang láwas. The life of the soul is eternal,
that of the body transitory. Sa dáyon nga ínit nagláyà ang madámò nga
mga tanúm. On account of the long drought many plants withered. Dayóna
ang ímo pagbása, paglakát, hámbal, etc. Go on with your reading, your
march, your speech, etc. Magdáyon ka dirí sa ámon. Stay here with
us for a time. Diín ang ginadayónan mo? Where are you staying? Kon
magsakáy ka pa Manílà saráng mo madayónan dídto ang ákon tíò. When
you go to Manila, you can stay at my uncle's there. Dáyon gid lang
ang paghibî siníng bátà. This baby is always crying.

_dáy-us_, To slip, make a false step. Nakadáy-us siá sa latayán
kag nahúlug sa túbig. He slipped on the gangplank and fell into the
water. (cf. dalín-as, dúpyas).

_debosyón_, (Sp. devoción) Devotion, piety. Mangadî ka sa may
debosyón. Pray devoutly.

_debóto_, (Sp. devoto) Devout, pious, religious,
devotee. (cf. madebosyónon, mainampóon).

_dedál_, (Sp. dedal) Thimble.

_deklamár_, (Sp. declamar) To declaim, recite. Gindeklamár níya ang isá
ka matahúm nga binaláybay. He recited a beautiful poem. (cf. pamítlang,
pamúlong).


_delána_, (Sp. lána) Woollen, of wool, flannel. (dilána id.).

_delárgo_, (Sp. de largo) Long trousers, pantaloons, pants, breeches,
small-clothes; to wear trousers, etc. Nagadelárgo na iníng bátà. This
boy is wearing long trousers already. Kon magbáklay ka sa bakólod
índì ka magdelárgo, kóndì magpuróy ka lang. If you go over the
hill, don't wear long trousers, but knee-breeches, knickerbockers,
shorts. (cf. sárwal, pantelón, puróy).

_demasyádo_, (Sp. demasiado) Too much, excessive, more than enough,
exceeding, beyond proper limits. (cf. masyádo, lám-ag, lakás, dúro,
támà, súkò, sóbra).

_dependiénte_, (Sp. dependiente) Dependent, subject to, inferior to,
menial; servant, employee. (cf. sologoón, sákup, ginsakúpan, ayóp,
batâbátà).

_derétso_, (Sp. derecho) Right, justice, law; due, recompense,
fee. (cf. tungúd, katarúngan; baláyran).

_derétsos_, (Sp. derechos) Rights, privileges, customary fees or dues
for official services. (cf. baláyran).

_deskárga_, (Sp. descarga) The unloading--, unlading--, of a ship;
discharge, volley; to unload, unlade, lighten, discharge cargo;
to discharge, let off (a rifle, etc.). (cf. palúsad; palupók).

_desmáyo_, (Sp. desmayo) Swoon, faint, fainting fit, syncope, collapse;
to swoon, faint, collapse, become--insensible,--unconscious,--destitute
of feeling, lose consciousness, go off in a faint, lose
one's senses. Naabután siá sing desmáyo or nadesmáyo siá. He
fainted. (cf. lípong, lipóng).

_desóras_, (Sp. deshora) Inopportune, untimely, ill-timed,
at an unseemly hour, not the proper time, inconvenient
time. (cf. aláng-álang, disóras).

_después_, (Sp. después) Afterward, later, then, next. (cf. dasón,
sang, sa tápus na, sa ubús na; ogáling).

_destíno_, (Sp. destino) Destination, appointment, allocation;
destiny, doom, fate, lot, fortune, chance. (cf. kapaláran, swérte,
pálad, kadtoán).

_dî_, No, not, not so. (cf. dílì, índì, bokón).

_dî-_, A negative prefix similar to the English in- and un-,
e.g. dîhímpit-- not perfect, imperfect; dî mahinulsúlon--not
contrite, impenitent; dîmadampígon--not helping or supporting,
impartial; dîtúgut--not allowed, not permissible, illicit, forbidden;
dîsonô--not according to, irrelevant; dîmapahaylóhon--not easily won
over, unshaken, unyielding; dîmahímò--impossible; dîmabása--illegible;
dîmamalátyon--not mortal, immortal; dîmadinulúnton--not subject to
decay, imperishable, indestructible; dîmapinadaláhon--not easily
carried along or swayed, unswayed, unswerving; dîmainandámon--not
careful, unconcerned; dîmaúgdang--immodest; dîmatínlò--unclean;
dîmabatás--intolerable, etc. etc.

_día_, (Sp. día) Day, date, datum. (cf. ádlaw, pétsa).

_diá_, This, that. Imáw diá. That is it. (cf. riá, iní, inâ).

_diabítis_, (Sp. diabetes) Diabetes.

_diáblo_, (Sp. diablo) Devil, satan, demon. (cf. yáwà).

_diadéma_, (Sp. diadema) Diadem, crown. (cf. purúng, koróna).

_diagnósis_, (Sp. diagnosis) Diagnosis. (cf. pangilála).

_diagráma_, (Sp. diagrama) Diagram.

_dialékto_, (Sp. dialecto) Dialect, form or idiom of a language
peculiar to one place distinguishing it from the same language spoken
in other parts of the country, provincialism. (cf. hámbal, púlong,
pululúngon).

_diálogo_, (Sp. diálogo) Dialogue.

_diamánte_, (Sp. diamante) Diamond, brilliant;
adamant. (cf. batóngmaídlak).

_diámetro_, (Sp. diámetro) Diameter.

_dián_, (B) There; that (one). (cf. dirâ; inâ, diá, riá).

_diána_, (Sp. diana) Reveille; a band marching and playing through
the streets at early dawn; to play a reveille.

_dibuénas_, (Sp. de buena suerte) Lucky, fortunate, propitious,
auspicious, successful. (cf. paláran, uísit, úysit; dimálas
(buísit)--unlucky, etc.).

_dibúho_, (Sp. dibujo) Design, drawing, sketch, plan, map, chart,
delineation, outline, projection, representation, elevation,
ground-plan; to draw, sketch, make an outline,--draft (draught),
of etc. Gindibúho níya ang laráwan ni ----. He drew the picture of
----. Magdibúho ka sing baláy. Make a plan for a house.

_díd-an_, For dilían from dílì. Nadíd-an siá sang pálad, sang mánggad,
sang lángit, etc. Fate was unkind to him, he was not a favourite of--,
was not favoured with--, wealth, heaven was against him, etc.

_dídis_, The civet of the civet cat; the very malodorous scent of
the fox due to a secretion of a gland near the base of the fox's tail.

_dídto_, There, yonder, over there; there is (was, are, were,
etc.). Adto dídto. That there. Madámò ang ísdà dídto. There is (was)
much fish there. Magkádto ka dídto. Go there. Dílì inâ, kóndì yádto
dídto. Not that one, but the one over there.

_diéta_, (Sp. dieta) Diet, prescribed or regulated food for a sick
man, for an invalid, etc.; daily allowance for officials travelling
by order of the government, daily salary or extra-allowance for some
special work.

_digála_, (Sp. de gala) In full dress, arrayed as for a feast or
some solemn gathering, festive, in gala dress; to wear festive
apparel. Nagadigála siá. He is in gala dress. (cf. dikumpotók,
mahípid, mahípig).

_digámo_, To arrange, prepare, get ready, set to rights or in
order, especially applied to all work in a kitchen. Digamóha ang
mga pínggan. Arrange the plates. Put the plates in their proper
place. Digamóhi akó sing panyága. Get some dinner ready for me. Idigámo
akó sang sángkap sa digamohán. Please tidy up the kitchen utensils
for me. Ipadigámo sa kay Hosé ang mga pagkáon. Let Joe look after the
food. Sín-o ang nagdigámo sang ákon pányo nga nalipatán ko dirâ sa
ibábaw sang lamésa? Who took away (and kept for me) the handkerchief
I forgot there on the table? (cf. lútò, ráhà; hímos).

_digamohán_, Kitchen, fireplace, hearth. (cf. kosína, lulutuán).

_díg-as_, To make--, become--, fine, pound or grind well. Usánga
sing maáyo ang ímo ginakáon, agúd madíg-as kag mahapús matúnaw sang
ímo solóksolók. Chew your food well that it may be properly ground
(between your teeth) and become easy to digest. (cf. líg-as, ríg-as).

_dignidád_, (Sp. dignidad) Dignity, high rank or station, honour,
excellence. (cf. kadunggánan, pagkatalahóron, dungúg, pagkahalángdon).

_dígos_, To bathe, wash, lave, give a bath to, wash by pouring water
over the body. Digósa ang bátà, báboy, etc. Give the baby, the pig,
etc. a bath. Digósi iníng pasungán sang idô. Wash the dog in this
trough. Idígos akó ánay sang ákon báboy. Please wash the pig for
me. (cf. lígos, rígos, lígò).

_dígra_, To deter, intimidate, scare, frighten, cow, daunt. (cf. dúdlà,
tíkba).

_dígwà_, To belch, eructate, retch, strain, as in vomiting. Indì
ka magdígwà. Don't belch. Indì mo akó pagdigwaán. Don't belch in my
presence. (cf. kúghad, pangúghad).

_digwákà_, (B) To belch, etc. See dígwà.

_dihál_, To loll, hang out the tongue. See diwál.

_dìhílmon_, Invisible, unseen. (dílì, hilúm).

_díhok_, To move, stir, budge, waggle, wriggle, writhe, squirm,
twitch, twist, show life by motion. Nagadíhok pa ang úlud nga ímo
pinápà. The worm you crushed is wriggling still. Padihóka siá. Make
him move. (cf. líhok, híos, híwos, húlag, lítok).

_díhon_, To make, produce, manufacture, (especially said of
earthenware). Dihóni akó sing napúlò ka kólon. Make ten rice-pots
for me. (cf. búhat, hímò, patubás).

_díhon_, To divide, part, distribute into heaps things that are loosely
connected. Dihóna ang bugás, tinápay, arína, etc. Divide the rice,
bread, flour, etc. Dihóni akó sing balingón nga báli pisítas. Give
me twenty centavos worth of the fish called balingón. Idíhon mo akó
ánay siníng ginamós nga ákon ibalígyà. Kindly divide into little
heaps this salt fish, which I am going to sell. (cf. dólon, báhin).

_dihón-díhon_, Dim. and Freq. of díhon. Dihóndihóna ang kárne
kag ibalígyà sing binúgsò. Divide the meat and sell it by the
piece. (cf. bahínbáhin).

_dihót_, To run eagerly after, covet, desire, seek or try to obtain,
hanker after. Ang kwárta ko lang amó ang ginadihót mo. You are only
after my money. Dihotá ang pílak sang maéstro, kay kaína nakabáton
siá sang íya binúlan. Try to get some money from the teacher, because
a short while ago he drew his monthly salary. Indì mo pagdihotón
sing lakás ang mga kalingáwlingáwan. Don't go in too much for
pleasure. (cf. lagás).

_díhut_, Means, resource, contrivance. (cf. padíhut).

_diín_, Where? There, where ----. Which of ----? Diín ka makádto? Where
are you going,--going to? Diín ka magkádto? Where did you go
to? Where have you been? Diín ang baláy mo? Where is your home? Sa
bisán diín. Anywhere, in any place. Bákli akó sing limá ka abáno sa
bisán diín nga ginabaligyaán. Buy me five cigars at any shop. Kon
sa diín ang kalámay magatilípon ang mga subáy. Where there is sugar,
ants will gather. Sa mánggad kag dungúg, diín ang ímo anóhon? Between
wealth and honour, what will you choose? Diín na ang ákon kálò? Where
is my hat? Diín na (dín-a) siá? Where is he now? Ang panimaláy nga
sa diín nagahárì ang paghidáit ----. The household or family in which
(where) peace reigns ----. Diín siníng duhá ka balítà ang matúod? Which
of the two reports is true? Diín siníng duhá ka butáng ang dápat ko
pagpasulabíhon? Which of these two things should I prefer?

_dik_, A call used in many parts to attract the attention of pigs or
to call them together at feeding time or the like. (cf. dúkan, idík).

_dikalás_, To be in a hurry, hasten, hurry, make haste, be prompt or
quick. Magdikalás ka gid sa pagpaúlì kon magbágting ang orasyón. Come
home at once when the Angelus bell rings. Nagadikalás siá sa
pagpanyága. He is in a hurry to get his dinner. (cf. dalî, alipasá).

_dikál-dikál_, Gravel. (cf. dakáldákal, grábas, ormigón).

_dík-dik_, To say "dik", when calling the pigs together.

_díkdik_, To pound the dikdikón--a mixture of "bugás" and "pásì".

_dikdikón_, Rice that has been pounded, but not so thoroughly but that
it still contains some unhulled grains called "pásì"; a mixture of
"bugás" and "pásì".

_dikdikonán_, The receptacle containing a mixture of "bugás" and
"pásì".

_dikín_, A ring of braided straw, etc. See likín, kalangán.

_díklan_, From dikól.

_dikól_, To shove, push--away,--aside; to gainsay, deny. Ang amó nga
kamatuóran índì madíklan kag índì mabalabágan. That truth cannot be
denied (gainsaid) and cannot be twisted. (cf. sikól; dílì).

_diksionáryo_, (Sp. diccionario) Dictionary, vocabulary,
lexicon. (cf. kapulúngan).

_díkta_, (Sp. dictar) To dictate. Ikáw ang masulát, akó ang
magadíkta. You write, I will dictate to you. Diktahí na akó, kay
hándà akó sa pagsulát kon anó ang ímo igatúgon. Now dictate to me,
for I am ready to write down whatever you wish to order.

_dikumpotók_, In full dress, arrayed as for a solemn occasion,
spick-and-span. (cf. digála).

_dílà_, The tongue; to lick with the tongue. Mapísan ang íla mga
dílà. Their tongues are very busy. They are great gossips. Ang íya
dílà waláy túl-an. His tongue is unbridled. Literally: His tongue is
boneless. Ang mga babáye nga matalíwis sing dílà maábtik magbuyágyag
sang mga tinágò sang íla isigkatáo. Sharp-tongued women are quick
to let out the secrets of their neighbours. Indì ka magdílà sang
ímo kamót, kay maláw-ay. Don't lick your hand, for it is not a nice
thing to do. Gindiláan sang idô ang pínggan. The dog licked the
plate. Ngangahá kag ipadiwál ang dílà mo. Open your mouth and put
out your tongue. (cf. dílap).

_dilá-an_, Long--tongued, having a large tongue; very talkative,
a gossip, chatterbox, one who has the gift of the gab. (cf. buraán,
babá-an, wakalán, etc.).

_dilág_, To rise, appear, (said of the sun, etc.). Nagadilág na ang
ádlaw. The sun is rising. Ginadilagán sang ádlaw ang kalibútan. The
sun is rising on the world. (cf. bútlak, subáng, murâ).

_dilamúon_, Things to be had or bought in the way of food, drink,
clothes, etc. Walâ sing dilamúon dirí. There is nothing to be had here
"for love or money".

_dilána_, (Sp. de lana) Woollen, made of wool, flannel. Panápton
nga dilána. Woollen garments. Médyas nga dilána. Woollen socks or
stockings. (cf. pranéla).


_dílap_, To lick, lap, draw the tongue over. Indì ka magdílap sang ímo
túdlò. Don't lick your finger. Dinilápan sang kuríng ang yahóng. The
cat licked the bowl. (cf. dílà).

_diléma_, (Sp. dilema) Dilemma, perplexity, quandary,
predicament. (cf. itálítal).

_dilgádo_, (Sp. delgado) Thin, lean, lank, slender, gaunt, emaciated,
fine, light. Dilgádo nga táo. A lean person. Dilgádo nga súklà. Fine,
thin silk. (cf. maníwang, kalamanít, kanít, magamáy, magágmay, píno,
manipís).

_dílì_, (H) No, not, nay; to say no, deny, negative, gainsay,
interdict, prohibit, forbid, proscribe, ban, bar, debar, disallow,
forefend, refuse permission. Dílì amó inâ. That is not it. Iníng
baláy dílì ákon. This house is not mine. Dílì ka magálam, kon dílì
ka magtoón. You will not become learned, unless you study. Nagdílì
siá. He said no. He refused. He would not. Ginadilían ang pagdúplà
sa salúg. Spitting on the floor is prohibited. Idílì sa íya ang
pagsulúd dirí or dilíi siá sa pagsulúd dirí. Forbid him to enter
here. (cf. índì).

_diligamohán_, (H) Kitchen, hearth, fireplace. (cf. lulutuán, dapóg,
digamohán, abohán, kosína).

_dilihonán_, (H) Manufactory, factory, workshop. (cf. díhon,
buluhatán).

_dilihonón_, (H) Earth, clay (for pottery, crockery); manufacture,
industry, trade, output. (cf. díhon, dilihonán, palatúbson).

_dílì nga más-a_, (H) Never, on no account, not at all.

_dílì nga mugís_, (H) See dílì nga más-a id.

_diling-díngon_, Material for partition-walls. Tádtad nga
dilingdíngon. Bamboo laths or slats to be woven into a
partition-wall. (cf. díngding).

_dìmaísip_, Countless, innumerable, without number, unnumbered,
untold, numberless, incalculable. (dî, ísip).

_dimálas_, (Sp. de mala suerte) Unlucky, unfortunate, ill-fated,
ill-starred, hapless, out of luck, "hard lines", (cf. dibuénas--lucky,
etc.).

_dîmanínggol_, Headstrong, stubborn, unyielding, obstinate, obdurate,
self-willed, unheeding, deaf to admonitions, commands or advice,
tenacious, perverse, refractory, dogged. (cf. dîmawáding).

_dîmasábi_, Unknown and unknowable, inexplicable, unfathomable;
innumerable. (dî, sábi; dîmasáysay, dîmatúngkad, dîmaísip).

_dîmasáysay_, Inexplicable, unaccountable, mysterious. (cf. dì,
sáysay).

_dimát_, To attract, draw, induce, win, win over, propitiate,
conciliate, gain over, attach to, entice, allure, charm, fascinate,
captivate, cause a liking for, coax, wheedle, cajole, Nadimát na siá
sang káon sang tinápay. He has now a liking for eating bread. He
has taken to eating bread. Ginpadimát níya ang idô ni Fuláno sa
pagkarí dirí. He enticed N.N.'s dog to come here. Iníng bungálon
ipadimát ko sa karabáw nga bág-o pa lang nákon mabakál. I am going
to win the attachment of the buffalo I bought lately with this green
fodder. Padimatá gid ang kuríng, agúd índì na magbálik sa íya nga
ginhalinán. Make it worth while for the cat to stay with you, lest
it should return whence it came--or--lest it should go back to where
it came from. Makapadimát gid sa íya dirâ ang maáyo nga hángin. The
good air there will please (conciliate) him. Nadimát siá sang báile,
sang sakáy sa áwto, etc. He likes to dance, to travel by automobile,
etc. (cf. amág, ílà, íma, lúyag, úyon, wíli, yánggaw).

_dîmatárung_, Unjust, wrong, dishonest, inequitable, not right,
unfair, injurious, wicked, bad. (dî, matárung).

_dîmatúngkad_, Unfathomable, bottomless, inscrutable, impenetrable,
incapable of being sounded or measured. (dî, túngkad).

_dîmawáding_, Firm, unshakeable; stubborn. (cf. dîmanínggol).

_dímdim_, To taste, try the taste of, bring in contact with the tip
of the tongue. Dímdim--or--magdímdim ka lang siní kon anó ang íya
sabór. Try the taste of this. Dimdimí iní kon kaúyon ka siní ukón
índì. Taste this and see whether you like it or not. Dinimdimán ko
yanáng sabáw, ápang índì akó makaúyon (sinâ). I tasted that sauce,
but I don't like it. Nadimdimán ko na iníng bulúng kag napaitán akó
(siní). I tasted this medicine and found it bitter. (cf. tiláw).

_dimól_, To taste, experience, profit from, get or receive a benefit or
advantage. Walâ gid akó makadimól sang pinatubás námon, kay ginbáyad
gid lámang sa ákon útang. I have not derived any advantage from our
harvest, because it has all gone towards paying my debt. Walâ gid akó
kadimól sang ímo kwárta, kán-on, kalámay, etc. I never had the least
benefit from your money, rice, sugar, etc. Your money, etc. never did
me any good. I never profited by your money, etc. i.e. you never gave
me any money, rice, sugar, etc. (cf. dímdim, tiláw, pulús).

_dímus_, Bathed, laved, washed; smothered; to bathe, etc. Sang pagabút
níya sa baláy nadímus siá sa halúk sang íya mga ábyan. When he arrived
at the house, his friends smothered him with kisses. (cf. dígos,
lígos).

_dín-a, dína_, For "diín na". Dín-a (Dína) siá? (Diín na siá?) Where
is he now?

_dinagáas_, Murmur, purl, etc. See dagáas. (cf. hugánas, dagánas).

_dinagúbdub_, A noise like thunder; thunderous, rolling, rumbling;
to thunder, etc. (cf. dagúbdub).

_dinágyang_, Cheer, merriment, gaiety, mirth, hilarity, joy, pleasure,
merry-making; cheerful, jolly, merry, gay; to make merry, frolic,
be full of glee, enjoy oneself. (cf. sádya, sángya, hinúgyaw).

_dinahúm-dáhum_, Thought, idea; inkling; sign, indication. Walâ inâ
sing dinahúmdáhum. There is not the least sign of it. (cf. dahúmdáhum,
dahúmon).

_dinalán_, A line, verse, etc. See dalán.

_dinaláyday_, Prose, plain speech, the ordinary spoken or written
language. (cf. daláyday; binaláybay--poetry, poem).

_dinalók_, To be greedy. Indì ka magdinalók. Don't be
greedy. Nagdinalók silá sa pagkáon kag nagmungámúngà. They were greedy
and ate ravenously. (cf. dalók).

_dinamák_, Nasty, dirty, slovenly, slatternly; indecent, obscene; to
act or speak in a vile, abominable way. (cf. damák, sáprat, bástos,
mahígkò, maláway).

_dinamíta_, (Sp. dinamita) Dynamite; to dynamite. Nadinamitáhan ang
táytay. The bridge was blown up with dynamite.

_dinayaáy_, Cheating, committing fraud, etc. (said of many
persons). (cf. dáyà).

_dinayándáyan_, To promenade, ramble, take a stroll, etc. See
dayándáyan.

_díngding_, Wall, partition, division-wall, inside wall,
partition-wall; to build--, erect--, put in--, provide with--,
partition-walls, etc. Magdíngding ka sang ímo baláy or dingdingí
ang ímo baláy. Provide your house with partition-walls or
inside-walls. Gindingdingán níla ang ákon hulút. They partitioned
off my room.

_dínggal_, Leanness, thinness, weakness; lean, meagre, weak; to be
or become lean, etc. (cf. hágpis, níwang, lúya, lamanít, kandínggal).

_dinghúlay_, To drop, trickle, flow. (cf. ágay, talabirís, tululágay,
ílig).

_dínglè_, A kind of dark sand-stone.

_dingót_, Stinginess, meanness, niggardliness, parsimony, miserliness,
penuriousness; to be stingy, miserly, close, parsimonious, chary. Indì
mo pagidingót sa íya ang ímo pagtáhud. Don't begrudge him signs
of respect. Indì ka magdingót sa ímo pagkáon. Don't stint your
food. Nadingotán akó sa íya. I consider him stingy. To me he seems
to be close-fisted. (cf. ímot, ínot).

_dínhi_, (H) here. (cf. dirí, ári, doón, rúgya, rúgia).

_dinuagán_, (H) Painting; picture. (cf. duág).

_dinumtánay_, Mutual hatred, hatred of each other; to hate each
other. (cf. dumút).

_dióktok_, Crushed sea-shells, as often found on the beach.

_Diós_, (Sp. Dios) God, the Deity. (cf. díwa, bathálà).

_diós-díos_, A heathen deity, idol, false god. Ang pagsímba sa mga
diós-díos. Idolatry, worship or adoration of idols.

_diósnon_, Divine, godlike, pertaining to divinity. (cf. diwánhon,
diwán-on).

_diót_, (H) Small, little, etc. See diótay. (cf. tikî, gamáy).

_diótay_, (H) A little, trifle, morsel, snack; small, little, tiny,
wee, scant, meagre, bit, petty, diminutive, few; to diminish, decrease,
lessen, be or become small, etc. Nagdiótay iníng bánwa. This town
has become small. Diotáya ang pagbutáng sing kalámay sa kapé. Put
only a little sugar into the coffee. Diótay man lang ang mga táo nga
nagtalámbong. There were only a few people in attendance. Diótay nga
butáng. A small, trifling or unimportant matter. Diótay nga táo. A
small or uninfluential man. Diótay na lang ----. Almost, nearly, close
upon, well nigh, all but ----. Nadiotáyan gid lang siá (sa pagkahúlug)
nga mahúlug sa busáy. He nearly fell into the abyss. Gindiótay níla
ang baláy. They made the house smaller. Ginpakadiótay níla inâ. They
made light of it. They considered it a trivial matter. (cf. dítik,
diót, dítay, díting, gamáy, tikî, isót).

_diótay_, Half a centavo. Tátlo ka diótay. One centavo and a half.

_diót-dakô_, Unreasonable, unconscionable, without proportion, for
any trivial or paltry reason. Diót-dakô mangákig siá. He is apt to
get wild--for any trivial matter,--without any apparent reason.

_diótdiót_, Dim. of diót, diótay. Slight, rather little, somewhat
small, etc.

_dipáha_, (Sp. de paja) Of straw, made of straw. Kálò nga dipáha. A
straw-hat. (cf. dagámi).

_dipára_, (Perhaps from the Sp. deparar) To attend to, see to,
look after, pay attention to, take notice of; make arrangements or
preparations for. Walâ siá magdipára sinâ or walâ níya pagdiparáha
inâ. He has not attended to it, has made no arrangements or
preparations for it. Diparáha sing maáyo ang íya guyá kon kilála
mo ukón índì. Look well at his face to see whether you know him or
not. (cf. ripára, tátap, túluk, hímos, híwat).

_diperénsya_, (Sp. diferencia) Difference, dissimilarity,
dissimilitude; controversy, quarrel. (cf. kalaínláin, kalaínlaínan,
ginakatuháyan; súay, báis, bagâ, bángig, áway).

_dípias_, To slip, make a false step. (cf. dúpias, dalín-as).

_diplóma_, (Sp. diploma) Diploma; bull, patent, credential, title,
testimonial. (cf. título, kalig-onán, pasálig, pamatúod).

_dípyas_, See dípias.

_dirâ_, (H) There; there is. Dirâ or árà dirâ ang ímo tulún-an. Your
book is there, (cf. dián, árà, yárà, dídto, but dirâ denotes a lesser
distance than dídto).

_dirâ-dirâ_, (H) Rather well to do, but not rich; having a moderate
living or income. Inanák siá sang isá ka panimaláy nga may dirâdirâ. He
is the scion of a rather well-to-do family. (cf. dawâ-dawâ).

_dírham_, Fear, apprehension, nervousness, perturbation, trepidation,
timidity; to be apprehensive, in trepidation or fear, to wince,
shrink, flinch, blench, tremble. May dírham siá or ginadírham siá. He
is afraid, apprehensive, in trepidation. Nagadírham ang íya ginháwa
(solóksolók). He is nervous, afraid. Ginadírham akó kon mangilát. I
am afraid of lightning. (cf. hádluk, kúlbà).

_dirí_, (H) Here; here is (was). Karí ka dirí. Come here. Ang báyò
mo dirí or ári dirí. Your coat is here. (cf. doón, dínhi, rúgya).

_diringóyngoy_, (B) Not good, of a bad or inferior kind, left
or rejected, (as things left over after the good ones have been
chosen). Indì ka magbakál sing mga páhò nga diringóyngoy. Don't buy
left-over mangoes.

_dirúskas_, (Sp. rosca) Screw.

_disgrásya_, (Sp. desgracia) Accident, misfortune, mishap; meet
with an accident, be unlucky or unfortunate, make a false step,
(often applied to girls becoming pregnant out of wedlock). Nadisgrásya
siá. She has lost her honour. She has been unfortunate. (cf. buísit,
maláut nga kapaláran).

_disgústo_, (Sp. disgusto) Disgust, repugnance, dislike, aversion,
displeasure; to disgust, offend, dislike, displease, annoy, vex,
bother, fret, irritate, tire, try the patience of, have a grudge
against. Nagadisgústo akó sa íya. I am disgusted at him. Ginpadisgústo
níya akó. He annoyed me, caused me displeasure. Indì mo siá paghatágan
sing disgústo. Don't cause him annoyance or displeasure. Walâ akó
mangákig kag walâ man akó magbátyag sing disgústo sa íya tungúd sang
íya nga ginhímò. What he did neither made me angry nor did it cause
me annoyance. (cf. lás-ay, kalás-ay).


_disiémbre_, (Sp. diciembre) December. (cf. pánglut-dakô).

_disimulár_, (Sp. disimular) To pardon, excuse, condone, overlook,
let pass. Kon mga saráng disimulahá lang iní. Please, excuse it,
pardon it. (cf. patáwad, pasáylo, dispénsa).

_diskúrso_, (Sp. discurso) Discourse, declamation, recitation, speech,
oration, harangue; to deliver a speech, discourse or allocution,
declaim, recite, expatiate, hold forth. Sín-o ang nagdiskúrso, anó ang
íya gindiskúrso kag sín-o ang íya nga gindiskursohán? Who spoke, what
did he say and to whom did he address himself? (cf. pamulóngpúlong).

_diskursóhan_, Place, room, stage or platform for a discourse, etc.

_dís-og_, To push, jostle, shove, etc. See dás-og id. Nagadis-ogánay
ang mga bátà sa bánkò. The boys are jostling each other on the
bench. (Dis-ogí, idís-og--das-ogí, idás-og).

_disóras_, Untimely, etc. See desóras. (cf. aláng-álang).

_dispánta_, (Sp. espantar) To scare, frighten, daunt, terrify,
intimidate; to chastise, beat. Gindispánta níya ang íya bátà, kay támà
kasutíl. She gave her boy a thrashing, because he was very naughty.

_dispánto_, (Sp. espanto) Shock, consternation, fright, horror,
dismay; to dread, stand aghast, be appalled, horrified, dismayed,
shocked; to terrify, cause consternation, etc. (cf. kuyús, hanguyús,
kúgmat, kibút, lísang).

_dispárate, disparátis_, (Sp. disparate) Nonsense, absurdity,
extravagance, blunder, slip, mistake, stupidity; superstition,
superstitious belief or practice, (cf. binúang, binabáylan, waláy
pulús, waláy sáyod).

_dispénsa_, (Sp. dispensa) Pantry, larder, store-room. (cf. palanagoán,
palatipigán).

_dispénsa_, (Sp. dispensa) Dispensation, pardon, excuse, indulgence,
exculpation, remission; to dispense, excuse, exonerate, forgive,
to take no notice of, wink at, pardon. Dispensahá akó. Pardon
me. Excuse me. Mangáyò akó sing dispénsa. I ask for forgiveness,
pardon or dispensation. (cf. patáwad).

_dispensasyón_, (Sp. dispensacion) Dispensation. (cf. dispénsa).

_dispuís_, See después.

_dispúnti_, (Sp. despuntar) To sew well, sew with fine, machine-like
stitches. Dispuntihá lang ang hénero, kay walâ kitá sing mákina
sa tahî. Stitch the cloth well, because we have no sewing
machine. (cf. tahî).

_dispúta_, (Sp. disputa) Dispute, argument, discussion,
controversy, debate, plea, polemics; to dispute, discuss, argue,
etc. Nagadisputahánay silá. They are arguing with each other, are
having a discussion. Anó man ang ínyo nga ginadisputahán? What are
you arguing about? What is the point of your debate? (cf. baísbáis).

_distánsya_, (Sp. distancia) Distance, remoteness, farness, interval
of time or space. (cf. kalayoón, kalawigón).

_distríto_, (Sp. distrito) District, ward, precinct, region, territory,
province. (cf. puók, puód; hilít, kahigarán).

_ditâ_, Cinchona, chinchona; Peruvian bark, quinine. (cf. bitâ).

_dítay_, (H) Small, etc. See diótay, diót.

_dítik_, See diótay.

_dítil_, Clitoris, glans clitoris. (cf. gitî, lidít, tigí, tínggil).

_díting_, (H) Small, little, etc. See diótay.

_díwa_, God, deity. (cf. bathálà, diós).

_diwál_, A kind of sea-shell.

_diwál_, To loll--, put out--, hang out--, the tongue. Nagadiwál ang
dílà sang idô sa kahápò. The dog is hanging out its tongue panting
for breath. Ngangahá ang ímo bábà kag padiwalá ang ímo dílà. Open
your mouth and put out your tongue. Indì mo siá pagpadiwalán. Don't
put out your tongue at him (in derision or the like).

_diwal-ógan_, Naughty, mischievous, etc. See darándarán, dingkalogán,
harásharás, karandagán.

_diwánhon_, Divine, godlike, pertaining to the deity or
divinity. (díwa).

_diwán-on_, See diwánhon. (cf. diósnon).


_diwasíng_, See diwal-ógan.

_diwáta_, Idol, idolatry, fetish, fetishism; to serve idols, practise
idolatry, worship a fetish. Indì ka magdiwáta. Don't serve idols,
don't practise idolatry. (cf. diósdíos).

_diwatáhan_, Idolater, heathen, pagan; idolatrous, heathenish.

_díway_, To feel out of sorts, be near vomiting, be queasy, squeamish,
qualmish. Nagadíway ang ákon solóksolók. I am sick at stomach, my
stomach is out of sorts. (cf. dígwà).

_dóbla_, Cigar (rolled). (cf. abáno, koládo, piokós).

_dóbla, doblár_, (Sp. doblar) To double; to roll, especially applied
to tobacco. Doblahá ang tabákò. Roll the tobacco. Doblahí akó sing
tátlo ka nahót nga tabákò. Roll three cigars for me. Idóbla mo akó
ánay siníng isá ka manóso nga tabákò. Kindly roll for me into cigars
this bundle of tobacco-leaves. (cf. pilô; balólon).

_dóble_, (Sp. doble) Double, duplicate, twofold, twin; to double,
twin, duplicate, reduplicate, bifold, turn down, tuck under. Doblehá
ang kalát. Double the rope. (cf. pilô).

_dódò_, To stick, stab, especially in the throat as when killing a
pig. Dodóa ang báboy. Stick the pig. Dodói ang báboy sa tutúnlan. Stab
the pig in the throat. Metaphorically: Nadódò ang íya ginháwa. She
was scared, got wiser through experience. (cf. in this sense "dúdlà").

_dógi_, (B) Thorn, prick, prickle, barb, spike, spine, point; to prick,
scatter--, strew with--, thorns, etc. Nadógi ang tiíl ko. My foot
was pricked by a thorn. Sín-o ang nagdógi sang dálan? Who strewed
the road with thorns? Who scattered thorns on the road? Gindogíhan
(gindógian) níla ang kodál sang pamulákan. They put thorns in the
garden-fence. Iníng kamúnsil idógi ko sa dálan sa binít sang ákon
umá, agúd índì masúdlan sang mga háyup. These camunsel-branches with
their prickles I will put on the road near the edge of my field,
so that animals cannot enter. (cf. súyak, dalíngag, tunók).

_dogíhon_, (B) Thorny, prickly, spinous, barbed, bristling with
thorns. Dogíhon nga kahóykahóy, dálan, bakólod, etc. A thorny
shrub, a road strewn with thorns, a hill covered with thorns,
etc. (cf. tunukón).

_dógmon_, A sow's bed or litter; to build or make a sow's
litter. Nagdógmon ang báboy sa idálum sang ámon baláy. The sow made
her bed underneath our house. Gindogmonán sang báboy ang idálum sang
tambóbo. The sow made her litter under the granary.

_dógsan_, (B) To be angry, flare up; scold, abuse, upbraid, blow up,
give expression in strong language to one's excited feelings. Indì ka
magdógsan. Don't flare up. Don't get exasperated. Gindogsanán níya
akó. He gave me a good scolding. (cf. ákig, kárà, pangárà, pamúsa,
pamulúgso, pamuyáyaw).

_dógsing_, To nudge, touch slightly, stroke, play with as in flirting
or the like. Indì kamó magdógsing. Don't nudge each other. Ang mga bátà
nagadógsing. The children are nudging each other in play. (cf. káblit,
kolokáblit, kúhit).

_dógwak_, A stork-like bird; a kind of tall heron, crane. (dúgwak id.).

_dóhol_, To pass, reach, tender, offer, hand, give into another's
hand (from some considerable distance or whenever the receiver has a
difficulty to reach, or cannot reach, what he needs, himself). Idóhol
sa ákon ang súndang. Pass me the knife. Kon dídto ka na gánì sa sangá
sang kamúnsil idóhol ko sa ímo ang singít. When you are there on the
branch of the camunsel-tree I will hand you the pole and hook. Dohóli
akó sing pínggan, biníklan, etc. Hand me a plate, a piece of split
bamboo, etc. Ginadohólan níya ang pánday nga árà dirâ sa hágdan sang
martílyo. He is handing up the hammer to the carpenter there on the
ladder. Dawáta ang tulún-an nga ginadóhol sa ímo. Take the book that
is held out to you. Pumalapít ka sing diótay, agúd makadóhol akó sa
ímo sang lánsang. Come a little nearer that I may be able to hand
you the nail. (cf. túnghol, hátag, entregár).

_dohól_, To stick in the gullet, obstruct the passage in the throat;
an obstruction or something sticking in the oesophagus. May dohól siá
or ginadólhan siá. He has something sticking in his throat. Nadólhan
siá sang (sing) bokóg. A large fish-bone stuck in his gullet. Ginadohól
ang íya ginháwa. His breathing is impeded or obstructed. He breathes
with great difficulty. (cf. dolón, dulún).

_dókdok_, To press--, force--, wedge--, slip--, plug--, sandwich--,
in between, to introduce, thrust in, elbow one's way in. Idókdok iníng
líbro sa mga líbro sa estánte. Wedge this book in among the books in
the book-case. Dokdokí sing búlak sang búlak ang ímo gwáb. Plug some
cotton into your hollow tooth. Sang ámon pándut madámò gid nga mga
táo ang nagtalámbong nga daw índì ka makadókdok sa simbáhan. At our
feast-day very many people attended, so that it looked as if you could
not elbow your way into the church or that you could scarcely get into
the church. Gutúk na iníng trak, índì ka na kadókdok. This truck is
full; you cannot squeeze in any more. (cf. sóksok, dútdut, lótlot).

_dokô_, See dukô--to bow--, incline--, the head.

_dokól_, To knuckle, strike--, push--, jerk--, punish--, with the
knuckles. Dokolá siá. Knuckle him. Dokolí siá sa íya tangkúgò. Knuckle
him on the nape of his neck. Andam ka, kay kon íya ikáw makítà dokolón
ka gid níya. Be on your guard, for if he sees you, he will knuckle you.

_dokól-dokól_, Dim. and Freq. of dokól. Ang ámon sakristán maábtik
gid magdokóldokól sa mga akólito nga nagsayúp. Our sacristan is an
adept at knuckling acolythes that make mistakes.

_dokól-dókol_, To show signs of life, move or push against the sides
of the womb, applied to embryos. Nagadokóldókol ang bátà sa tiyán
sang íya ilóy. The child is moving in the womb of its mother.

_dokót_, To stick, adhere to, etc. See dukót.

_dókoy_, To walk with a stoop. See dúkoy.

_dóksol_, (B) To advance upon, draw near, close in upon, approach,
march upon, come to close quarters, attack, assault, assail. Doksolí
siá. Pitch into him. Attack him. Ang mga soldádo nga nagakontrahánay
nagadoksolánay na. The opposing soldiers are now coming to close
quarters, are now advancing against each other. Kon may kinahánglan
ka sa íya dumúksol ka, índì ka magkahádluk. If you want him, approach
him, don't be afraid. (cf. palapít, túlus, sál-ot, soróso, saróso).

_dóktan_, From dokót--to stick to.

_doktór_, (Sp. doctor) Doctor, physician, medical man, practitioner,
professor, learned man, one who has received a degree from an
university; wiseacre, a would-be wise person. (cf. manugbúlung;
manginalámon).

_dokuménto_, (Sp. documento) Document, paper, deed,
record. (cf. kalig-onán).

_dólà_, (H) To lose, etc. See dúlà.

_dolodomíngo_, Every Sunday. Nagasímba siá sing dolodomíngo. He goes
to church every Sunday. (dorodomíngo id.).

_dologsánon_, Quarrel, ill-temper, cause or origin of a heated
discussion or quarrel, explosion; irritating, exasperating, exciting,
causing one's blood to boil. (dógsan).

_dolóktan_, (H) Liable to be--adhered,--clung--,--stuck--, to. Mga
butáng nga dolóktan sang kaláyo. Things that are--easily kindled or
set on fire,--combustible,--burnable. (cf. dokót).

_dólon_, To separate, set apart, limit, delimit, demarcate, set bounds
to, define, circumscribe. Dolóna ang maís sa humáy. Separate the corn
from the rice. Dolóni sing kawáyan ang ákon umá sa umá sang ibán. Make
a bamboo paling between my field and the field of others. Idólon ko
iníng mga kásla sa ákon hardín. I will use these casla-plants to make
a boundary round my garden. (cf. bulág, sipák).

_dolón_, Part, division, share, separate piece. (cf. atádo).

_dolón_, To stick in the throat, etc. See dohól. Nadónlan siá sang
síkag sang ísdà. A small fish-bone stuck in his throat.

_dolónan_, Boundary, limit, partition, border, frontier, (dólon;
cf. kadulúnan).

_dólot_, Gift, present, offering, boon, grant, donation, favour; to
make a gift of, give a present, bestow upon, present with, offer,
proffer, tender, donate. Sín-o ang nagdólot sinâ sa ímo? Who gave
you that as a present? Idólot mo sa íya iníng pínya. Offer him
this pine-apple. Gindolótan níya akó sing madámò nga mga páhò. He
made me a gift of many mangoes. Anó nga dólot ang nabáton mo? What
kind of present did you receive? Dolóti sing búlak ang Mahál nga
Bírhen. Offer some flowers to the Blessed Virgin. Ang kalasálon
nadolótan sing madámò nga mga butáng. The marriage-couple were given
many presents. (cf. hátag, regálo, túgrò, taó, bugáy).

_dolót_, Penetrate, pierce, etc. See dulút.

_dólse_, (Sp. dulce) Sweetmeat, dessert; preserved fruit, jam, jelly,
sweet, candy. (Any sugared dish may be called a "dólse"; cf. matám-is,
marímis; hingúndang, hinungá).

_dolwásì_, A large basin, cauldron, etc. See dalwásì id.

_domíngo_, (Sp. domingo) Sunday, the Lord's day.

_dominó_, (Sp. domino) Dominoes; to play the game of dominoes; domino,
a hooded robe worn for disguising or masquerading purposes.

_domô_, To clench--, grind--, gnash--, one's teeth, etc. (cf. dumô,
doóm, ókdom).

_don_, (Sp. don) Don, squire, esquire, Sir. Equivalent to Mr. in
English, but used only before Christian names, as Don Alfonso.

_don_, (B) Now, already. (cf. na, ron, karón).

_dón-an_, From doón--to mark, etc. (dún-an, id.).

_donár_, (Sp. donar) To donate, bestow, grant, make a gift of. Gindonár
níya sa simbáhan ang isá ka bintánà--or--gindonahán níya ang simbáhan
sing isá ka bintánà. He donated to the church one window. Idonár mo
lang inâ sa hospitál. Make a gift of it to the hospital. (cf. dólot,
hátag, túgrò).

_donasyón_, (Sp. donación) Gift, donation, present, grant, offering,
boon, favour, bestowal. (cf. dólot, bugáy, hátag, regálo).

_dondónay_, A kind of small bird.

_dóo_, (Sp. dúo) Duet; to sing a duet. Nagadóo silá. They are singing
a duet.

_doóg_, An out-of-the-way place, corner, nook. See loók, soók, toók,
doók, hilít, kahigarán).

_doók_, Corner, place away from the center, recess, nook,
out-of-the-way place. (cf. soók).

_dóol_, Cork, stopple, stopper, plug, bung, spike; to cork, stopple,
etc. Doóli ang botílya. Cork the bottle. (cf. súngsung).

_dóol_, Sucker, offshoot, shoot, (as of the pagátpat-tree, etc.).

_dóol_, To establish firm contact with, compress, press down, exert
pressure upon. Indì makadóol ang íya tiíl sa salúg, kay may hubág. He
cannot put his foot to the floor, for it--is swollen,--has a boil or
ulcer. (cf. doót).

_doóm_, To munch, crunch, craunch, cranch, grind, chew noisily between
the teeth, gnash. Malúyag ka magdoóm sing maís nga sinánlag? Would
you like to grind some roast corn,--parched corn,--pop-corn, between
your teeth? Dóm-a (doomá) ang límbok, maís nga sinánlag, etc. Eat
some "límbok", roast corn, etc. Ginadoóm lang níya ang íya ngípon sa
kaákig. He is gnashing his teeth in anger. (cf. domô).

_doón_, (B) Here, hither, present, at hand, etc. (cf. dirí, dínhi,
rúgya).

_doón_, Mark, brand, blaze, sign, tick, notch, impress, imprint,
stigma; to impress, mark, stamp, brand. Idoón mo sa papél ang
tímbre. Stamp the paper with the seal. Dón-i (dooní) ang papél sang
ímo kumalágkò. Mark the paper with your thumb-print. Gindón-an níla
ang karabáw sing úso. They branded the buffalo with the customary mark.

_dóong_, To land, anchor, arrive, stop, halt; take up one's abode,
be a guest or stranger. (cf. dúghò; dumolóong).

_doót_, To come into physical contact with, feel, touch, handle,
finger, fumble. Walâ siá makadoót sa ákon. He did not touch me. Padót-i
(padootí) ang ímo túdlò sang íya túdlò. Bring your finger in contact
with his. Nagadot-ánay ang duhá ka pilewpilewán sang kawáyan. The
tops of the two bamboos are touching each other. Padót-a iníng tápì
sa isá. Join this board to the other, (so that they may be closely
connected). Indì ka magdoót or magpadoót sa íya. Don't touch him. Don't
approach so near as to touch him. (cf. dóol).

_dorádo_, (Sp. dorado) Gilt, of gold, coloured gold,
golden. (cf. bulawánon).

_dorár_, (Sp. dorar) To gild. Dorahá ang kális. Gild the
chalice. Dorahá ang kális sa sulúd. Gild the inside of the
chalice. Idorár iníng unsíta sa kális, síngsing, etc. Use this doubloon
to gild the chalice, ring, etc.

_dorodomíngo_, (B) Every Sunday. (dolodomíngo id.).

_doróg_, To be at the side of, parallel to, not in front or behind;
to attack on the flank or side, join sides. Ayón níya ang pagdoróg
kon magdúmug siá. He is expert at attacking one from the side,
when he wrestles. Dorogí siá. Join sides with him. Fight on his
side. (cf. dulúg, húlid).

_doróg_, A field at the bottom of a valley or near a
river-bed. (cf. bálud).

_doróg_, Unevenness, roughness, elevation, inequality. Madámò sing
doróg ang íya hináblan. The cloth woven by her is full of inequalities
or irregularities, full of little lumps, nodes or the like.

_dorogsánon_, (B) Quarrel, etc. See dologsánon.

_dorós_, Turned-up (of eyes); to have turned-up eyes. Nagadorós ang
íya mga matá or dorós siá sing matá. His eyes are turned up, have
an upward squint. Nagadorós ang matá sang bátà nga ginaabút sang
masoswélo. A child in a convulsive fit turns up its eyes.

_dósdos_, Close, tight, pressed together, closely woven; to push,
shove, impel, put close to, make tight, bring near together. Dósdos
nga panápton. A closely woven garment. Dosdosá ang paghabúl. Weave
closely or tightly. Idósdos siá sa díngding. Push him against the
wall. Put him close to the wall. Gindósdos níya akó sa kodál. He
shoved me close against the fence. (cf. tulúd, dás-og, dís-og).

_dosél_, (Sp. dosel) Canopy, baldachin, dais with canopy.

_doséna_, (Sp. docena) Dozen.

_dósis_, (Sp. dosis) Dose, potion, draught, mouthful, small quantity
of medicine taken at a time. (cf. láb-ok, hungít, tíl-og).

_dóte_, (Sp. dote) Dowry, dower, marriage-portion; endowment.

_dótol_, Tick, a blood-sucking insect often found on buffaloes,
etc. (cf. ótol).

_dotól-dotól_, Dim. of dótol; any thing resembling a dótol.

_dotól-dótol_, An ingrowing toe-nail, agnail, hangnail, an overgrowth
from the side of a finger-nail or toe-nail causing great pain.

_dóydoy_, Straight stripes or lines in cloth, especially in jusi and
piña. (cf. sámay).

_duág_, Colour; form, figure, outline, appearance, shape; to
colour. Ang íya báyò naduagán (dinuagán) sing mapulá. Her dress was
coloured red. (cf. kolór, pinta; dágway, báyhon).

_duál_, Surfeited, completely satiated, stuffed, sated, gorged,
glutted, crammed, replete, near vomiting; to feel nausea, be glutted,
etc. Nagaduál ang ginháwa ko. I am nearly vomiting,--have no appetite
any more,--am full to the brim. (cf. díway).

_duál-duál_, Dim. and Freq. of duál. Nagaduálduál na siá, kay busúg. He
has no longer any appetite, for he has eaten his fill. (cf. duyâduyâ).

_duás_, (B) To develop beautifully, grow handsome, become
lovelier,--better. Nagaduás na ang bátà, kay nagdakô. The child is
growing beautiful and tall. (cf. dálig, tahúm, mahî, hingánhingán,
ayóáyo).

_duás-duás_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of duás. To grow rather handsome,
become a little better, etc.

_dúaw_, To visit, pay a visit to, call-at,--upon, drop in, look in,
look up someone, pay one's respects to. Duáwa ang ímo ábyan. Pay a
visit to your friend. Walâ pa gid siá magdúaw sa ámon. He has not yet
visited us, has not yet called on us. Gindúaw níya akó sa Manílà. He
called upon me in Manila. Idúaw mo akó sa íya. Do me the favour and
visit him. (cf. hápit, súr-aw, súy-aw, dálaw, dáraw).

_dúbla_, See dóbla--to double; to roll (cigarettes, etc.). (cf. pilô,
balólon).

_dúbok_, To join a group, be present at, come together, associate with,
go to, assist, take part in, put in an appearance. Madámò nga mga táo
ang nagadúbok, nagadulúbok. Very many people are present, are taking
part, are joining. Nadubókan sing madámò nga mga dumulúaw ang ámon
pándut. Many visitors came to our feast. Our feast was attended by
many visitors. (cf. dúgok id.).

_dúda_, (Sp. duda) Doubt, misgiving, suspense, demur, scepticism,
mistrust, hesitation, suspicion, scruple, qualm, question, query; to
doubt, diffide, distrust, mistrust, suspect, demur, question. Nagadúda
akó kon matúod inâ ukón índì. I am in doubt as to whether it is true
or not. Ginadudáhan ko siá. I have my doubts--, misgivings--, about
him. (cf. duhádúha).

_dúdlà_, To get wise by experience, beware a second time, dread or
fear to repeat an action. Nagakadúdlà na siá sa pagpangáwat. He is
now afraid of stealing, he will not easily steal again. Ginadudlaán
na níya ang pagpangáwat (pagpanakáb) sing mga ságing. He will think
twice before stealing bananas again. Hanóta siá sa pagpadúdlà sa íya,
agúd índì siá mangahás sa pagbúhat sing amó liwán. Give him a whipping
to scare him, so that he may not dare to do such a thing again.

_dúgà_, Sap, juice, the watery part of plants, fruits,
etc. (cf. tagók).

_dugáan_, Juicy, sappy, full of sap or fluid.

_dugâ-dugâ_, Dim. of dúgà.

_dugá-dúga_, Infirmity of purpose, evasion, wavering, hesitation,
demur; to act irresolutely, etc., but mostly constructed
with a negative particle and hence having a positive meaning:
Resolutely, thoroughly, vigorously, without hesitation or wavering
of purpose. Ginhánot níya siá sa waláy dugádúga. He gave him a
good thrashing. Indì mo pagdugádugáhan ang paghákot sing humáy, ang
paghákwat sing batô, etc. Carry rice, lift stones, etc., with right
good will. (cf. hugábhúgab).

_dúgang_, Addition, augmentation, increment, increase, accretion,
accession, supplement, complement, codicil; to add, augment, increase,
superadd, subjoin, accrue, superpose, superimpose, throw in or on
(as an addition). Nagadúgang pa ang bahâ sang subâ. The flood of
the river is still on the increase. Nagadúgang gid lámang ang íya
mga kalisúd. His difficulties are becoming more numerous. Dugángi ang
súd-an. Increase the quantity of the side-dishes. Gindugángan níla ang
mga mamumugón, agúd madalî matápus ang dálan. They have added more
workmen, in order that the road may be finished soon. Dugángi ang
asín sa sópas. Put more salt in the soup. Idúgang mo lang iníng duhá
ka nahót nga kawáyan sa isá ka gatús nga binakál ko sa ímo. Just add
these two pieces of bamboo to the hundred I bought from you. Dugángan
pa sang kosinéro ang túbig sa kólon?--Hóo, padugánga siá, kon buút
siá magdúgang sang túbig. Shall the cook put more water into the
rice-kettle?--Yes, let him put in more, if he likes to increase the
quantity of water. May dúgang pa? Is there still something to be
added? Gindúgang pa gid níya ang pilá ka dinalán sa ákon sulát. He
added a few lines--, a postscript--, to my letter. (cf. túbò, áman,
támba, támban).

_dúgay_, (H) Long (of time); to spend a long time, last long, endure,
abide, prolong, protract, tarry, linger, drag on, draw out, put off,
procrastinate, delay. Nagdúgay siá sang íya pageskwéla dídto. He
prolonged his schooling there, was going to school there for a long
time. Nadúgay ka dídto? Were you there long? Dugáya ang paglúmon mo sa
ámon. Stay with us for a long time. Indì mo pagdugáyon ang pagpadalá
sa ákon sing sulát. Don't be long in sending me a letter. Gindúgay
níya ang bálus. He put off answering for a long time. Dúgay na gid
inâ. That was ages ago, a very long time ago. (cf. búhay; maláwig).

_dugáy-dúgay_, (H) Dim. of dúgay. Rather long, quite a long
time. Dugáydúgay ang pagpuyô níya sa Manílà. He lived quite a long
time in Manila. Dugáydúgay ang íla pagbatás túbtub nga nadángat níla
ang katawháyan. They had to struggle a long time before they could
live at ease. (cf. buháybúhay).

_dugáy-dugáy_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of dúgay. Presently, shortly, within
a short time or while; at short intervals, almost continuously,
very often. Dugáydugáy karón maabút ang koríyo. The mail will be
in shortly now. Dugáydugáy pa lang nga nalúmbus siá. He left only a
short while ago. Ang dugáydugáy nga pangákig dílì maáyo sa láwas. To
be very often excited by anger is not conducive to health (is not good
for the health). Duláon mo ang maláut nga batásan sang dugáydugáy nga
pagkahubúg. Try to rid yourself of the bad habit of getting drunk so
frequently. (cf. dúgay, dugáydúgay, buháybuháy).

_dúg-dug_, To thrust, stab, stick, jab, pierce with an upward
motion. Idúgdug iníng bagát sa halô sa kisamí. Jab this bamboo-pole
against the iguana on the ceiling. Dugdugá ang koláknit sang liníyas
nga kawáyan. Make a thrust at the bat with the piece of split
bamboo. (cf. sútsut).

_dúghal_, To thrust, push, drive, impel, poke, (particularly with a
downward motion), (cf. dúgkal).

_dúghan_, The chest, breast, bosom, thorax. (cf. abá, pétso).

_dughanán_, Broad-chested, having a broad chest.

_dughánan_, A kind of small fish.

_dúghat_, To poke, stir, excite; to thrust, push. (cf. dúgdug, dúldug,
dúghal, dúgkal).

_dúghò_, Guest, visitor, stranger, foreigner; to stay (for a short
time only), drop in, look in, call in one's way, pay a hurried
visit. Nagdúghò lang siá dirâ. He went there for a short stay only. He
just paid a hurried visit. (cf. dóong).

_dúghò_, To fall or light by chance, to trip, stumble. Ngáa nga may
lísgis ikáw sa bútkon?--Kay nakadúghò akó sa kanál. Why is your arm
scratched?--Because I stumbled into the ditch. (cf. túdag).

_dúghò_, A kind of fish that resembles a sardine.

_dúgi, dugíhon_, See dógi; dogíhon--thorn; thorny.

_dugíng_, To be close by, attached to, alongside of, joined to. Ang
íya kasubô kag kaimolón dinugingá (nadugingán) pa sing balatían. To
her trouble and poverty there was added illness. (cf. íping, dulúg,
doróg, dúgang).

_dúgkal_, To thrust, stick, stab, pierce, run through, with a downward
motion, as with a shovel, dibble, spear, lance, etc. Dugkalá sang
kawáyan ang mán-og nga árà sa búhò. Stick the bamboo into the snake
in that hole there. Idúgkal sa haló ang tágad. Run the iguana through
with your dibble. (cf. hárog, dúgdug, sútsut--to stick, etc. with an
upward motion; dúghal, dúghat).

_dúgmal_, To use often or frequently, wear out by constant
use. Ginadúgmal níya lang ang malahálon nga mga panápton. He wears
out his expensive clothes by constant use. He is always wearing his
best clothes. Indì ka magdúgmal sang ímo sapátos nga bág-o. Don't
wear your new boots often. (cf. gánoy, gámit, dagumák, saguláy).

_dúgman_, A kind of under-water river-moss and sea-weed. (cf. lúmut,
aguláman).

_dúgmok_, To crush, break by pressure or incumbent weight, to reduce or
grind to powder, pulverize, comminute, triturate. Indì mo pagdugmokón
ang pínggan, botílya, glóbo, túbo, etc. Don't crush the plate, bottle,
globe, lamp-globe, etc. Idúgmok mo akó ánay siníng bató, kay ihínis ko
sa ákon ngipon. Kindly grind this stone to powder for me, for I wish
to use it to clean my teeth. Amó iní ang gindugmokán níla sang úlo sang
mán-og. Here they crushed the snake's head. (cf. pusâ, lumâ, lamúsot).

_dúgmon_, See dógmon--pig's litter.

_dugô_, Blood, gore; to bleed, stain or mix with blood. Ang íya nga
pilás nagdugô sing támà. His wound bled terribly. Nadugoán ang ákon
báyò. My jacket was stained with blood. Gindugo-án sang kosinéro
ang tinóktok nga báboy. The cook mixed the minced pork with blood,
put some blood into the minced pork. Ari (dirí) ang isá ka botílya
nga dugô sang báboy; idugô iní sa tinóla. Here is a bottle of pig's
blood; mix it with the sauce or broth.

_dúgok_. See dúbok id.--to join, go to, take part in, assemble,
etc. Nadugókan--nadubókan. (cf. gubúk, támbong).

_dúg-on_, To put--, place--, upon, etc. See dát-og,
dát-ol. Dug-oní--dat-olí.

_dugoón_, Bloody, gory, full of blood, blood-stained, sanguinary,
ensanguined. (cf. dugô).

_dúgpan_, From dúpag. Nadúgpan ang íya painóíno. His mind is (was)
distracted.

_dúgsò_, A variety of conger-eel.

_dúgsò_, A passer-by, traveller; tramp, loafer, idler. (cf. dúghò,
huróng, tiyóg-tiyóg).

_dugús_, Honey; the best, sweetest or most delectable part of a thing,
nectar, mead.

_dúgus_, (H) To gather fruit with hook and pole, etc. See
dágas. Dugúsa ang dúldul. Pluck with pole and hook the capsules
of the kapok-tree. Dugúsi akó sing páhò. Pluck some mangoes for
me. (cf. síngit, káwit).

_dugúsnon_, Honeyed, full of honey, sweet, delightful. Dugúsnon nga
hámbal. Words full of compliments or tenderness.

_dúgwak_, Crane; stork. (dógwak id.).


_dúgyon_, To gather, assemble, attend, assist, put in an
appearance. (cf. dúguk, gubúk, támbong, típon, tingúb).

_duhá_, (H) Two; a couple, couplet, pair, deuce, twin, twain, brace;
to duplicate. (cf. dárwa).

_duhá-dúha_, Doubt, indecision, wavering, vacillation, hesitation;
to doubt, hesitate, waver, be undecided, be in a dilemma,--a
quandary,--suspense, to vacillate, to question. Sa walâ sing duhádúha
----. Doubtless, without doubt ----. Indì ka magduhádúha siní. Have no
doubt about this, be sure of this. Anó pa ang ginaduhádúha mo? What
are you still hesitating, vacillating, doubting about? Why are
you still wavering? Anó ang ginaduháduháan mo? What is it you are
doubtful of or undecided about? Seguróha gid ang ímo hunâhúnà, índì mo
pagduháduháon. Be firmly convinced, don't permit any doubts to enter
your mind. Walâ na nákon pagaduháduhái ang íya sinâ nga kamatuóran,
ápang nagaduhádúha pa akó kon mabúut balá ukón índì ang pagpasilabút
sa amó nga mga butáng. I do not any longer doubt the truth of it, but
I am still undecided as to whether it is prudent or not to interfere
in such things. Duhádúha na gid kon maabút pa siá karón, kay gáb-i
na. It is very doubtful whether he will come now that it is dark.

_duhá ka púlò_, Twenty, a score. (cf. darwampúlò).

_duhá-sínko_, (_dárwa-sínko_), Two (eggs or the like) for five
(centavos). N.B. In similar phrases the Visayan numeral expresses
the quantity bought or sold, and the Sp. numeral denotes the amount
to be paid.

_duhá-tátlo_, A contract obliging a borrower to pay 50% interest in
kind or money, e.g. 3 bushels of rice for 2 bushels or 3 pesos for
2 pesos that he has borrowed.

_duháw_, A kind of flat fish.

_duhô_, Very weak, in a state of collapse, almost collapsing
from debility; to languish, decline, fail in strength, become
frail, weak. Duhô siá. He is very weak. Nagduhô siá, kay nagági
sa balatían. He became very weak, for he had been through an
illness. (cf. lúya, lumíng).

_dúhon_, To divide, partition, etc. (cf. díhon, duhóna, duhóni--dihóna,
dihóni).

_duhóng-dúhong_, To come to a halt or stop, to rest, loiter, linger,
tarry, (cf. dulúgdúlug).

_dúhoy_, A gentle breeze, puff, whiff, zephyr; sigh, suspiration, wail,
plaint, moan; to blow gently, to sigh, sough, moan, lament, etc.,
but mostly used in composite form. Anó ang ginapangandúhoy mo? Why
are you sighing or moaning? Anó ukón sín-o ang ginapanganduhóyan
mo? For what or for whom are you sighing? (cf. dúpoy; bákhò).

_duhóy-dúhoy_, Dim. and Freq. of dúhoy. (cf. dupóy-dúpoy).

_dúkà_, A quick downward motion of the head from drowsiness, a
nod; to let the head sink--,--drop--,--bend--, from drowsiness,
to incline the head in sleep, to nod. Nagadúkà siá. He is nodding
(from sleepiness). Dílì ka magdúkà sa sulúd sang láygay or dílì mo
pagdukáan ang pagláygay sang Párì. Don't sleep during the sermon of the
Parish Priest. Dinukáan gid lámang sang madámò nga mga tumalámbong ang
íya pamulóngpúlong, kay támà kaláwig. Many of those that were present
fell asleep during his discourse, because it was very long. (cf. tuyó;
dukô--to bow the head).

_dúkal_, to prate, prattle, chatter, babble, talk much, brag,
boast. Indì ka magdúkal sang mga waláy pulús nga mga butáng. Don't
prattle so much about trivial things. Indì kamó maglamód sing maláut
nga mga púlong sa ínyo nga pagdúkal (mga dinúkal). Don't interlard
your talk with bad or indecent expressions. (cf. wákal, búrà, hádak,
lásang, ngálngal).

_dúkan_, A call for bringing pigs together at feeding time, etc. Also
used as a verb. Dukána ang mga báboy. Call the pigs together by
shouting: "Dúkan, dúkan!". Idúkan akó sang ákon báboy, kay damogán
ko. Please call my pig, for I am going to feed it. (cf. dik, dík-dík,
idík).

_dúkar_, (English--dog-cart) A kind of uncovered calesa, a roofless
rig.

_dukasíng_, Restless, naughty, etc. (cf. harásharás, darándarán,
diwasíng, diwal-ógan, dingkalogán, etc.).

_dúkaw_, To venture abroad, walk abroad under difficulties, as at
night, during rain or in a storm, to brave or defy the elements. Anó
ang ginadúkaw mo? Why are you braving the elements? Why are you
walking out at such a time or in such weather? (cf. kúdaw, id.).

_dúkduk_, To press, force, squeeze in, etc. See dókdok.

_dúke_, (Sp. duque) Duke.

_dukésa_, (Sp. duquesa) Duchess.

_dúklong_, Pain, cramps (in the stomach); to be painful, cause pain,
especially in the stomach; a passing fit of stomach-ache. Nagadúklong
ang solóksolók ko. I have stomach-ache. (cf. sakít, kútoy).

_dúkmil_, To lie on or upon, as children on their mother, or the
like. Indì pagdukmilá si nánay mo, kay nagakatulúg. Don't lie upon your
mother, for she is sleeping. Dukmilá si nánay mo, agúd magmatá. Lie
down close to your mother to wake her up. (cf. dulúg, húlid, idág).

_dukô_, To incline--, bow--, bend--, the head, to bow, make
a--bow,--reverence,--courtesy,--curtsey,--curtsy,--inclination,--obeisance.
Idukô or dukoá ang ímo ólo. Bow your head. Dukoí siá sang ímo ólo sa
pagtáhud sa íya. Incline your head out of respect for him. (cf. kuúb,
kúbkub; dúkà--to nod in sleep).

_dúkot_, What sticks or adheres to; rest, remnant. Ang dúkot sang
ribók. The scattered remnants of the revolutionary army. Pandúkot,
pangdúkot--to behave like scattered remnants, make depredations, etc.

_dukót_, Rice, etc., that sticks to the side of a kettle or the like.

_dukót_, To stick, adhere to (as plaster, paste, glue, gum, or the
like). Ang sílyo nagadukót sa sóbre. The stamp adheres firmly to
the envelope. Nagdukót ang lúnang sa ákon báyò. The mud stuck to my
coat. Sín-o ang nagpadukót siníng papél sa ganháan? Who pasted this
paper on the door? Nadúktan ang ákon delárgo sang ápog. My trousers
were plastered with lime. Padúkta sing má-áyo iníng abíso, kay
nagakóbal. Paste this notice on well, for it is not smooth. Ipadukót
sa díngding iníng estámpa. Paste this picture on the wall. (cf. pilít,
dokót id.).

_dukót_, A skin-disease, a kind of herpes or eczema. (cf. arikís,
kagídkid, itíp, bungang-ínit, katúl, aláp-ap, adík-dik, panítpanít,
kabúyaw, impíne, bakokáng, aláw, tabukáw, upúdupúd, gulós-gúlos,
dúnggas).

_dúkoy_, To walk with a stoop, slouch, bend the body forwards and
downwards, to be bent. Nagadúkoy na si Fuláno, kay tigúlang na. N.N. is
quite bent as he walks, for he is old. (cf. dúroy, kuúb).

_dukóy-dukóy_, Dim. and Freq. of dúkoy. Nagadukóydukóy siá sang íya
buluhatón. He goes about his work with a stoop.

_dúktan_, From dukót--to stick, adhere to. (dóktan id.).

_dúlà_, (H) To lose, miss, mislay, suffer the loss of, incur--,
meet with--, experience--, a loss, to deprive, get rid off,
divest--, dispossess--, oneself of. Indì ka magdúlà sang lyábi
or índì mo pagduláon ang lyábi. Don't lose the key. Nadúlà ang
lyábi. The key got lost,--is lost. Naduláan akó sang lyábi sang
ákon hulút. I lost,--mislaid, the key of my room. Duláa ang mga
batásan nga maláut. Rid yourself of your bad manners. Nakítà ko na
ang lápis nga ímo nga gindúlà. I have found the pencil you lost. Kon
magkadúlà ang ímo mánggad maduláan ka man sang pagkaábyan sang madámò
nga kilála mo. If you should suffer the loss of your wealth you will
also be deprived of the friendship of many of your acquaintances. Ang
ádlaw nagaamátamát na sang dúlà sa katúndan. The sun is now slowly
disappearing in the West. Ang nawád-an sing pagláum maduláan sang
tanán nga kalípay sa pangabúhì. One deprived of hope loses all joy
in life. (cf. walâ, alimúnaw).

_dulâ_, Spittle, saliva, expectoration; to spit, expectorate. Indì
ka magdulâ dirí. Don't spit here. Gindulaán níya siá. He spat
on him. Ginadilían ang pagdulâ dirí. Spitting is prohibited
here. (cf. dúplà).

_dulâ-dúlà_, Dim. and Freq. of dúlà. Also: Disappearing, melting
away, changing imperceptibly from one into the other; to melt--,
dissolve--, into each other. Dulâ-dúlà (nagakadulâ-dúlà) gid ang duág
sang balangáw, tipáy, etc. The colours of the rainbow, of a sea-shell,
etc. melt--, dissolve--, into each other. (cf. tunáwtúnaw).

_dulág_, To leave, separate, go away, escape. (cf. bulág, simáng,
sipák, palágyo).

_dulág_, Unsuited, disagreeing, inharmonious, not fit, discordant,
discrepant, unbefitting, unbecoming, at odds with, out of keeping with,
disproportionate; to disagree, be out of harmony or proportion, be at
variance with, etc. Ang íya báyò nagadulág sa íya delárgo. His coat or
jacket does not go with his trousers. Indì mo pagdulagón (pagpadulagón)
ang ímo digamohán sa baláy. Don't put up a kitchen--out of proportion
to--,--not in harmony with--, the style of your house. (cf. libágon,
sihág).

_duláhot_, To baste, tack, sew with long or wide
stitches. (cf. asálásal, halóthot, haróthot, tahî).

_dúl-ak_, To peel--, strip--, flake--, scale--, off, take off in
thin layers. Napásò siá kag nadúl-ak ang pánit sa íya bútkon. He was
scorched and the skin peeled off his arm. Nadul-akán ang ákon batíis,
kay liniswahán ni Pédro sing maínit nga túbì. The skin of my calf came
off in scales, for Peter had poured scalding water over it. (cf. ál-al,
ák-ak, bák-bak, óklab, ukáb).

_dúlang_, An earthenware plate, plate--, dish--, lid for covering
pots and pans--, made of pottery.

_duláng_, To dig up, excavate, unearth, mine. Iníng lugár ginadulangán
sing buláwan. Gold is being mined in this place. Duláng ka sang--,
dulangá ang--, manggad nga nagakatulúg sa idálum sang dútà. Dig up
the wealth hidden (Literally: that is sleeping) below the soil.

_dulángan, dulangán_, Mine. Dulangán sang bulawán, dulangán-buláwan. A
Gold-mine. Dulangán-karbón--a coal-mine. (cf. mína, minahán).

_dulát_, Awl, brad-awl, sprig-bit; to use or apply an awl, make a
hole with an awl. Magdulát ka sang binít sang amákan kon magbódbod
ka. Pierce the edge of the bamboo-mat with an awl, when you make
a rattan-rim around it. Dulatí ang sapátos kon magtahî ka sang
pánit. Perforate the boots with an awl, when you sew the leather. Dílì
mo pagdulatán, kóndì síbtan mo lámang, ang dulúnggan sang bátà kon
bitáyan mo sing arítos. Don't pierce the girl's ear with an awl,
but only with a needle or pin, when you are going to hang an ear-ring
in it.

_duláw_, A kind of plant somewhat similar to the kalawág and
sagíngsagíng; a sort of crocus or saffron; its roots yield a yellowish
dye.

_dúl-ay_, Clod, lump, mass (of earth, etc.). (cf. pugá, píghol, dáay).

_dúldug_, To thrust, stab, push, impel, make a lunge (upwards),
throw up, throw away. Ginadúldug gid lang siníng táo ang íya
kwárta sa sugálan. This man throws his money away on the gambling
table. Duldugá sang súngkud mo ang haló. Make a lunge at the iguana
with your stick. (cf. dúgdug, hárog, dúgkal).

_duldugán_, Stem, stalk, flower-stem; the fruit-stalk of the
banana-plant, especially that part of it to which the cluster of
bananas is attached. (cf. ilipoán, kulútlan).

_dúldul_, See dúldug--to thrust, etc.

_dúldul_, The kapok-tree, cotton tree; cotton of the
kapok-tree. (cf. búlak, búrak).

_dúlgan_, From dulúg--to lie down side by side, etc.

_dúlhug_, To descend, walk--, get--, go--, down a slope or inclined
plane, go down-hill. Sán-o ikáw magadúlhug sa bánwa? When shall you
come down to town? Nagdúlhug na siá sa búkid? Has he come down from
the mountain? Has he descended the mountain? Padulhugá siá. Make
him come down (the slope). Dulhugí akó dirí. Come down to me
here. (cf. tokád--to go up, ascend).

_dulhúgon_. Descent, declivity, slope downhill. (cf. dululhúgon,
dululhúgan).

_dúli_, To roll up cotton into small bundles before spinning it
into threads. Dulíha ang búlak sang búlak nga napapák na, kay ákon
pagapamurúngon. Roll up into bundles the cotton that is beaten,
for I am going to spin it into threads. Dulíhi akó sing búlak. Get
me some cotton ready for spinning. Ikáw ang magadúli sang búlak,
akó ang magapamúrung. You will roll up the cotton into small bundles
and I shall spin it. Idúli akó ánay siníng búlak sang búlak. Please
roll this cotton for me. (cf. balólon).

_dúli_, To lie on or upon. See dúkmil.

_dúling_, To be unsteady, swing or sway about as a drunken person,
tumble or stumble along, stagger, reel, titubate, zigzag. Nagadúling
siá. He is unsteady on his legs. Indì nínyo siá pagpadulíngon sang
bíno. Don't make him reel or stagger with wine. Ginpadúling siá
sang lakás nga tubâ. He was made unsteady by too much toddy or
palm-wine. (cf. isí-ísi).


_dulíng-dúling_, Dim. and Freq. of dúling. To take irregular
steps, stagger slightly, to be a trifle unsteady on one's
legs. (cf. panayódò).

_dúl-is_, To scratch, scrape, excoriate, injure, lacerate. (cf. báklis,
pákris, dúsil, dúsngal).

_dulís_, Meteor. (cf. amorókpok, bululákaw).

_dúlis_. A kind of small fish.

_dulít_, Black and sticky, dark and wet, especially said of low
grade cane-sugar or third and fourth class muscovado. Dulít nga
kalámay. Dark-coloured and sticky cane-sugar. Also used as a verb. Indì
mo pagdulitón sa isá ka túig ang ímo kalámay. Don't produce low-grade
sugar next year.

_dúlit_, To soil, dirty, etc. See búlit id.

_duló_, A puncture, small hole or wound caused by a prick or the
like, especially in the head; a hairless or (in the case of birds) a
featherless spot on the head; bald-spotted; to puncture, nick, notch,
dent. Gindúlwan sang íya kasíng ang ákon. He dented my top with his,
my top was notched by his. Padúlwi ang ákon kasíng kon makapaduló
ikáw. Nick my top, if you can. Duló nga manók. A chicken with a bald
spot on the head. (cf. bungád, kálbo, upáw; dús-il, dúsngal).

_dulóy_, See padulóy--to be heedless, etc.

_dúlud_, To trickle, ooze out, dribble, exude, issue, distil. Nagadúlud
ang gátas or ginadulúdan (ginadulúran) siá sang gátas. The milk is
trickling out. (cf. tubúd, túlò, ágay).

_dúlug_, To stop, stand, come to a--stand,--rest,--standstill, put
up at, draw rein, halt, cease to advance. Nagdúlug siá sa atubángan
sang ákon baláy. He stopped in front of our house. Ginpadúlug níya
ang salákyan sa tupád sang simbáhan. He drew up the vehicle before
the Church. Padulúgi sang áwto ang íya baláy. Stop the auto at his
house. Padulúga dirí ang trak, kay malúsad akó. Stop the truck here,
for I wish to get out. Sa diín magadúlug ang trak? Where will the
truck stop? Sa diín magapadúlug ka sang trak? Where will you stop the
truck? Ipadúlug ináng gamó sa mga punoán. Let the authorities put a
stop to that annoyance or disturbance. Indì mapadúlug ang lakát sang
ádlaw. The sun cannot be stopped in its course. (cf. pára; táyod--to
stand, stop walking).

_dulúg_, (H) To join sides with, to stand--, lie down--, side by side,
be close together. Si Hosé nagadulúg sa kay Andrés. Joseph is close
by the side of Andrew. Dulugí (dúlgi) siá kag sikádan túbtub nga
magbalískad (mabúntul). Press him to your side and push against him
till he tumbles on his back. Nagadulgánay (nagadulugánay) silá. They
are close together. (cf. doróg, húlid).

_dulúg-dúlug_, Dim. and Freq. of dúlug.

_dulúg-dulúg_, Dim. and Freq. of dulúg.

_dulugukán_, (H) Meeting, gathering, congregation, convention,
assembly; goal, place or occasion requiring one's attendance or
presence. (cf. dúguk).

_dululángon_, (H) Ore, minerals to be mined, the output of a mine;
industrial output (in general). (cf. duláng; palatúbson).

_dululhúgan_, (H) Declivity, downward slope, descent; path or place
of descent. (dúlhug).

_dululhúgon_, (H) Descent, downhill road, incline, act of
passing--, marching--, travelling--, from a higher to a lower
level. (cf. dululhúgan, dulhúgon).

_dululugán_, (H) Terminal, terminus, stoppage, stop, halt, end,
station, goal, destination, close; place to stop at. (cf. dúlug).

_dulúm_, Darkness, blackness, night, gloom, murk, dusk, obscurity,
obfuscation, dimness, indistinctness; to darken, become dark,
get--dusky,--dim,--obscure,--gloomy, to come on--night,--dusk,
etc. Nagadulúm na. It is growing--, getting--, dark. Nagadulúm na ang
kalibútan. Night has fallen. Padúlma (padulumá) ang hulút. Darken
the room. Padúlmi akó. Surround me with darkness. Ang amó nga
hitabô nagpadulúm sang íya painóíno. That event cast a gloom over his
thoughts. Nalágyo siá sa pitípit nga dulúm sang kagab-íhon. He ran away
at dead of night. Dinúlman (nadúlman) ang íya panghunâhúnà. His mind
became clouded. His ideas grew confused. (cf. itúm, ilóm, girómgiróm).

_dulumáan_, (H) Old, ancient, etc. See dáan, dumáan.

_dulumaláhan_, (H) Management, administration, direction,
administrative office. (dumála).


_dulumdúmon_, (H) Memory, recollection, retrospect;
memorable, to be remembered, worth remembering, worthy
of--remembrance,--commemoration. Buút siá malágyo siníng dulumdúmon. He
would like to escape the recollection of this. Ang isá ka dulumdúmon
gid nga tabô. A very memorable event. (dúmdum).

_dulúmtan_, (H) Hateful, odious, exciting dislike or repugnance,
causing aversion or antipathy, noisome, abominable, execrable,
detestable, repugnant, repellent, disgusting. (dumút).

_dúlun_, See dólon.

_dulún_, See dolón.

_dúlung_, Direction, destination, steering; prow; to go in the
direction of, come towards, proceed to, approach, draw near, make
for or towards. Nagadúlung (nagapadúlung) siá dirí. He is on his way
here. He is approaching or drawing near. He is coming hither. Anó ang
dúlung mo? Where are you going? What is your destination? Idúlung ang
sakayán pa Manílà. Direct the boat towards Manila. Ginadulúngan níla
ang katúndan. They are steering west.

_dúl-ung_, To bring--, take--, to, transfer, transmit, convey,
transport, carry, bear, post, ship, mail. Idúl-ung mo inâ sa
Ilóngílong. Take or carry that to Iloilo. Ipadúl-ung mo inâ sa
Ilóngílong. Send that to Iloilo. Dul-ungí ang ákon baláy siníng
bág-o nga baúl. Convey this new trunk to my home. Dinul-ungán níla
kamí sing isá ka gatús ka bílog nga páhò. They brought us a hundred
mangoes. (cf. hatúd, dalá).

_dulúngan_, Goal, end, termination, destination; port, haven,
harbour. (cf. dúlung).

_dulúngan, dulungán_, Together, at the same time, simultaneous,
concomitant, concurrent, contemporaneous; to do together, act--in
concert,--concomitantly--concurrently, etc. Nagdulúngan silá sa
paglakát. They set out together. They marched off at the same
time. (cf. dúngan, dungán).

_dulúnggan_, (H) The ear, auricle, lug. (cf. dungúg, dalúnggan,
talínga).

_dúlup_, (H) To be very busy--, occupied--, with, have no time,
work hard at, be hard at work, be brisk, keep--moving,--on the
move. Ginadulúpan níla ang atóp sang baláy. They are hard at work
putting a roof on the house. Nagadúlup silá sang arádo. They are fully
occupied with ploughing. Dulúpi ang ímo mga buluhatón. Be brisk in
performing your duties. (cf. sákò, dánghos).

_dulupláan_, (H) Spittoon. (cf. dúplà, dupláan).

_dulús_, Fine wire as used for flower-making or the like.

_dulús_, Gust, blast, squall, gale, strong--, stiff--, breeze; blowing
strongly, etc. (of wind); to blow strongly. Nagadulús ang hángin. It
is blowing a gale. Gindulusán kamí sang hángin sa sakayán. We had a
stiff breeze while we were on the boat. (cf. mádlus, unús).

_dulút_, Mark, impression, penetration, stamp, notch; to mark,
blaze, penetrate, leave--a mark,--trace,--notch, to indent, notch,
pierce. Nagdulút ang ngipon sang idô sa batíis sang bátà. The dog's
teeth left a mark on the calf of the child's leg. Padútla ang tigíb
sing maáyo. Drive the chisel in well. Gindútlan sang kagát sang lukón
ang ákon kamót. The claws of the lobster imbedded themselves in my
hand. Ipadulút ko iníng tigíb sa kahóy. I will drive this chisel to
mark--, indent--, the tree.

_dúlut_, Gift, present, etc. See dólot.

_dulután-on_, Worldly, earthly, material, of the earth, pertaining to
the earth, sensual, materialistic. (cf. dútà, dután-on, kalibutánon).

_duluwásì_, Cauldron, large pan. (dolwásì id.).

_dúmà_, To bother, pester, molest, trouble, aggravate. Nakahibaló
ka nga waláy kwárta si nánay, kag nagadúmà ka gid sang pangáyò. You
know that mother has no money, yet you are always pestering her with
requests for it.

_dumáan_, Old, olden, of old, of yore, antique, old-time, long in use,
of long standing, time-worn, ancient. Dumáan gid iníng kansyón. This
song is a very old one. (cf. dáan, kinarágto, minál-am, sinádto).

_dumála_, (H) To manage, lead, conduct, direct, govern, supervise,
be in charge of, regulate, administer, overlook, superintend, have
control of. Ikáw ang magadumála, kamí ang magatrabáho. You will give
directions, and we will do the work. Dumaláhi silá sing maáyo. Govern
or direct them well. Idumála akó ánay siníng mga mamumugón, kay akó
sing ákon may kadtoán pa. Please supervise these workmen for me,
because I have to go elsewhere. Ipadumála ko sa ímo ang ákon mga
sinákup. I will hand over to your management my dependents. Mapúto
gid lang silá sa íla palatikángan, kay walâ níla pagadumaláhi sing
maáyo. They will surely go bankrupt in their business, because they
do not--conduct--,--manage--, it well. Ang mga manugdumála kag ang
mga ginadumaláhan. Rulers and ruled.

_dumalága_, (H) A female animal nearing puberty. The corresponding
term for human beings is "dalagíta".

_dumalágkò_, (H) Large, tall, great, big. Dumalágkò silá sing
kalíwat. They come of a race of tall men. They belong to a family-line
of tall people. Their ancestors were tall. (cf. dakô, dalágkò,
lántiog).

_dumalágkut_, (H) Sticky, viscous, adhesive. (cf. dágkut).

_dumalágsà_, (H) Carrying driftwood, etc. (cf. dágsà).

_dumalála_, (H) Porter, carrier, bearer; driver, coachman,
chauffeur. (cf. dalá).

_dumalámpig_, (H) Partner, party-man, associate, helper, assistant,
supporter. (cf. dámpig).

_dumalámpon_, (H) One who joins; guest, visitor, foreigner. (dumalápon
id.).

_dumalápon_, (H) See dumalámpon. (cf. dámpon, dápon).

_dumaláyaw_, (H) Praiser, extoller, votary, devotee, magnifier,
exalter. (cf. dáyaw).

_dumaláyon_, (H) Continuing, continuous, permanent; one who stays
for a considerable space of time; lodger, boarder, guest. (cf. dáyon).

_dumár_, (Sp. domar) To train, tame, break in, domesticate. Makahibaló
ka balá magdumár sang kabáyo? Do you know how to train horses? Hóo,
kay madámò na ang ákon gindumár. Yes, for I have trained many
before this. Dumahá iníng simarón nga karabáw. Tame this wild
buffalo. Ipadumár ko sa ímo ang ákon kabáyo, kay akó índì makadaúg
sa íya. I will let you break in my horse, for I cannot subdue
it. (cf. ántà).

_dumarágkul_, (B) Tall, great, etc. See dumalágkò.

_dúmdum_, To think, remember, recollect, bear in mind, recall,
cogitate, reflect, consider, reason, ponder, muse, take into
consideration, bethink oneself, bring or call to mind, collect one's
thoughts, revolve in the mind. Dumdumá inâ. Remember that. Indì
ka kadúmdum sinâ? Can you not recollect that? Don't you remember
that? Idúmdum akó sang ákon mga manók karón sa hápon, kay akó walâ
dirí. Kindly think of my chickens this evening, for I shall not be
here. Ipadúmdum mo sa íya ang íya ginsilíng. Remind him of what he
said. Nadumdumán ko karón ----. I recollect now ----. Padumdumá siá
sang íya nga tinúg-an. Put him in mind of his promise. Recall to him
his promise. Walâ akó kadúmdum siní. I did not think of it. Nagdúmdum
akó, nga índì ka na gid magabút. I thought you would never come
again. (cf. hunâhúnà).

_dúmdum_, Small glass pearls or glass beads or similar decorations
of glass used in necklaces, on skirts, tops of slippers and the
like. Abáw, ang sinélas níya napunô (nabútà) sang dúmdum! Why, her
slippers are entirely covered with glass beads!

_dumdúman_, Thought, memory, recollection, concern, solicitude. Walâ
na gid siá dumdúman sa ámon. He does not think of us any longer. He
does not even remember us, has no concern for us. (cf. panumdúman).

_dumílì_, (H) To interdict, forefend, proscribe, refuse, withhold,
bar, ban, forbid, prohibit. Nagdumílì siá sa ámon sa pagpamakóg
sang kabúgaw. He forbade us to throw sticks at the pomeloes. Indì ka
magdumílì sinâ sa íya. Don't refuse him that. Ginadumilían kamí sa
pagsulúd sa íya hulút. We are not allowed to enter his room. (cf. dílì,
lihî, índì, íngà).

_dumô_, To chew noisily, munch, crunch, craunch, champ, as when
eating roast corn or the like; to clench--, grind--, gnash--, one's
teeth. (cf. doóm, domô, ókdom, úgtom).

_dúm-ok_, A small heap of stone put in a river in order to catch
shrimps, lobsters, crabs and the like; to form a heap, lie about in a
heap or in disorder. Magdúm-ok ka sa subâ, kay áton pagabungkagón sa
búlan sa Enéro, kon may sulúd na. Build some stone traps in the river,
for we will take them down in January, and see if they have anything
in. Gindúm-ok níla ang mahígkò nga mga panápton sa higád. They piled
up the soiled clothes in the corner. Nagadúm-ok gid lang dirí ang íya
kasangkápan. His tools are here lying about in heaps--or--in utter
disorder. Dum-okí ang kátre sang mga ulúnan. Put the pillows in a
heap on the bed. Iníng subâ madámò sing dúm-ok. This river has many
stone traps in it. (cf. hál-id).

_dumolóong_, Stranger, foreigner, outsider, not belonging to a place,
not native or indigenous. (cf. dúong).

_dúm-on_, From doóm, domô--to munch, etc.

_dúmpug_, To knock--, hit--, box--, with the fist, to pommel,
to have a bout of fisticuffs, thump, maul, box, punch, cuff,
buffet. Dumpugá siá. Box him. Dumpugí siá sa íya likód. Punch him
on the back. Gindúmpug níya akó kag ákon siá ginbalúsan. He hit me
and I returned the blow. Idúmpug sa íya iníng pitsokwérno. Give him
a blow with this cestus. (cf. ómol, súmbag, pápà, papák, búngbung).

_dúmpul_, To dull, blunt, take off the point; to become dull or blunt,
said of pointed instruments and tools. Nagdúmpul ang dulát, ang púya
sang kasíng, ang bángkaw, etc. The awl, the point of the spinning top,
the point of the lance, etc. has become blunt. Indì mo pagdumpulón
ang lápis. Don't blunt the pencil's point. Sín-o ang nagdúmpul
sang ákon dágum? Who broke off the point of my needle? (cf. kímpul,
hábul, dupúl).

_dúmug_, Wrestling; to wrestle, grapple, struggle,
scuffle. Magdúmug--or--dúmug na kamó. Wrestle now. Start
wrestling. Dumúga siá. Wrestle with him. Grapple with him. Dumúgi
siá. Get him to fight a wrestling bout with you. Ang mga waláy
sing tinón-an nagapáti gid silá nga kagáb-i gindúmug sang áswang si
Fuláno. Silly folks actually believe that last night the evil spirit
wrestled with N.N. Madámò nga mga pamatán-on ang magatámbong kon may
dúmug. Many young fellows will attend if there is wrestling.

_dúm-ug_, To lie down with bent legs as animals do. See lukó,
lúp-ug id.

_dumugán_, Wrestling ground. (cf. dúmug).

_dumulúong_, Stranger, foreigner. See dumolóong.

_dumús_, To drown; to smother. (cf. lumús id. and the usual term).

_dumút_, Hatred, hate, spite, odium, antipathy, aversion, spleen,
acrimony, detestation, animosity, enmity; to hate, abominate, detest,
bear malice. May dumút siá sa ákon. He has a spite against me. He
bears me malice. Nagadumút siá sa ákon--or--ginadúmtan níya akó. He
hates me. Ipadumút mo sa íya ang maláut nga batásan. Teach him to
detest bad habits. Nagadumtánay silá. They hate each other. Ginbátyag
ko ang isá ka dakô nga dumút sa íya, ápang gintágò ko lámang. I felt
a great detestation for him, but kept it hidden. (cf. ákig--anger;
aligótgot--spite, resentment, grudge; kahísà, kahíkaw--envy, grudge,
spite; kasílag--hot blood, rage, ill feeling).

_dunâ_, To be punctual, be in time, be there at the proper moment,
in the nick of time, just in time. Nakadunâ siá sa íla pagsúgud sang
rosáryo. He was there when they started saying the rosary. Walâ ikáw
makadunâ sang pagbukás námon sang kláse. You were not there when we
opened the class. Tungúd sa anó nga, walâ ka makadunâ sa prosesyón
sang ámon pándut? Why didn't you come in time for the procession of
our Feast?

_dunâ_, Together, at the same time. (cf. dungán).

_dunâ_, Nature, a necessary quality; natural to. (cf. kinatúbò).

_dunák_, Common, vulgar; old, worn out; to be common, etc. (cf. lunák;
gubát).

_dundúnay_, A kind of small bird. (dondónay id.).

_dungán, dúngan_, To be or do together or at the same time, be coeval
or concomitant, do simultaneously or in concert, perform in unison,
to synchronize. Nagadungán silá sa pagbúthò. They are going to school
together. Gindungán silá sang trankáso. They had influenza at the same
time. Dunganá nínyo ang kalabása kag lángkà sa paglúnud sa kólon. Put
the squash and jackfruit into the kettle together. Dunganán ta ang
bató sa paghákwat. Let us lift the stone all together. Dunganón ta
ang paghákwat sang bató. Let us raise the stone in unison, like one
man. Dunganón nínyo ang pagbángon sa buás sa pagarádo. Rise together
to-morrow morning for the ploughing. (cf. dungán, kadúngan).


_dúngan_, Meeting, encounter, rendezvous, coming together, gathering.

_dungán_, Together, at the same time, simultaneous, coincident. Dungán
ang íla paghalín dirí. They left (will leave) here together. Dungán
gid iníng dagúob kag pangilát. The flash and thunder were
simultaneous. (cf. dúngan, kadúngan, talidúngan, talirungán).

_dungán-dúngan_, The temple (of the head).

_dungángo_, To droop--, drop--, the head or hands in a lazy manner, to
be--idle,--indolent,--dispirited, languish. (cf. dungángok, panimókò,
pakuribúng, pamuágpuág, paligóy, pabánol, patáwhay, búog).

_dungángok_, To stand by, be present, look on, be an idle spectator,
loaf, loiter. Anó ang ginadungángok mo dirí? Why are you loitering
here? What is the reason of--your presence--,--being--,--standing
about here? What are you doing here? Palayô ka, índì ka magdungángok
dirí. Go away, don't loiter here. Gindungangókan sang mga bátà ang
pagíhaw námon sang báboy. The boys looked on when we killed the
pig. (cf. támbong, taroróng; dungángo).

_dungás_. Having a turned-up nose. Dungás siá--or--dungás ang íya
nga ilóng. He has a turned-up nose. (cf. ungás).

_dúngas_, To turn up one's nose, to sniff; to look for, seek, search
out, try to find. Kon walâ siá sing tabákò magadúngas gid siá. If
he has no tobacco he is sure to look for some. (cf. sághap, ságap,
lághap, úngas).

_dúngdung_, To rain heavily and continuously, to rain for a long time
with a clouded sky and frequent squalls at short intervals. Dáyon gid
lang nagadúngdung ang kalibútan. It rains continuously. Sa búlan nga
mabulús pagadungdungán na man kitá sa waláy duhádúha. Next month we
are sure to have a long spell of rainy weather.

_dúngdung_, To put or lay heads together. Nagadúngdung silá sang íla
úlo--or--nagadungdungánay silá sang íla úlo. They are putting their
heads together, the head of one touching that of the other.

_dúnggan_, From dungúg--to hear, etc.

_dunggánan_, Honourable, respectable, estimable, reputable, full of
honour and dignity, distinguished, famous, well-known, of high esteem
or repute, of good repute. (dungúg).

_dunggánon_, Worthy of--honour,--respect,--esteem, to be honoured,
meriting distinction, honourable. (cf. dungúg, dunggánan, talahúron,
talaháon).

_dúnggas_, A skin disease, a kind of eczema or herpes attacking large
parts of the skin and spreading rapidly. Also used as a verb. May
dúnggas siá--or--ginadúnggas siá--or--ginadunggasán siá. He has
the skin-disease "dúnggas". Sang túig nga tinalíkdan dinunggasán
ang íya bátà sang dídto siá sa umá, ápang karón maáyo na siá. Last
year his child had the skin-disease "dúnggas", when he was staying
at his farm, but now it is well again. Indì ka magságad óbog sa
mahígkò nga mga danáw kay básì dunggasón ikáw. Don't wade through
dirty mud-puddles, for you may get the skin-disease "dúnggas". (In
the "dúnggas" the pustules, eruptions and excoriations are thickly
spread over considerable portions of the skin and so near together
that there is scarcely a healthy spot left between them. The head,
cheeks and chin, especially of children, seem to be most liable to
contract "dúnggas"). (cf. dukót).

_dúnggò_, To attack, assail, fasten on, take, afflict with, strike,
lay low, get hold of, (said of a disease). Nagdúnggò sa ákon ang
trankáso. Influenza got hold of me. Gindúnggò siá sang butí. He was
attacked by small-pox. Andam ka, kay básì pagadunggoón ka man sang
kólera. Be careful or you may also fall a victim to cholera. Dinúnggò
siá sang balaúd. He was laid low with dysentery. He took sick of
dysentery. He had an attack of dysentery. He had--,--was down with--,
dysentery. (cf. sángkò, sákrò, tapík, abút).

_dúngkà_, To land, make port, arrive in port, put into--, attain--,
gain--, port, obtain one's object. Magdúngkà kitá sa madalî, kay
daw maabút ang bágyo. Let us make for port at once, for it looks
as if a storm were coming. Kaína sang ága nagdúngkà ang bapór. The
steamer arrived in port this morning. Padungkaá--or--ipadúngkà ang
sakayán. Put the vessel into port. Padungkaá silá sa báybay, kay
buót silá maglúsad. Effect a landing for them on the beach, for they
wish to disembark. Nakadúngkà na siá sa palangakóan nga íya ginhándum
nga dáan. He has now finally obtained the office he has aspired to so
long. Pinadungkaán níla sang sakayán ang amó nga báhin sang pulô. They
put the vessel ashore at that part of the island. (cf. tákas).

_dungkáan_, Port, harbour, haven, landing; goal, end, termination,
fulfilment.

_dúngkul_, A piece of rather thick, stout fire-wood, often used to
keep the fire alive for a long time and to rekindle the fire without
the use of matches, a log, yule-log; to put a large piece of wood
or a log on the fire. Dungkulí ang kaláyo. Put a log of wood on the
fire. (cf. agipó).

_dungkulán_, A log, a large piece of fire-wood.

_dungkúl-dúngkul_, Dim. of dúngkul. Also: to lie like a
log. Nagapandungkúldúngkul siá; sa ákon bántà may ginabátyag siá nga
balatían. I think he is ill; he lies there so quietly (like a log).

_dúnglay_, To bend, incline, droop, get soft and pliable (as a
candle from heat). Kon maínit gid ang tiémpo, magadúnglay ang mga
kandílà. If it is very hot, the candles bend. Nadunglayán ang pínggan
nga napatindogán sang kandílà. The candle bent over the plate on
which it stood. Padunglayá ang úlo mo. Incline--, bow--, bend--,
your head. (cf. dúplay, tabulî, talingí).

_dúngon_, A kind of hardwood tree and its valuable timber.

_dungúg_, Fame, repute, reputation, name, renown, celebrity, notoriety,
notability, glory, distinction, mark, figure; also used as a verb:
Ginapadúnggan ta ang mga Sántos. We venerate the Saints. Magpadungúg
ka sa íya. Honour him. Respect him. Ang ímo dungúg nagapangáyò
sinâ. Your reputation requires that. Húptan mo ang imo dungúg. Guard
your honour. Keep your name unsullied. (cf. kadunggánan).

_dungúg_, To hear, overhear, catch (by hearing), get to know by
hearsay. Nakadungúg ka nga ----? Have you heard that ----? Nadúnggan mo
ang natabô sa Manílà? Have you heard what happened in Manila? Dúnggi
akó kag pamatíi. Hear me and listen. Ipadungúg mo sa íya iníng ákon
mga púlong. Bring these words of mine to his knowledge. See that
these words of mine reach his ears. (cf. batî).

_dungúk_, To incline one's head forward, look down, bend--, bow--,
the head. Dungúk ka or magdungúk ka. Incline your head. Gindungukán
akó níya sang íya úlo. He bowed his head to me. Idungúk or padunguká
ang úlo mo. Bow your head. (cf. dukô, tamúd, kuúb).

_dúngul, dungulán_, See dúngkul, dungkulán--a log, etc.

_dungúl_, Very poor, pauper, indigent, destitute, penniless, needy,
necessitous, distressed, straitened, pinched, penurious; to be or
become very poor, suffer great privations, etc. Dungúl siá nga táo,
kay abátabát gid lámang kag kamús-kamús ang íya pagkáon. He is very
poor, for he really lives only from hand to mouth. (N.B. Dungúl
supposes a greater degree of poverty than either ímol or póbre).

_dungúl-dungúl_, Dim. of dungúl. Poor, needy, reduced, embarrassed,
impecunious, straitened, living in reduced circumstances.

_dúnut_, To decay, rot, spoil, putrefy, decompose, corrupt; to
become or make soft. Nadúnut ang káhoy sa dútà. The wood rotted in
the ground. Padunúta lang sa dútà iníng káhoy. Just let this wood
rot in the ground. Dunúta ang linúgaw, kamóti, ságing, etc. Make the
rice-porridge soft, let the sweet potatoes, the bananas, etc. get
very soft. Nadunútan ang ámon baláy sing duhá ka halígi. Two posts
of our house have become rotten. (cf. gabúk).

_dunút_, Rotten, putrid, spoilt, decaying, corrupt; soft,
overripe. Dunút nga káhoy. Rotten wood. Dunút nga lángkà. An overripe
jack-fruit. Dunút nga batásan. Depraved habits. (cf. gabúk).

_dúo, duók, dúol, duóm, duón, duót_, See dóo, doók, dóol, doóm,
doón. doót.

_dúong_, To visit--, migrate to--, another place. See dóong. Ang
mga nagdúong dídto. Those who went to live there. (cf. dumulúong--a
stranger, immigrant).

_dupá_, The length of a man's outstretched arms from finger-tip to
finger-tip; a fathom, two yards; to stretch out one's arms, to fully
extend the arms, to measure something with outstretched arms. Nagadupá
siá. He is stretching out his arms. Magdupá ka or dupá ka. Extend
your arms fully. Gindupá níya ang káhoy. He measured the timber with
outstretched arms. Dúpha or dupahá ang tápì kon daw anó ang íya sinâ
nga kalábà. Measure the board with your outstretched arms to see how
long it is. Nagdupá ang Aton Ginoó sa krus or gindupahán sang Aton
Ginóo ang krus. Our Lord stretched out his arms on the cross. Dúphi
(dupahí) akó sing limá ka dupá nga lúbid. Measure out for me ten
yards of string. Idupá akó siníng kalát. Kindly measure for me this
rope with your outstretched arms.

_dupág_, (B) Distracted, preoccupied, busy. Walâ ko mabalúsi ang ímo
sulát kay dupág akó kaáyo. I could not answer your letter, because
I was so busy. (cf. lupág).

_dúpag_, (B) To detain, interfere with, balk, meddle with, preoccupy,
prevent, foil, baffle, hamper, trammel, obstruct, handicap. Indì
ka magdúpag sa ákon sang lakás nga sugilánon. Don't detain me
with excessive talk. Walâ pa gánì makapanyága kamí, kay nadúpag
kamí sang ámon hambálay. We have not even had dinner yet, because
we were preoccupied with our conversation. Indì mo akó pagdupágon,
kay masákò ang ákon mga buluhatón. Don't hamper me, don't interfere
with me, for I have much work to do. Buót akó magkádto dídto kahápon,
ápang gindúpag akó ni Fuláno. I wanted to go there yesterday, but
N.N. prevented me. (cf. awát, lúpag, pamalábag).

_dúpak_, Bad language, obscene talk, dirty, foul, smutty,
indecent, impure conversation; to use bad, filthy, obscene, dirty,
etc. language. Indì kamó magdúpak. Don't use foul language. Gindupákan
níya akó, ápang sa madalî ákon siá ginpúnggan. He uttered obscenity
in my presence, but I soon stopped him. Iníng mga táo daláyon gid
lang nagadinúpak. These men are constantly using foul language.

_dúphan_, From dupá--to extend the arms, etc.

_dúpias_, A false step, skid, skidding, slip, slide, glide; to
make a false step, to skid, slide, glide, slip; to err, fall into
error. Nakadúpias akó sa salúg nga nabutangán sing espérma. I slipped
on the floor that had been rubbed with tallow. Amó iní ang ákon
dinupiasán. This is the place where I slipped. Padupiasá siá. Make
him slip. Cause him to slip. (cf. dápios, dalín-as; dáhog).

_dúplà_, (H) Spittle, saliva, rheum, sputum; to spit, eject spittle,
expectorate. Indì ka magdúplà dirí. Don't spit here. Indì mo pagduplaán
ang salúg, kay may dulupláan. Don't expectorate on the floor, for
there is a spittoon. Dúplà ka sang minamâ mo or idúplà mo ang ímo
minamâ. Spit out the betel-nut juice. Sín-o ang nagdúplà dirí? Who
spat here? (cf. dulâ, durâ; lúad--to spit out unpalatable food, etc.).

_dupláan_, (H) Spittoon. (cf. dulupláan, durúr-an).

_dúplay_, To bend, droop, become very weak or exhausted, languish,
become enfeebled. Nagdúplay siá sa gútum. He became very weak from
hunger. (cf. lúya; dúnglay).

_dúplo_, (Sp. duplo) Double, twice as much; to double,
duplicate. Duplohá ang kalát. Double the rope. Idúplo akó sang
pústa. Bet me two to one. Duplohí akó sing pústa. Bet me twice as
much. (cf. pilô).

_dúpoy_, A gentle breeze, etc. See dúhoy, dupúy-dúpuy.

_dúprà_, See dúplà.

_dupúl_, Blunted, dull, obtuse, having the point broken off or its
sharpness gone; to take off the point, to blunt or make dull; to become
blunt or dull. (See dúmpul id. Gindupúl, dupulá--gindúmpul, dumpulá).

_dupúy-dúpuy_, A slight breeze, light wind; to blow softly
(of wind). Nagadupúydúpuy ang hángin. The wind is blowing
softly. Gindupúydupuyán kamí sáng hángin sa báybay. On the shore we
were fanned by a gentle breeze.

_dúpyas_, See dúpias--to slip.

_dúrà_, (B) See dúlà id.

_durâ_, (B) See dulâ, dúplà, id.

_durár_, See dorár id.

_durár_, (Sp. durar) To last, endure. Iníng baláy pamádo gid, segúro
magadurár sing kalím-an ka túig. This house is very strong, it will
certainly last fifty years. (cf. dúgay, búhay).

_dúray_, To tickle, titillate, make to itch. Duráya ang bátà, agúd
magkádlaw. Tickle the baby to make it laugh. Ginadúray ang ákon úlo
sang kútò. Lice are making my head itch. Duráyi siá sa tiíl. Tickle
his foot. (cf. kalám).

_durián_, A tropical tree and its fruit, which is very enticing to eat,
but has an offensive smell.

_dúro_, (Sp. duro) Many; very, much. Dúro nga mga táo. Many people. A
great multitude. Dúro kasakít. Very painful. (cf. támà, lakás, lám-ag,
rakô, madámò).

_durok-ónon_, (B) The thumb. (cf. darak-ónon, kamomóo, kumalágkò).

_dúroy_, To walk with bent shoulders as old people, walk about with
a stoop, to duck, stoop down, lower the head. Nagadúroy siá nga
daw úmbok. He walks about like a quail. Dúroy ka, kay masíot ang
dálan. Stoop low, for the road is overgrown. Duróya ang paglakát mo,
kay nagabúyok ang mga sangâ sang káhoy. Bend down as you walk, for
the branches of the tree are hanging down low. (cf. dúkoy, kuúb, dukô).

_durúgas_, Contrivance, means, machination. (cf. pahitôhítò, patúga,
etc.).

_durumálpog_, (B) To succeed one another, follow in quick
succession. Nagadurumálpog lang ang mga kalisúd. One trouble succeeds
another. Difficulties are coming on in quick succession. (cf. abákabák,
alábut, dulúngan).

_dúrup_, See dúlup--have much to do, be very busy, etc.

_durupráan_, Spittoon. (cf. dulupláan, durúr-an, dupláan).

_durúr-an_, (B) See durupráan.

_dusák_, Bruised, contused, abraded (skin), grazed, lacerated,
excoriated, wounded with some blunt-pointed instrument.

_dúsak_, To injure, hit, wound, bruise, abrade, excoriate, graze,
scratch, lacerate, take the skin off with a blunt-pointed tool or the
like. Kon magkáli ka sing kamóti, andamán mo nga índì madúsak. If you
dig sweet potatoes, be careful not to injure them. Idúsak iníng tágad
sa úlo sang mán-og. Crush the head of the snake with this dibble. Sín-o
ang nagdúsak siníng talóng? Who bruised this egg-plant? Húo, kalíhon
(kályon) mo lang ang mga patátas, ápang índì mo pagdusákon. Yes,
dig out the potatoes, but do not bruise them. (cf. dús-il, pák-ad,
báklis, kúdlit).

_dúsdus_, To push, shove, etc. See dósdos.

_dús-il_, To scratch, scrape, lacerate, wound slightly so that part of
the skin or bark comes off. Nadús-il ang ákon bútkon sang símsim. My
arm got scratched by the bamboo-branches. Ang dógi nagdús-il sang ákon
túdlò. The thorn wounded my finger. Indì ka magági dirâ sa kasíot,
kay básì dus-ilón (madús-il) ikáw. Don't pass there through that
undergrowth, for you may get scratched. Gindús-il sang tuód ang batíis
ko. The calf of my leg was grazed by the tree stump. (cf. dúsak, etc.).

_dusíng_, Stain, slur, blemish. See dágtà, músing. Gúgma nga walâ
sing dusíng. Pure, unsullied love.

_dúsmò_, To fall prone, fall on one's face. (cf. dásmà, dágpà;
sukámod).

_dúsmug_, To assault, assail, attack, rush--, fall--,
upon. (cf. soróso, dásmag, dámhag, dóksol).

_dúsngal_, To lacerate, wound, injure, burst, split. Also: thicklips,
one who has thick lips like a negro. (cf. dús-il, dás-il; sámbil).

_dusô_, To push, impel, shove, thrust. Indî mo akó pagidusô. Don't
push me. Nagadusoánay ang mga bátà. The boys are pushing each
other. Gindusoán níya akó sang íya kamót. He pushed me with his
hand. Dusoá or idusô ang ganháan, agúd madápat sing maáyo. Push the
door, that it may close well. (cf. dósdos, dís-og, dás-og, tulúd,
tíklod).

_dusô-bútong_, Push and pull; at random, haphazard; chanceful, risky.

_dús-og_, To thrust, impel, shove, push, press upon, squeeze
against. (cf. dás-og, tulúd, tíklod, oróod, lígpit).

_dútà_, (H) The earth; earth, soil, ground, loam, clay, marl, mould,
dirt; field, territory. (cf. lúpà).

_dután-on_, (H) Earthly, material, bodily, corporeal, pertaining to
this world, made of earth or clay. Ang áton kabúhì nga dután-on umalági
gid lámang. Our earthly life is merely passing. (cf. dulután-on).

_dútdut_, To plaster, seal, calk, caulk, plug, cement, stuff up cracks,
stop chinks or cracks with paper, cloth, thick paint, plaster or the
like. Idútdut iníng papél sa kinitáan sang tápì. Put this paper into
the crack between the boards. Duddutí ang litík sing alkitrán. Close
the split with tar. Dinutdután níla ang mga búhò sing seménto. They
plastered the holes with cement. (cf. dúkduk, dókdok, sóksok, lótlot).


_duúk_, Out-of-the-way place, nook, corner. See doók.

_duyâ-duyâ_, To be completely full or satisfied, have no appetite any
longer, loathe food on account of having already eaten one's fill, eat
without relish. Nagaduyâduyâ siá, kay busúg na. He eats without relish,
for he is full already. (cf. dwáldwal, díway, butíngting, taká).

_dúyan_, A hammock; to use a hammock, swing--a hammock,--in a
hammock. Magdúyan ka lang dirâ. Just lie down in that hammock. Duyána
ang bátà. Put the baby in the hammock and swing it. Idúyan akó ánay
sang bátà. Kindly rock the baby in the hammock for me. Amó iní ang
abóyabóy nga ginaduyánan sa bátà. This is the make-shift hammock in
which the baby swings.

_duyán_, To walk, take a stroll, go--, pass--, by. See dayán id.

_duyán-dúyan_, Dim. of dúyan. A small hammock, anything resembling
a hammock. (cf. abóyabóy).

_dúyaw_, To influence, carry along, persuade, induce, prevail upon,
make to act, decide. Gindúyaw akó sang ákon mga ábyan sa pagkádto sa
sáut. I was prevailed upon by my friends to go to the dance. Nadúyaw
ang íya buót sa pagbúthò, kay nagabúthò man ang íya pakaisá. He was
induced to go to school by the fact that his first cousin is going
to school also. (cf. gará, gánya).

_duyáw-dúyaw_, Dim. and Freq. of dúyaw.

_dúyò_, Dejected, sad, melancholy, pensive, moody, sorrowful,
cheerless, dismal, unhappy, mournful, gloomy, spiritless; to be sad,
etc. Kútub sang kamatáyon sang íya ilóy nagadúyò siá sing dáyon. Since
the death of her mother she is always melancholy, dejected. (cf. búog).

_dúyò_, To sit or stand still, be motionless, stop, remain standing,
cease to proceed, halt, station oneself, take one's stand. Indì ka
magdúyò sa tungâ sang dálan. Don't remain standing in the middle of
the road. Indì mo pagduyóan ang ganháan sang bodéga. Don't stand in
the shop-door. Magdúyò ka dirí. Stand here. (cf. táy-od).

_dúyong_, A young whale; the dugong of the Indian ocean, a mammal
that resembles a whale. (cf. bungansísò, balyéna).

_duyóng-dúyong_, To go to and fro, back and forth, go in search of,
ramble or roam within a rather narrow circle; to loiter, tarry,
idle away the hours. (cf. lagáwlágaw, landólándo, etc.).

_dúyug_, To incline towards, lean towards, be attracted, have a
mind to, be in favour of, have a liking for, be disposed to, feel
inclined to, to like doing. Nagadúyug ang íya buót sa pagtámbong sa
beláda. He is inclined to go to the play. Indì mo pagpaduyúgon ang
íya buót sa maláut nga batásan. Don't allow him to become addicted
to bad habits. (cf. búyok).

_duyúg_, Inclined, attached, attracted, having a liking for,
allured. (cf. hiláy, buyó, bíhag; yánggaw, dimát).

_duyúg-duyúg, duyúg-dúyug_, Dim. and Freq. of dúyug. Also: to shake,
stagger, reel, tremble with weakness, walk unsteadily. Nagaduyúgduyúg
siá sang pagtíndog níya, kay malúya pa siá tungúd nga bág-o lang siá
nagáyo sa balatían. When he stood up he shook with weakness, for he
is still feeble on account of his late illness. (cf. dulíngdúling).

_dwál-dwál_, See duálduál--to surfeit, glut, etc.




E


_e_, The Visayan language has a vowel-sound that is neither that of
Spanish "e" nor of Spanish "i", but occupies a position somewhere
between the two. Consequently this sound is represented sometimes by
"e" and sometimes by "i", even in spelling the same word, e.g. babáye,
babáe, babáyi, babái; bebíngka, bibíngka; bígne, bígni, etc.
In choosing between the two vowels "i" has a better claim to
recognition than "e", for the following reasons:--
1) The full open sound of "e" is never heard in Visayan, whereas "i"
is often very clearly and sharply pronounced.
2) Whilst it is true that in many words the sound, of which we have
spoken, is vague, yet as a rule it approaches "i" more nearly than "e".
The conclusion is that "i" can always be used, and that "e" might
without loss be abolished from the Visayan Alphabet.
The following words under "e" are given, because, although they are
of Spanish origin, yet they are frequently used in Visayan.

_ebanhelísta_, (Sp. evangelista) Evangelist.

_ebanhélyo_, (Sp. evangelio) Gospel, evangel, good tidings.

_ébano, ebanó_, (Sp. ébano) Ebony. (cf. bantolínaw).

_edád_, (Sp. edad) Age, epoch, time, period; to be so many years old,
to be the age of so many years. Mayór de edád siá, menór de edád
siá. He is of age, he is a minor. Pilá ka túig ang ímo edád?--or
simply--Pilá ang edád mo? How old are you? What is your age? Nagaedád
na siá sing napúlò ka túig. He is ten years old. (cf. panuigón,
panahón).

_edén_, (Sp. eden) Eden, paradise. (cf. paraíso).

_edisyón_, (Sp. edición) Edition, issue, publication. (cf. bantálà,
gwâ, bálhag).

_editór_, (Sp. editor) Editor, publisher, author. (cf. manunúlat,
magsusúlat, mamantálà).

_edukár_, (Sp. educar) To educate, instruct. Magedukár ka sing maáyo
sang ímo mga bátà or edukahá sing maáyo ang ímo mga bátà. Educate
your children well. Iníng koléhio ginaedukahán sing madámò nga mga
pamatán-on. Many youths are being educated in this college. (cf. túdlò,
patoón).

_edukasyón_, (Sp. educación) Education, instruction, training, good
breeding, politeness, polished manners. Walâ siá sing edukasyón. He
is lacking in good breeding. (cf. tinón-an, kinaálam).

_éhe_, (Sp. eje) Axle, axis, axle-tree, shaft on which a wheel turns.

_ehémplo_, (Sp. ejemplo) Example, type, instance, pattern,
model, precedent, standard, prototype, paradigm, guide,
specimen. (cf. palanganináwan, solóndan, huluáran).

_ehersísyo_, (Sp. ejercicio) Exercise; retreat; to
exercise. Ehersisyohá ang láwas mo. Exercise your
body. (cf. banátbánat, hanáshánas, bayátbáyat, unátúnat).

_ehérsito_, (Sp. ejercito) Army, military force. (cf. mangangawáy,
kinabón sang mga mangangawáy).

_eklípse_, (Sp. eclipse) Eclipse; to eclipse. May eklípse ang búlan sa
isá ka búlan or may eklípse sang búlan sa isá ka búlan or magaeklípse
ang búlan sa isá ka búlan. There will be an eclipse of the moon next
month. Sang duhá ka túig (sang may duhá na ka túig) nageklípse sing
búg-os ang ádlaw. Two years ago there was a total eclipse of the
sun. (cf. bakunáwa).

_eksámen_, (Sp. examen) Examination, disquisition, inquisition,
inquiry, search, investigation; to examine, search, inquire into,
investigate, question. Pagaeksaménon pa ikáw ukón naeksámen ka na? Have
you still to undergo an examination or have you been examined? Exaména
siá sa ininglés. Examine him in English. Examénon mo sing maáyo ang
ímo mga salâ sa walâ pa ang pagkonpesár mo. Make a good examination
of conscience before going to confession. (cf. sanghíran, pangusísà).

_eksposisyón_, (Sp. exposición) Exposition, exhibition. (cf. pakítà,
paháyag).

_ekstremaunsyón_, (Sp. extremaunción) Extreme Unction. (cf. bádlis).

_ektárea_, (Sp. hectárea) Hectare, a measure of surfaces (a hectare
contains one hundred ares or ten thousand square metres).

_elástiko_, (Sp. elástico) Elastic; an elastic band or
ribbon. (cf. lástiko, yayát, mayayát, luyátyat).


_elegánte_, (Sp. elegante) Elegant, stylish, tasteful, graceful,
refined, cultured, polished. (cf. lántip, hímpit, matahúm, sampáton,
maányag, magayón, makawiwíli, makalulúyag).

_eleksyón_, (Sp. elección) Election, poll, vote, referendum, ballot; to
choose, select, pick out. Dáyon gid lang íya ginaeleksyonán ang íya mga
agsadór. He is constantly picking out his tenants i.e. he constantly
changes his tenants, choosing one in place of another. (cf. piniliáy,
pílì, pilî).

_eléktor_, (Sp. elector) An elector, voter, one entitled to vote in
elections. (cf. pumilílì).

_eléktriko_, (Sp. eléctrico) Electric, electrical. (cf. kilás).

_elektrisidád_, (Sp. electricidad) Electricity. (cf. kilás).

_elektromotór_, (Sp. electromotor) An electric motor.

_eleménto_, (Sp. elemento) Element. (cf. lalím, báhin, símbug).

_elepánte_, (Sp. elefante) Elephant. (cf. gádyà).

_elokwénte_, (Sp. elocuente) Eloquent, oratorical.

_embaháda_, (Sp. embajada) Embassy, legation; message,
errand. (cf. tiglawás; balítà, pasáyod, pahibaló).

_embahadór_, (Sp. embajador) Ambassador, legate,
delegate. (cf. tiglawás, tulugyánan).

_embalsamár_, (Sp. embalsamar) To embalm. Embalsamahá ang bángkay ni
Fuláno. Embalm the corpse of N.N. Naembalsamár na ang íya bángkay. His
corpse is already embalmed.

_embárgo_, (Sp. embargo) Embargo, seizure, attachment;
sequestration of goods and chattels; to serve an attachment, seize,
sequestrate. Naembárgo ang íya nga dútà. His land was embargoed, had
an attachment served. Embargohá ang íya mga háyup. Put an embargo on
his cattle. (cf. bútong).

_embarkasyón_, (Sp. embarcación) Embarkation, navigation; ship or
vessel of any size. (cf. sakayán).

_embornál_, (Sp. embornal) Scupper-hole; ditch, canal, gutter, culvert,
drain, outlet for water; to make a ditch, drain, etc. Embornalí ang
baláy mo. Make a ditch around your house. Iníng duhá ka baríl nga
seménto iembornál ko sa ákon pamulákan. With these two barrels of
cement I am going to make a water-drain in my garden. (cf. kalóg,
iligán, ililigán).

_embúdo_, (Sp. embudo) A funnel; to use or apply a funnel. Embudóhi
ang botílya, agúd dílì magáwas ang agás. Use a funnel for the bottle,
lest the petroleum should be spilt. Iembúdo iní sa prásko. Use this
as a funnel for the flask.

_embúste_, (Sp. embuste) Fib, lie, fiction, artful tale, fraud,
imposition, cheating. (cf. butíg, dáyà, límbong, balíbad, lág-it,
agóng, pasúnì, malí).

_embustéro_, Liar, tale-bearer, tale-teller, tell-tale, impostor,
cheat, trickster, hypocrite, dissembler. (cf. butigón, madinayáon,
etc.).

_empáke_, (Sp. empaque) Packing; to pack. Empakéha ang kalámay. Pack
the sugar. Iempáke iníng mga bayóong sa kalámay. Use these sacks of
matting to pack the sugar in. (cf. putús, baláhos, bágtong).

_empanáda_, (Sp. empanada) Meat-pie, anything baked in paste.

_empátso_, (Sp. empacho) Indigestion, surfeit.

_empéine, empéne_, (Sp. empeine) A cutaneous disease, tetter or
ringworm, chiefly attacking the scalp, neck and throat.

_emperadór_, (Sp. emperador) Emperor. (cf. hárì).

_emperatrís_, (Sp. emperatriz) Empress. (cf. hárà).

_empesár_, (Sp. empezar) To begin, commence, start, initiate, enter
upon. Empesahí na ang ímo trabáho. Start your work. Nagempesár na kamó
sang pagtánum? Have you started planting rice yet? Dúgay na nga íya
ginempesahán sing trabáho ang íya bág-o nga baláy, ápang túbtub karón
walâ níya matápus. He commenced work on his new house a long time
ago, but up till now he has not been able to finish it. (cf. umpisá,
súgud, pamúnò).

_empleádo_, (Sp. empleado) Employee, office-holder,
office-bearer. (cf. sologoón, alagád).


_empléo_, (Sp. empleo) Employment, office, occupation, engagement,
business. (cf. palamúgnan, palatikángan, palangakóan, kahimtángan,
alagarán).

_emprentáda_, See imprentáda--a serenade.

_emprésa_, (Sp. empresa) Undertaking, enterprise, venture,
engagement. (cf. palatikángan, empléo, etc.).

_empresáryo_, (Sp. empresario) Contractor; manager of a circus,
theatre, cinematograph, etc.).

_enágwas_, (Sp. enaguas) Undershirt, petticoat.

_enáno_, (Sp. enano) Dwarf, pigmy, midget, manikin; cretin,
idiot. (cf. potót; búang, buangít, kólò, etc.).

_endonár_, (Sp. endonar) To make a gift or present of, to present with,
donate, give. (cf. regálo, hátag, dúlut, donár, bugáy).

_endóno_, (Sp. endono) Gift, present, donation, alms. (cf. hátag,
etc.).

_enemígo_, (Sp. enemigo) Enemy, adversary, opponent, antagonist;
inimical, hostile. (cf. kaáway, kasúmpung, kóntra).

_enéro_, (Sp. Enero) January. (cf. ulalóng).

_enkáhe_, (Sp. encaje) Lace-making, lace, fine needle-work; embroidery;
to make lace, do fine needle-work, embroider. Enkahéhi ang báyò
ko. Put some lace on my frock. Ginenkahéhan níya ang ákon pakô. She
has put some lace on my sleeve.

_enkantádo_, (Sp. encantado) Enchanted, charmed, haunted,
bewitched, under a spell, under the influence of magic, or of the
devil. (cf. lúmay, lumáy, bíhag).

_enkánto_, (Sp. encanto) Enchantment, charm, spell, incantation,
magic, fascination, bewitchment; to put a magic spell upon, bewitch,
charm, fascinate, haunt. May enkánto, konó, sa yádto nga baláy. They
say that that house is haunted. (cf. bárang, awóg, téutéu, riít, etc.).

_enkantohánon_, See enkantádo.

_enkargádo_, (Sp. encargado) One who is in charge, care-taker, manager,
director, agent. (cf. manugtátap, manugdumála, tulugyánan, pangúlo).

_enperméra_, (Sp. enfermera) Nurse, female attendant in a hospital,
infirmarian. (manugtátap--, manugámlig--, manugbántay--, sang mga
masakít).

_enpérmo_, (Sp. enfermo) Sick, infirm, diseased, ill, patient, inmate
of a hospital. (cf. masakít).

_ensaláda_, (Sp. ensalada) Salad; to make a salad, put in
vinegar. Ensaladáha ang kapáyas. Make a salad of papaws. Ensaladáhi akó
sing limá ka páhò. Work five mangoes up into a salad for me. Iensaláda
akó ánay sinâ. Kindly prepare for me a salad of that.

_ensáyo_, (Sp. ensayo) Rehearsal, preparatory practice, exercise;
to rehearse, practise. (cf. hánas, hanáshánas).

_entabládo_, (Sp. entablado) A board floor, stage,
platform. (cf. tabládo).

_entiénde_, (Sp. entender) To understand, know, see, grasp, comprehend,
realize, make out, perceive, take. Makaentiénde ikáw siní? Do you
understand this? Walâ siá makaentiénde sang ímo nga ginhámbal. He could
not comprehend or grasp what you said. He could not understand what you
said. Nabáton ko ang ímo sulát kag naentiendehán ko ang kontenído. I
have received your letter and have understood its contents. Entiendehá
ánay sing maáyo ang íya nga ginsilíng, kag ugáling mangákig ka sa
íya. First try to comprehend well what he said; then (if you think
there is reason) get angry with him. Dílì ka magpakitarakáng sa
mga butáng nga walâ mo maentiendehí. Do not meddle with things you
know nothing about. Entiendehá nga ----. You are to understand that
----. You may take it that ----. Kon walâ ikáw makaentiénde sang ibán
nga mga ginabása mo, pangkotá lang akó. If you cannot make out some
of the things you are reading, just ask me. (cf. sáyod, hibaló, álam,
máan, áto, balintúnod, hangúp, hántup).

_entiéro_, (Sp. entierro) Funeral, burial, exequies, funeral rites,
interment, entombment, sepulture. (cf. lubúng). (Sánto entiéro--Statue
of dead Christ).

_éntra_, (Sp. entrar) To go in, enter, come in; to participate--,
share--, partake--, join--, take part--, in. Entrahí ang
pagkamúsiko. Become a musician. Join the musicians. Entra
ka. Come in. Nagéntra ka man sa pagdúmug? Did you take part in the
wrestling? Indì ka magpaéntra sa ímo baláy sang mga balasahón nga
maláin. Don't permit bad reading-matter to enter your home. (cf. sulúd;
abáy).

_entráda_, (Sp. entrada) Entrance, opening; entrée, entrance-fee,
admission. Walâ gid sing entráda iníng babáye. This woman is above
reproach. This woman does not admit undesirable visitors.

_entradílya_, (From the Sp. entrar) Intruder, trespasser, meddler;
to interfere, trespass, intrude, meddle with. Indì mo pagentradilyahán
ang mga butáng nga walâ ka sing lábut. Don't interfere in things that
don't concern you. Halín kamó nga mga entrandílya. Take yourselves
off. You have no business in here.

_entregár_, (Sp. entregar) To deliver, hand over, reach to,
give to, convey. Ientregár mo sa íya iníng sulát. Give him this
letter. Ginentregahán mo siá sang íya nga linábhan? Have you delivered
to him his wash? Walâ siá magentregár sa ákon sang ginsilíng mo. He
has not handed over to me what you mentioned. Sa waláy duhádúha
magaentregár siá sa ímo sinâ sa buás. Doubtless he will hand it over
to you to-morrow. (cf. túnghol).

_entremés_, (Sp. entremés) Intermezzo, interlude, side-dish; humbug;
to provide an interlude, etc.; to joke, play the fool, fill up
the time, be in a playful mood; to spoil, corrupt, dishonour,
flirt with. Nagaentremés gid lang ikáw? You are surely only
joking? Ginentremés si Fulána ni Fuláno. Miss N.N. was deceived by
Mr. N.N.

_entreswélo_, (Sp. entresuelo) Messanine, entresol, gallery.

_entyéro_, See entiéro--funeral, etc.

_eréhe_, (Sp. hereje) Heretic.

_erétiko_, (Sp. herético) Heretical.

_ermána, -o_, (Sp. hermana, -o) Sister, brother; lay-sister,
lay-brother; member of a confraternity. (cf. útud, búgtò; ilóy,
mádre, relihióso).

_ermíta_, (Sp. ermita) A small church, village church,
chapel. (cf. simbáhan).

_ermitányo_, (Sp. ermitaño) Hermit.

_esénsya_, (Sp. esencia) Essence; extract, tincture, excerpt.

_eskabétse_, (Sp. escabeche) Fried fish mixed with vinegar and spices.

_eskándalo_, (Sp. escandalo) Scandal, opprobrium, shame, filth,
obscenity, indecency; commotion, tumult, row, squabble, hubbub, rumpus,
scrimmage, embroglio, fracas, uproar; to be scandalous; be rowdy,
turbulent, a disturber of the peace, etc. Indì ka mageskándalo. Don't
create a scandal. Don't cause a scene. Don't be rowdy. Don't kick up
a row. (cf. gamó, gáhud, kinagúlà, kagarokán, kinagúbot).

_eskandalósa, -o_, (Sp. escandaloso, -a) Scandalous,
shameful, filthy, obscene; rowdy, turbulent, causing
a--tumult,--commotion,--scandal,--scene.

_eskapuláryo_, (Sp. escapulario) Scapulary, scapular.

_eskarláta_, (Sp. escarlata) Scarlet, red cloth; a kind of red flower.

_eskarlatína_, (Sp. escarlatina) Crimson fabric; scarlet-fever.

_eskóba_, (Sp. escoba) Brush, scrubbing-brush, broom, besom,
floor-brush; to use or apply a brush. Eskobáhi ang lamésa, salúg,
etc. Scrub the table, floor, etc. with a scrubbing-brush. Ieskóba akó
ánay sang ákon sotána. Please brush my cassock for me. (cf. sílhig).

_eskotáda_, (Sp. escotado, escotadura) Low neck, decolleté; a low
cut in the neck of a dress. (cf. wángwáng sing líog).

_eskribáno_, (Sp. escribano) Clerk, especially the clerk of a court
of First Instance.

_eskribiénte_, (Sp. escribiente) Clerk, writer, amanuensis, secretary,
scribe.

_eskríto_, (Sp. escrito) Writing, written document, writ, brief,
deed. (cf. sulát, kasulátan, kalig-onán).

_eskrúpulo_, (Sp. escrúpulo) Scruple, perplexity, doubt, hesitation
arising from fear of doing wrong.

_eskrupulósa, -o_, (Sp. escrupulosa, -o) Scrupulous, nice, particular,
fastidious, meticulous, perplexed, hesitating through fear of
doing wrong; delicate of conscience, finical, finicking, finikin,
strait-laced, prudish, prim, squeamish.

_eskultór_, (Sp. escultor) Sculptor, carver.


_eskultúra_, (Sp. escultura). Sculpture, carving.

_eskwála_, (Sp. escuadra) Square, carpenter's square,
etc. (cf. askwála, kasílo).

_eskwádra_, (Sp. escuadra) Navy, sea-force, naval strength,
squadron. (cf. mga sakayán nga inugáway, sakayánáway).

_eskwéla_, (Sp. escuela) School-house, school; school-children; to go
to school. Mageskwéla kamó. Go to school. Diín ikáw nagaeskwéla? Where
do you go to school? Madámò ang mga eskwéla dirí. There are many
schools or school-children here. Katúbò ko siá kag nageskwéla kamí
sing dungán. He is of the same age as myself, and we went to school
together. Dî mo pagpaeskwelahón ang ímo bátà sa mga eskweláhan
nga waláy pagtóo. Don't send your child to a school without
religion. (cf. búthò, buluthóan, bumulúthò).

_eskweláhan_, School-house, school. (cf. buluthóan).

_espáda_, (Sp. espada) Sword, sabre, falchion, scimitar, brand,
rapier, side-arm. (cf. binángon, talibúng, sandúkò, ginúnting, kális).

_espánto_, (Sp. espanto) Fright, affright, shock, consternation, dread,
fear, alarm, terror, dismay. (cf. kakúgmat, kalísang, kahádluk, kuyús,
kibút, panguyús).

_Espánya_, (Sp. España) Spain. (cf. Kakatsiláan).

_espanyól_, (Sp. español) Spaniard; Spanish, Iberian. (cf. katsílà,
kinatsilâ).

_espárago_, (Sp. esparrago) Asparagus.

_espého_, (Sp. espejo) Mirror, looking-glass; used also loosely of
a window-pane; model, type; to use or look into a mirror. Espehói
ang mga matá mo. Look at your eyes in the mirror. Ginespehóan níya
ang íya nawóng. He looked at his face in the looking-glass. Pírme gid
lang siá nagapangespého. She is constantly looking in the mirror. Indì
ka magpangespého sing lakás. Don't look in the mirror too much. Daw
espého gid siá sang dalága. She is a model maiden, a mirror of
maidens. (cf. salamíng, palanganináwan, huluáran).

_espelér_, (B) Safety-pin; piece of bamboo, etc. used as a
safety-pin. (cf. sibít, alpilír). (Sp. alfiler).

_esperánsa_, (Sp. esperanza) Hope, expectation, expectancy, confidence,
reliance, trust, bright prospect, reassurance, hopefulness. (cf. láum,
sálig).

_espérma_, (Sp. esperma) Mineral or vegetable wax; candles of such
wax; to use or apply such wax. Espermahí ang plántsa, agúd índì
matoktokán. Rub the smoothing-iron with wax, lest it should become
rusty. Ginespermahán níla ang salúg, agúd magsilíng. They waxed the
floor to make it bright. (cf. tálo, táro).

_espía_, (Sp. espia) Spy, detective. (cf. tíktik, lampitáw).

_espiritú_, (Sp. espíritu) Ghost, spirit, soul; energy, animation;
consciousness. Ang Espiritú Sánto. The Holy Ghost. Walâ na siá sing
espíritú. He is spiritless, soulless, inanimate, unconscious, has no
energy left. (cf. kalág).

_espirituhánon_, Spiritual, not material, incorporeal, ghostly,
pertaining to the soul or spirit. (cf. kalágnon).

_espónha_, (Sp. esponja) Sponge.

_esponsáles_, (Sp. esponsales) Espousals, betrothal, troth, plight,
engagement, marriage-compact. Ang pagentregár sang síngsing amó ang
tándà sang íla nga esponsáles. The giving of the ring is the sign of
their betrothal. (cf. katípan).

_espuéla_, (Sp. espuela) Spur, goad, prick.

_estádo_, (Sp. estado) State (territory); state (condition of life),
especially the married state, wedlock, matrimony, also used loosely
of husband, wife. Also verb. Naestádo na ang ímo mga bátà? Are your
children married? Patigayóna agúd maestádo silá. See to it that they
marry. (cf. púngsud; kahimtángan, kabtángan, kahamtángan).

_estámpa_, (Sp. estampa) Picture, print, painting, representation,
icon. Also used as a verb. Paestampahí ang ímo sála. Hang your
reception room with pictures (cf. laráwan, dinuagán).

_estampíta_, (Sp. estampíta) A small picture.

_estandárte_, (Sp. estandarte) Standard, banner, flag, insignia,
streamer, colours. (cf. hayáhay).


_estánke_, (Sp. estanque) Pond, basin, reservoir; kind of
torch. (cf. línaw; sarísì, estrínke).

_estánte_, (Sp. estante) Stand, shelf, bookcase, bookstand,
cabinet. (cf. bulutángan--, tulungtúngan--, sang mga tulún-an).

_estár_, (Sp. estar) To stay, live, inhabit, remain, lodge, reside,
settle, put up at, have or take rooms at, dwell, abide. Diín
ka nagaestár? Where do you live? Pilá ka túig na ang pagestár mo
dirí? How many years have you lived here? Magaestár pa ikáw dirí sing
madúgay? Are you staying here still for long? Diín ang ginaestarán
mo? Where is the house you live in? Iestár mo akó ánay sing pilá
ka ádlaw sa baláy. Please stay at my home for a few days to oblige
me. Húo, estarán ko ang ákon útang sa ímo. Yes, I will remain as
long as my wages pay my debt to you. Estarí lang ang útang mo sa
ákon. Stay with me (i.e. serve me) till your debt to me is paid
(by the wages you would get, if I did not keep them back). Paestará
siá sa ímo baláy. Let him reside or lodge at your house. (cf. puyô,
lúmon, lúntad, púngkò, amoyóng, ulî, buhî).

_estasyón_, (Sp. estación) Station. Ang mga estasyón. The Stations
of the Cross. (cf. dululugán).

_estatúto_, (Sp. estatuto) Statute, law, ruling, act, order, ordinance,
decree, enactment. (cf. sógò, kasogoán, pagbulút-an, palatúkdan).

_estimádo_, (Sp. estimado) Esteemed, respected, valued, dear. Estimádo
ko nga ábyan. My dear friend. (cf. talahúron, talaháon; tinatáhud,
ginatáhud--from táhud).

_estiwítis_, Arnotto; bixa orellana. See atiótis, tiwítis.

_estóla_, (Sp. estola) Stole, a vestment worn by a priest at a
religious function.

_estrelyádo_, (Sp. estrellado) Fried (of eggs); egg-slice, turnover.

_estríbo_, (Sp. estribo) Stirrup. Also verb. Estribóhi ang
kabáyo. Provide the horse with stirrups. Paestribóhi ang síya. Have
stirrups attached to the saddle.

_estrínke_, (Sp. estrenque) A stout rope of bass or bast; a
torch. (cf. sarísì estánke).

_estudyánte_, (Sp. estudiante) Student, alumnus, learner, pupil,
scholar. (cf. bumulúthò, gintotón-an).

_estúdyo_, (Sp. estudio) Study, learning, attainment, erudition;
to study learn, imbibe--, gain--, gather--, acquire--, knowledge,
acquaint oneself with. Magestúdyo ka sing maáyo. Study well,
diligently. Estudyohán mo sing maáyo ang ímo karéra. Study well for
your career, prepare yourself well for your profession. Ginaestudyohán
pa sang mga médiko ang bulúng sa arô. Doctors are still trying to
find a remedy for leprosy. (cf. álam, toón).

_etér_, (Sp. eter) Ether.

_etsúra_, (Sp. hechura) Form, figure, manner, appearance, semblance,
look, exterior aspect. Often used contemptuously or sarcastically:
Nonsense, bosh, twaddle; impertinence, cheek, etc. Etsúra níya
siní! What impertinence! What cheek! (cf. tsúri, súri, hitsúra,
hitsúri).

_eukaristíya_, (Sp. eucaristía) Eucharist, Blessed Sacrament, Holy
Communion. Kongréso Eukarístiko--Eucharistic Congress.

_exámen_, See eksámen--examination, etc.

_examinán_, (From the Sp. examen) Register or list (as a help for an
examination); syllabus.

_exkomulgár_, (Sp. excomulgar) To excommunicate,
anathematize. Exkomulgádo--excommunicated.

_exkomunyón_, (Sp. excomunión) Excommunion; anathema.

_éxtra_, (Sp. extra) Besides, in addition to, supplementary
to, something over and above the agreement or stipulation,
extra. (cf. dúgang, pasahî).

_extraordináryo_, (Sp. extraordinario) Extraordinary, special,
exceptional, abnormal, anomalous, peculiar, out of the common, unusual,
uncustomary, unwonted, uncommon, fantastic, grotesque, outlandish,
exotic. (cf. pasahî, makatilingála, makatalanhágà).

_extremaunsyón_, Extreme Unction. See ekstremaunsyón.




F


_f_, There is no sound in the Visayan language corresponding to the
letter "f". When it occurs in a foreign word, it is pronounced by
Visayans "p", except, of course, in the case of the educated Visayan,
by whom it is pronounced correctly. The following words have become
part of the Visayan language, and are often written with an "f".

_fábrica_, (Sp.) Mill, works, factory, manufacturing plant; goods
made in a factory. (cf. galingán, dawdáwan, pábrika).

_fája_, (Sp.) Band, bandage, belt, girdle, sash. (cf. páha, wáklos,
wágkos).

_falsificación_, (Sp.) Falsification, fabrication.

_falsificadór_, (Sp.) Forger, counterfeiter, falsifier.

_falsificár_, (Sp.) To forge, falsify, counterfeit.

_fálso_, (Sp.) False, wrong, untrue; spurious, fictitious, not
authentic. (cf. kulirô; butíg, butigón).

_fálta_, (Sp.) Fault, deficiency, defect, omission, default, want,
lack, failure; to fail to, neglect, commit a fault, to default, not
to fulfil one's promise, not to perform one's duty. Indì ka magfálta
sa pagsímba sa mga Domíngo kag Fíesta. Don't miss going to Church
on Sundays and Feast-days. Nagfálta siá sa pagtúman sang íya nga
katungdánan. He neglected to fulfil his duties. (cf. sayóp, salâ;
lápas, lípas).

_fáma_, (Sp.) Fame, reputation, renown, report, rumour,
name. (cf. dungúg, kadunggánan).

_família_, (Sp.) Family, household, kith and kin. (cf. panimaláy).

_famóso_, (Sp.) Famed, renowned, well known, famous. (cf. dunggánan,
kinilála, lutáw, bántug, banságon).

_fanéga_, (Sp.) Half a bushel (of rice, etc.).

_faról_, (Sp.) Lamp; light, especially a hurricane lamp. (cf. sugâ,
solô).

_favór_, (Sp.) Favour, kindness; to oblige, favour, do
a favour. Nagfavór siá sa ákon. He did me a favour. Favór ang
hángin. The wind is favourable.

_fécha_, (Sp.) Date, to date. Fechahán mo ang sulát. Date the
letter. (cf. ádlaw; panahón, dág-on).

_feligrés_, (Sp.) Parishioner. (cf. sákup).

_ferocaríl_, (Sp. ferrocarril) Railway, railroad.

_fiadór_, (Sp.) One going or giving bail or surety for another,
bondsman, guarantor, surety, security. Fiadór gánì, pagadór. The one
that goes bail is the one that pays.

_fiánza_, (Sp.) Bail, surety, security, guarantee, pledge.

_fiésta_, (Sp.) Feast, Feast-day; to celebrate a feast, especially
the Feast of the Patron Saint of a place. Ginfiestahán níla ang
kaadláwan sang mahál níla nga Patrón. They celebrated the Feast of
their Patron Saint. Mamiésta ka man? Are you also going to the feast,
will you too take part in the feast? (cf. pándut).

_fího_, (Sp.) Fix, fixed, firm, secure, stable. (cf. mapág-on,
malíg-on, mabákud; pinát-ud, pát-ud).

_filosofía_, (Sp.) Philosophy.

_filósofo_, (Sp.) Philosopher.

_fíltro_, (Sp.) Filter. (cf. salaán).

_fíno_, (Sp.) Fine, nice, well made or done, elegant, beautiful,
delicate, tasteful, exquisite, refined, polite, polished,
dainty. (cf. maáyo, matahúm, maányag, magayón, makawiwíli, makalulúyag;
manámit; magamáy).

_fírma_, (Sp.) Signature, sign, mark, sign manual; name of a firm,
business, house, concern; to sign one's name, subscribe. Walâ níya
pagfirmahí ang sulát. He has not signed the letter. Pafirmahá siá. Make
him sign.

_firmaménto_, (Sp.) Firmament, sky, heaven, heavens, welkin, vault
or canopy of heaven. (cf. lángit).

_fiscál_, (Sp.) Fiscal, prosecutor, attorney on behalf of the
Government; the amanuensis of a Parish Priest, Parish clerk. Fiscál
Provinciál--Provincial Fiscal. (cf. manunúmbung (puodnánon)).

_fiscalía_, (Sp.) The office of the fiscal; place where a fiscal works.

_fléte_, (Sp.) Freight, freightage, cartage, carriage, conveyance,
shipment. (cf. hinákay).

_fólio_, (Sp.) Folio, leaf of a book, size of a book-leaf. (cf. pánid).

_fónda_, (Sp.) Hotel, inn, restaurant, ale-bouse, public-house,
eating-house, hostel, hostelry, tavern, hospice.

_fóndo_, (Sp.) Bottom, depth, furthest end or rear part;
capital, funds, stock, wherewithal; to provide capital, get funds
together. Sín-o ang nagfóndo siníng bág-o nga palatikángan? Who
provided the capital for this new business? Ginfondohán níla ni Gabíno
iníng almasín. Gabino and his friends furnished the capital for this
shop. (cf. sadsáran, pahunán).

_fonógrafo_, (Sp.) Phonograph.

_fórma_, (Sp.) Form, shape, figure, mould, cast; wafer, host; model,
type, pattern. (cf. dágway, báyhon; kahalimbáwà, huluáran).

_formál_, (Sp.) Formal, polite, methodical; steady, sedate, reliable,
trustworthy.

_formalidád_, (Sp.) Formality; politeness, etiquette; discretion,
prudence.

_fortúna_, (Sp.) Fortune; a kind of cactus that bears beautiful
flowers. (cf. kapaláran).

_fósforo_, (Sp.) Match, friction match, lucifer. (cf. bag-ídan,
lag-íton).

_fráile_, (Sp.) Friar; monk; religious, member of a religious order.

_franéla_, (Sp.) Flannel, woollen cloth, cloth made of wool or a
mixture of wool and cotton. (cf. dilána).

_frankíyo_, (Sp. franqueo) Postage; postage-stamps.

_fray_, Contr. of fraile and used before the proper name of a Friar,
e.g. si Fray António. Father Anthony, Brother Anthony.

_frésa_, (Sp.) Strawberry.

_fríto_, (Sp.) Fried; to fry. Fritóhi akó sing manók. Fry a chicken
for me.

_frontál_, (Sp.) Frontal of an altar, frontal,
antependium. (cf. atubángan).

_fuélle_, (Sp.) Bellows, a pair of bellows. (cf. hasohasohán).

_función_, (Sp.) Function, ceremony; feast, entertainment, social
party, banquet, dinner, repast. (cf. tábad, bádò, beláda, belasyón,
tinipóntípon, katipúnan, etc.).

_fúnda_, (Sp.) Case, slip, pillow-slip, pillow-case. (cf. putús,
baláhos).

_fusíl_, (Sp.) Musket, rifle, gun; to shoot with a rifle. Fusilá
siá. Shoot him. (cf. lúthang).




G


_g_, The letter "g" in Visayan is pronounced hard as in the English
words "gad, get, goggle, gut, etc.". The combination "ng" has a nasal
sound very like "ng" in the English word "singer". (cf. letter "n").

_gá_, Woa!, an exclamation used to halt a horse. (cf. higá; haráw).

_ga_, Often stands for naga--. Galakát siá--nagalakát siá--he walks.

_gáab_, To low, bellow, moo (of cattle); to weep, cry,
blubber. Ginagaában sang báka ang íya nga tínday nga naíhaw. The
cow is lowing mournfully for her calf that was slaughtered. A,
iníng bátà dáyon gid lang nagagáab. Why, this baby is constantly
crying. Indì mo akó paggaában kon mamatáy akó. Don't weep for me when
I die. Pagaába ang bátà, agúd makabatî ang íya nga íloy kag magpaúlì
sa madalî. Make the baby cry so that its mother may hear it and come
home at once. Pagaába lang ang bátà túbtub kon sán-o matápus ang íya
hilibíon. Just let the baby have its cry out. Hípus ka lang, índì ka
maggáab. Be quiet, don't cry. Anó na man ang ginagáab--or--ginagaában
mo? What are you weeping for this time? (cf. hibî, tángis, hibubún-ot;
gáab is properly used in connection with an animal, and the word sounds
rather rough and impolite when used in connection with a human being,
though colloquially it is often employed).

_gáang_, To heat, make hot, warm (by putting near a stove or
fire). Gaánga ang kamót mo, kay matúgnaw. Warm your hands, for it is
cold. Gingáang níya ang íya mga tiíl nga nabasâ túbtub nga nagmalá. He
warmed his wet feet till they became dry. Gaángi akó sing dáan nga
tinápay, báhaw, etc. Warm up for me some stale bread, cold rice,
etc. Igáang mo akó ánay sing súd-an. Heat for me, if you please,
some side-dish. Ipagáang mo sa manuglútò iníng tápa. Get the cook
to heat up this dried meat. Pagaánga siá sang íya mga kamót. Let
him warm his hands. Indì mo akó paggaángan sing kán-on nga báhaw,
kay buót akó ákon sang mabáhaw. Don't warm the cold rice for me,
for I like to eat it cold. (cf. paínit, baángbáang, aráng, aríng-ing).

_gaán-gáan_, (B) Abatement, decrease, mitigation; to diminish, ease,
lighten, make less; to be or become tolerable, bearable, easier to bear
or carry. Nagagaángáan na ang íya mga kalisúd. His difficulties are
now beginning to decrease, are abating. Gaángaána ang íya lúlan, kay
diótay pa siá. Lighten his load, for he is small yet. (cf. hagánhágan).

_gábà_, To cut or scratch with a sharp bamboo, with a splinter,
or the like; to mete out punishment, chastise, requite, punish,
castigate (of Divine Providence); retribution, divine punishment,
requital, chastisement, castigation, divine vengeance or justice. Anó
ang nakagábà sa ímo?--Ginábà akó sang kawáyan. What gave you this
scratch?--I was scratched by a bamboo. Nagábà ang ákon kamót sang
biníal nga káhoy. My hand was cut by a piece of split wood. Indì
kamó magbúhat sinâ, kay básì magabáan kamó. Don't do that, for you
may receive divine retribution. Sa waláy duhádúha ang Mahál nga Diós
magagábà sa íla kunína. Doubtless God will mete out to them later
on a fitting punishment. Ang mga Hudíyo gingabáan sang dugô sang
Aton Ginúo. The Jews had the blood of Our Lord visited on them. Sa
madalî úkon sa madúgay magaabút gid sa tanán nga mga makasasálà ang
gábà sang Diós. Sooner or later all sinners will meet with a condign
punishment from God. (cf. báklis; kastígo, bálus, sípat).

_gabáng_, More than half-full; to fill more than half-full. Iníng báso
nagabáng sang túbig. This glass is more than half-full of water. Iníng
gantángan gingabáng níla sing humáy. They filled this ganta more than
half-full with rice. Indì mo paggabangón ang báso sing bíno. Don't
fill the glass more than half-full with wine. Indì mo siá paghatágan
sing humáy nga gabáng sa paníga. Don't give him more than half a
fanega of rice.

_gabára, gabará_, (Sp. gabarra) Lighter, barge, small boat.

_gábaw_, The difference in price between values exchanged; to pay or
make up the difference in price or value of two things exchanged for
each other. Pilá ang gábaw mo sa íya nga karabáw? How much difference
in value did you pay him for his buffalo? Igábaw mo sa ákon káro
duhá ka púlò ka písos. Pay me twenty pesos as difference in value
for my cart. Baylohón ta lang ang áton mga báka, kay gabáwan ko ikáw
kon pilá ang ipagábaw mo. Let us exchange our cows, for I am ready
to pay you what difference in value you may ask for. Nabáton mo ang
kwárta nga gingábaw níya sa ímo kabáyo? Have you received the money
he paid for your horse as the difference in value? Kon malúyag ikáw
magbalígyà sa ákon sang ímo báka, ibáyad ko sa ímo ang ákon báboy kag
katloán ka mángmang nga gábaw. If you are willing to sell me your cow,
I am ready to pay you for her my pig and a balance of thirty pesos.

_gabáy_, To hold on to, cling to, clutch, grip, grasp, fasten upon,
seize--, get--, lay--, take--, catch--, lay fast--, take firm--,
hold of, keep oneself up by. Ginabayán níya ang kawáyan. He took
hold of the bamboo. Gabayí ang kawáyan, agúd índì ka malumús. Keep
yourself up by the bamboo, lest you drown. Gabayán mo sing maáyo ang
alobaybayán, agúd índì ka mahúlug sa hágdan. Grasp the handrail well,
lest you should fall down the ladder. Gabáy ka sa káhoy nga nagalutáw,
agúd índì ka malumús. Cling to the floating piece of wood, lest you
should drown. (cf. kapút, kápyot, úyat).

_gabayán_, Support, life-buoy, anything held or clung to for
protection or security, as a floating spar in water, a handrail or
the like. (cf. gabáy; uluyatán, kaláptan).

_gábhay_, Brindled, brinded, brown--and--black spotted, with
patches of brown intermingled with patches of a darker colour; to
be or become brown--and--black spotted. Naggábhay galî ang báboy
nga sádto maitúm. So, the pig that formerly was black has become
brown--and--black.

_gábi_, A kind of dágmay with large roots.

_gáb-i_, (H) Night, nightfall; to get--, grow--, dark, become
night. Maáyong gáb-i. Good evening. Good night. Dalî kamó sa pagpaúlì,
agúd índì kamó magabihán. Go home quickly, lest--you should be
benighted,--you should be overtaken by night,--night (darkness) should
overtake you. Naggáb-i na kag walâ pa siá magabút. It is quite dark,
and he has not arrived yet. Nagab-ihán kamí dídto tungúd sang ulán. We
spent the night there on account of the rain. (cf. kagab-íhon).

_gabígabí_, (B) A plant--, anything--, that resembles gábi; similar
to--, like--, gábi.

_gabíi_, (B) Night. See gáb-i.

_gábing_, To move or influence without much ado, obtain a favour
at short notice, prevail upon easily. Indì ka makagábing siníng
táo sa pagtábang sa ímo. You cannot easily get this man to assist
you. Gingábing ko gid siá sa pagbúlig sa ákon. I prevailed on him at
once to help me. Tilawán mo lang siá, ápang sa ákon bántà índì mo siá
magábing sa pagpahulám sa ímo sing kwárta. Just have a try at him,
but in my opinion you will be unable to induce him to lend you any
money. (cf. daríri).

_gabíng-gábing_, Dim. and Freq. of gábing. Indì mo siá magabínggábing
sa mga butáng nga bátok sa íya nga kabubút-on. You cannot coax him
to do things he has set his face against. (cf. daládála).

_gábnot_, To tear--, pull--, out, eradicate; to unsheath. (cf. gábut,
húlbot).

_gabúk_, Rotten, decayed, decomposed; to rot, become rotten,
etc. Nagabúk na iníng soléras. This crossbeam has become rotten. Gabúk
na ang káhoy sa atóp sang ímo baláy. The wood in the roof of your house
is rotten. Anó, ginapagabúk mo lang iníng káhoy dirí?--Húo, pagabukón
ko na lang, kay walâ na man sing pulús. What! Are you letting this
timber rot here?--Yes, I am just letting it rot, for it is no longer
of any use. Nagabukán ang pamúsud sang baláy. The corner of the house
is decaying. (cf. dúnut, dunút).

_gáb-ul_, (B) Half-cooked, underdone, not properly cooked, not
well done, especially applied to peas and beans; to be underdone,
etc. Gáb-ul pa ang kadiós kag ginbahít mo na. The cadios-beans are hard
still, and yet you have taken them off the fire. Nagab-ulán akó siníng
mga balátong. These beans are too hard for me. Indì mo pagpagab-ulón
ang mga patáni, kóndì lagáon mo sing maáyo. Don't cook the beans
insufficiently, but boil them well. (cf. alibútdan, lágdos, balotanóg).

_gabún_, To keep--snug,--close,--dark, conceal, cover, keep
out of--view,--sight, hush up. Maggabún ka siní. Keep it
secret. Ginagabunán níya ang kahulúy-an sang íya nga ábyan. He
covers with silence his friend's disgrace. Gabuní siá sang íya nga
ginhímò. Hush up what he has done. Igabún mo akó sang ákon pagpílas
sang íya nga karabáw. Please say nothing about my having wounded his
buffalo. (cf. tábon, tágò, hingabón, hinabón).

_gábut_, To pull--, weed--, root--, pluck--, grub--, up, draw out,
extract, eradicate. Gabúta ang mga gámhon. Pull up the weeds. Igábut
akó ánay siníng hilamón. Please pluck up this grass for me. Lungálungáa
ánay iníng lánsang nga maáwot kag ugáling gabúton mo. Shake this firm
nail first to and fro and then draw it out. Nagabútan ang nakawáan
sang mga eskwéla sang tanán nga baríri. The school-children weeded
out from the Public square all bariri-grass. Gabúti akó sing gútuk
sang kamátis, talóng, etc. Pull up by the roots for me some tomato--,
eggplant-seedlings, etc. (cf. lúkat, húlbot).

_gádgad_, Use, usefulness, utility, advantage, benefit, profit,
purpose; trouble. Anó ang gádgad mo sa pagkádto dídto? What is the use
of going over there? Makádto silá didto sa pagpangítà sing gádgad. They
are going there to look for trouble. (cf. dálpot, águd, ásoy, pulús;
gamú, kagarokán, gálgal).

_gádgad_, To bait, badger, nag at, make a butt or laughing-stock of,
pillory, hold up to ridicule or contempt, criticize malevolently,
expose one to the contempt of bystanders so as to make him angry or in
order to pick an open quarrel with him. Gingádgad níya ang kakulángan
ni Fuláno túbtub nga nangákig siá. He spoke of N.N.'s shortcomings
till he got angry. Indì mo paggadgarón (--adón) ang salâ sang ímo
isigkatáo. Don't always harp upon your neighbour's fault. Indì ka
maggádgad sang kasaypánan ni Hosé kay awát man lámang, kay siá íya
mapainubúson kag índì magbátok ukón magákig. Don't constantly bring
up José's failings against him, because it is of no use, for he on
his part is humble and will not make opposition or get angry about
it. (cf. gálgal).

_gádlas_, A scratch, etc. See gádras.

_gadóy_, Incompetent, useless, worthless, inept, inefficient, unfit,
below the standard. Gadóy nga abogádo, manunúdlò, mangungúma, etc. A
lawyer of low attainments, an incompetent teacher, an indifferent
farmer, etc. Also verb. Naggadóy na siá nga pangúlo-bánwa. He has
become unfit to be Municipal President. Nagadoyán akó sa íya. To
me he appears to be a worthless fellow. (cf. háslò, kabús, kulabús,
walâ sing águd, waláy pulús, mínus).

_gádras_, A scratch, abrasion, bruise; a cut, gash, laceration,
ragged wound; to scratch, wound, hurt, injure, cut, gash. Si Fuláno
sing íya bisán gádras, walâ. N.N. was not hurt at all, had not even
a scratch. Nagádras sing malábà ang íya páa. His leg was--badly
hurt,--gashed,--severely cut. (cf. kádlas, gádlas, báklis, pákris,
pák-ad, pílas).

_gádyà_, Elephant; monster, huge beast (in general).

_gága_, See under "gágo".

_gâgâ_, Insistence, persistency, importunacy,
pertinacity. (cf. pagâgâ--to insist, importune).

_gágmay, gagmáy_, To be small, etc. See gamáy.

_gágo_, (Sp. gago) Stuttering, stammering, having an impediment
in one's speech; lacking intelligence, not quite right in one's
mind. (cf. áng-ang, pihít, kúnlà, hát-on; buangít, kulángkuláng,
kolôkolô; etc.). N.B. In speaking of females, gága is often used.

_gáhab_, Gain, profit, return, proceeds; to gain, profit, make (money)
on. Pilá ang gáhab mo sa báboy nga ginbalígyà mo? How much did you gain
on the pig you sold? Gingahában ko ang ísdà sing tátlo ka písos. I
made three pesos on the fish. Kon báklon mo iní dirí kag ibalígyà mo
dídto, saráng ka makagáhab sing limá ka písos. If you buy this here
and sell it there, you can make a profit of five pesos. Walâ sing
gáhab sa amó nga balígyà. There is no gain in such merchandise. It
does not pay to handle such merchandise. (cf. ganánsya, láhab, gáhi,
sáplid, kasaplidánan).

_gáhi_, (Sp. gaje) Pay, wages, salary; profit, advantage, benefit,
earnings, fees, perquisites. (cf. sóhol; gáhab).

_gáhid_, To clean one's eyes, take out or remove--dust,--a grain of
sand,--a mote, etc. from the eye, from a wound or the like by means
of a soft, bent material suitable for the operation. Igáhid mo iníng
pungángo sang dáhon sang kásla sa ímo matá, agúd makúhà ang púling. Use
this leaf-stalk of the casla-plant to clean your eye with, so that
the mote may be taken away. Gahíra (--ída) ang ákon matá nga napunô
(nabútà) sing yáb-ok. Remove the dust from my eye, for it is full of
it. (cf. kolíkog, káwhi, kúhit).

_gahîgahî_, (B) The best, or least objectionable, amongst a number
of bad, spoilt or worthless objects.

_gáhit_, To clear a road through dense undergrowth, cut or hack
one's way through, open a passage through a jungle. Gahíti akó sing
dálan. Clear a road for me. Sín-o ang naggáhit sing alágyan dirí? Who
was it that cleared a passage here? Igáhit ang binángon siníng masíot
nga lugár. Use the bolo to cut a way through this jungle. Dakô ang íya
pagbatás kag madámò nga kabudláyan ang íya nga ginágyan sa paggáhit
sing dálan siníng bág-o nga palatikángan. He had to suffer much and
go through much fatigue in opening the way for this new enterprise.

_gahô_, Familiar name, pet name (amongst relations and
friends). (cf. hayô, ayô; bánsag--nickname).

_gáhud_, Noise, boisterousness, din, uproar, racket, hubbub,
hullaballoo, clatter; row, disorder, trouble; to be noisy, make
a noise, etc. Indì kamó maggáhud or maggaláhud. Don't make such a
noise. Ginahúran (--údan) akó níya. He disturbed me with the noise
he made. He was noisy in my presence or within my hearing. Pagahúra
lang ang mga bátà. Just let the boys make some noise. Ang manugláygay
nga dílì níla úyon pinagahúran níla sing láta. They made a noise with
tin-cans to disturb the preacher they did not like. Ginagahúran kag
ginagámwan ang bánwa sang duhá ka búnghay nga nagasampúkay. The town
is in a hullaballoo and is much disturbed by the fighting of the two
opposing factions. (cf. galúng, gamú, garók).

_gahúd-gáhud_, Dim. and Freq. of gáhud. Ang mga bátà
nagaginahúdgáhud. The boys are rather noisy.

_gahúk_, Hollow, deep, sunken; a hollow, hole, sinus,
fistula. (cf. gáhuk).

_gáhuk_, To become hollow, form a cavity, sinus or fistula, said
of an ulcerating wound, of rottenness in timber, etc. Naggáhuk ang
íya pilás. His wound formed a deep, festering cavity. Ang márka
sang karabáw nagkagáhuk (nagáhuk), kay inúdlan. The brand on the
buffalo became deep, for it became infested by worms. (cf. búhò,
gwáb, gíab, gíkab).

_gahúm_, Power, might, authority, control, rule, command, supremacy,
right, warrant, dominion, sway, sovereignty; to govern, administer,
preside over, have power, hold sway, etc. Sín-o ang nagagahúm
dirí? Who is in authority here? Gámhi (gahumí) ang ímo, índì ka
magsálig sa ibán. Manage your own affairs, don't put reliance on
others. Pagámha (pagahumá) siá sang ímo dútà. Let him look after
your land. Gámhi kag púnggi ang ímo mga kailíbgon. Keep in subjection
and repress your passions. Igahúm akó ánay sang ákon panimaláy, kay
akó ákon mapamanílà. Kindly look after my household, for I am going
to Manila. Naggahúm siá sing tátlo ka túig. He governed for three
years. Ginagahumán silá sang mga mapigúson nga dumulúong. They are
being ruled by oppressive strangers. Andam ka, agúd índì ka magahumán
sang mga kaduyugán nga maláut. Be careful, lest evil inclinations
should overpower you. Ang tanán nga gahúm nagagíkan sa Diós. All
authority comes from God. (cf. ákò, dumála, pangúlo, tátap; gamhánan,
makagagáhum; palangakóan, pangolohán).

_gahús_, (B) To undertake, deal with, be able to, have capacity for,
be capable or competent, tackle, master, accomplish, overcome, outdo,
manage. Makagahús ka balá siníng bató nga halakwáton?--Húo, saráng ko
magahús iní. Can you tackle this stone that is to be lifted?--Yes,
I can tackle it. Kon walâ akó sing búlig índì ko magahús ang tanán
nga mga buluhatón sa sulúd sang baláy. Without help I am unable to
perform all the house-work. Gahusá lang ang ímo trabáho. Do your best
to get your work done (without outside help) Nagahús níya galî ang
paghákwat sang mabúg-at nga halígi. After all he was able to lift
the heavy post. Naghunâhúnà siá nga íya magahús si Fuláno sa dúmug,
ápang nagsayúp siá. He thought he could beat N.N. at wrestling, but
he was mistaken. Dugángi ang mga mamumugón, agúd makagahús silá sa
pagpatíndog sang táytay sa sulúd sang isá ka simána. Increase the
number of workmen, so that they may be able to set up the bridge
within a week (cf. agám, gakám, gakóm, ákò, saráng).

_gái_. But, still, yet, though, notwithstanding. Ginpaabút ko siá
karón, gái walâ man siá makaabút. I expected him at this time, but
he has not turned up. (cf. ibágo, igái, ugái).

_gáid_, To bind, fasten, tether, hitch or lash to, secure, picket,
moor, make fast to, tie to. Igáid ang kalát sa búgsok. Fasten the
rope to the stake. Gingáid níla siá sa isá ka halígi. They bound him
fast to a post. Igáid ang karabáw sa kodál. Tether the buffalo to
the fence. Gaíri (--ídi) iníng búgsok sang ímo kabáyo. Tie up your
horse to this stake. Sín-o ang naggáid sang ákon idô sa hágdan? Who
tied my dog to the ladder? Pagabút ko dirí nagáid na siá. It was tied
when I arrived here. (cf. higót, bángot).

_gakám_, The span of the hand; to span, clasp, grasp, encircle with the
hand; to cope with, be able to do, be capable of performing. Gakamá
ang ákon bútkon, kay tan-awón ko kon makagakám ikáw sinâ. Clasp my
arm with your hand, for I wish to see whether you can span it. Igakám
akó ánay sang mga hilimosón sa dígamohán. Kindly undertake to look
after the things to be prepared in the kitchen. Makagakám balá siá
siní? Is he able to cope with this? Gakamón ko gid, kon malúyag ikáw,
ang ímong aradohón. I will undertake to do your ploughing, if you
like. (cf. gakáp, gakóm, gamól, gahús, agám, ágap).

_gakáp_, See gakám.

_gákid_, To rope, cord, bind. See gákut id.

_gakíd-gákid_, Dim. and Freq. of gákid.

_gakíd-gakíd_, Dry ear-wax, cerumen. (cf. bakídbakíd).

_gakít_, A kind of bird; wild duck.

_gákit_, To string or bind together, fasten one to another. Ginákit
nga kawáyan. Bamboos fastened together. Gakíta ang mga kawáyan nga
pulúnton, kay ipaánod ko sa subâ. String together the bamboos for
the fishtrap, for I am going to float them down river. (cf. gákid,
gáid, gákut; higót, etc.).

_gakóm_, See gakám id.

_gákud_, The base of a tree, the trunk or stem of a tree near the
ground, where the roots branch off; the great, mighty, influential,
rich people of a place. Sín-o ang mga gákud siníng bánwa? Who are
the most influential men in this town? (cf. kadalagkuán, kadaragkulán).

_gákut_, A bundle or package tied together with a string, especially
applied to rice corded or roped in the field, a sheaf. (One gákut is
equal to one tabungós or, discounting the ears, to about one bushel
of threshed rice); to tie, bind, fasten with a string or rope, to
rope or cord, to sheaf. Gakúti ang humáy sa tabungós. Bind the rice
in the tabungós-basket. Igákut akó sang bínhì nga humáy. Please sheaf
the seed-rice. Gakúti akó sing humáy nga bilinhíon. Bind a bundle of
seed-rice for me. Igákut iníng písì sa pinutús. Tie the parcel with
this string. (cf. putús, baláhos, higót).

_gakút_, Rope, cable, mooring (cables and anchors). (cf. gákut).

_gála_, (Sp. gala) Gala, full dress, dress worn on solemn occasions;
premium, present, reward, pay; to reward, give a present or tip,
offer a premium or payment. Iníng mga bátà nagapagála sa pagkánta
kag pagsáut. These children sing and dance for presents. Kon ámon
kamó saútan, pilá ang igála nínyo sa ámon? If we dance for you, how
much will you give us? Gingaláhan níya silá sing tagpisítas. He made
them a present of twenty centavos each. (cf. hátag, regálo, túgrò,
taó, báyad, sóhol).

_galaangán_, Fireside, hearth, oven, stove. (cf. gáang).

_galáb_, (H) Sickle, reaping-hook. (cf. gálab--to cut with a sickle).

_gálab_, (H) To cut with a sickle, reap. Galába ang hilamón. Cut the
grass with a sickle. Dílì mo pagigálab ang kotsílyo sa hilamón. Don't
use the knife as a sickle in cutting down the weeds. Galábi ang humáy,
kay lakás katáas. Cut off the tops of the rice with a sickle, for it
is too high. Galábi ang kabáyo sing sakáti. Reap some zacate-fodder for
the horse. Igálab mo akó ánay siníng mga gámhon. Please cut down these
weeds with the sickle. Ipagálab lang sa íya iníng hilamón nga ipakáon
níya sa báka. Let him cut this grass with the sickle to feed his cow.

_gálab_, (H) The method of reaping rice with the sickle. (cf. áni--to
cut off the rice-ears with the kayóg).

_galabáyan_, (H) Life-buoy, etc. See gabayán.

_galá-gála_, Dim. and Freq. of gála. Also: To dress or line with
mortar, decorate, beautify. Galagaláhi ang tabríya sing seménto. Line
the slabs with cement.

_galahíd_, (H) Feather, brush or other instrument used to remove a
foreign body from the eye, anything used to perform the action of
gáhid. (cf. gómi).

_galalíngon_, (H) Grist, that is to be milled or ground. May galalíngon
pa ikáw nga tubó? Have you any more sugar to be milled? Maís nga
galalíngon. Corn to be ground. (cf. galíng).

_galamitón_, (H) Equipment, utensils, furniture, outfit, gear,
implements, tackle, appliances, tools, apparatus. (cf. gámit;
kasangkápan).

_galán_, (Sp. galan) Gallant, courtier, ladies' man; spruce, natty,
dressy, well dressed, neat and trim; to be gallant, smart, dapper;
to be bright, conspicuous, visible from afar. Galán siá. He is a
gallant. He is spick and span, neat and trim, etc. Nagagalán ang íya
bíste. Her dress is very conspicuous, bright, glaring, visible from
a far distance. (cf. kánang, dáang, dagángdang; hípig, elegánte).

_galanás_, Knife, any sharp-edged tool used for cutting. (cf. garanás,
urutúp, súndang, kotsílyo; ganás).

_galangán_, A tree with sour, edible fruit. (cf. garángan).

_galáng-galáng_, A kind of rice-cake. (cf. kúmbò).

_galastóhan_, (H) Expenses, things to be paid for, things requiring
outlay or expenditure. (cf. gásto; baláyran, kahinguyángan).

_galastóhon_, (H) Expenditure, wherewithal, money or other assets in
hand. (cf. hilinguyángon).

_galatóng_, (H) Fuel, fire-wood, kindling wood, firing,
faggots. (cf. gatóng).

_gálaw_, A spiked entrance. See gáraw.

_galawáhan, galawahán_, (H) Observation post, lookout, window or
any other position from which one can see who is below or passing
by. (cf. gáwa).

_galawhánon_, (H) Anything set with spikes, hence: acrimony,
difference, dissension, quarrel, wrangle, controversy. (cf. gálaw),

_galawión_, (H) Usual, customary; accustomed, used to, practised
in. (cf. gáwì).

_galbanisádo_, (Sp. galvanizado) Galvanized, electroplated.

_gálgal_, Use, advantage, usefulness, avail, etc. See gádgad.

_gálgal_, Trouble, molestation, exasperation consequent on some
request, an adverse criticism or the like; to trouble, look for
trouble. Indì ka mangítà sing gálgal. Don't look for trouble, don't
do that, lest you should give offence or create difficulties for
yourself. (cf. gádgad).

_gálhò_, (B) To take charge of, tackle, handle, perform, execute,
work with one's own hands, put one's hand to, accomplish with actual
personal labour. Sín-o ang naggálhò sang pagíhaw sang báboy? Who
killed the pig? Who actually performed all the work in connection with
the killing of the pig? Galhoá lang ang mga hilikotón sa simbáhan
sa pándut. Take charge personally of all the preparations in the
Church for the feast. Igálhò akó siníng ísdà sa paglútò. Kindly
cook this fish for me yourself (in person). Gingálhò ni Fuláno ang
ilibusón. N.N. personally got ready all the requisites for making a
dish of "íbus". Kon maló-oy ka, galhoón mo lang ang tanán nga mahígkò
sang masakít. For mercy's sake, undertake all the work of cleaning
the sick person. (cf. agám, ágap, gamól, gakám, gakóm, gámlò, hámlò).

_gálhom_, (H) A silhouette, phantom, a dim, shadowy, obscure outline
or figure, an indistinct form seen in the dark; dim, undefined,
ill-defined, blurred; to glimpse, show in vague outline. Sang paglakát
námon sang las dóse ang gáb-i sa Ilóngílong may nakítà kamí nga isá
ka táo nga nagagálhom sa higád sang dálan. When we were walking at
twelve o'clock at night to Iloilo, we caught a glimpse of a man at
the side of the road. (cf. dágway, báyhon).

_galî_, Really! Can that be! Is that so! Indeed! Fancy that! You don't
say so! Who would have thought it! Diín ka makádto?--Sa Manílà.--Sa
Manílà, galî. Where are you going to?--To Manila.--To Manila,
indeed? I am surprised to hear it. Sín-o ang tagíya siníng malápad
nga dútà?--Si Fuláno.--Si Fuláno, galî! Who owns these extensive
grounds?--N.N.--N.N., I couldn't have guessed it.

_gáling_, Milling, especially the milling of sugar-cane. Sán-o matápus
ang ínyo gáling? When shall you finish your milling? (cf. galíng).

_galíng_, To mill, grind, pulverize, reduce to powder,
powder, comminute, crush, put through a mill or between grinding
stones. Sán-o kamó magagalíng sang ínyo tubó? When shall you mill your
sugar-cane? Galingí akó sing diótay nga maís, humáy, kapé, etc. Grind
for me some corn, rice, coffee, etc. Igalíng akó ánay siníng isá ka
gántang nga kapé. Please, grind this "ganta" of coffee for me. Kay
walâ akó sing galingán nga ákon kaugalíngon, ipagalíng ko lang ang
ákon tubó sa galingán ni Fuláno. As I have no sugar-mill of my own,
I will have my sugar-cane put through N.N.'s mill. (cf. gáling).

_galingán_, Mill, machine; grinding-stone, grindstone. Galingán-tubó. A
sugar-mill. Galingán-humáy. A rice-hulling machine. (cf. galíng,
gáling, galalíngon, dawdáwan, pábrika).

_galít_, (H) To habituate, etc. (cf. gálit).

_gálit_, (H) To get into the habit or knack of, accustom to,
inure, exercise, habituate, train, allure, entice, tempt. Galíta
siá sa paginúm sing diótay nga tubâ. Accustom him to drink a little
toddy. Gingálit niya ang manók sa pagsámpok. He trained the cock to
fight. Nagálit na siá sa pagkáon sing íbus. He is now accustomed to
eating "íbus". Indì mo siá paggalíton sa paghámpang sang baráha. Don't
induce, entice, allure, tempt him to play cards. Don't get him into the
habit of playing cards. (cf. ánad, hánas, bánggad, pabuyó, palúyag).

_galít_, (H) To provoke, excite, nettle, sting, enrage, exasperate,
tease, irritate, make angry. Indì mo akó paggalitón. Don't make me
angry. Gingalít níya ang ákon idô nga nagalokó sa báid. He teased the
dog that was lying in the corner. Indì ka maggalít siníng karabáw,
kay magasúngay (magapanúngay). Don't enrage this buffalo, for he will
strike with his horns. (cf. balít).

_galít-galít_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of galít. To tease a little, irk,
weary, disturb, bore; incite, provoke. (cf. tulúd, súgyot, súdyot).

_galó_, A ladleful; to lade, ladle, dip, spoon or draw out with a ladle
or dipper, scoop up. Ang manuglútò nagagaló na sang tinóla. The cook
has begun to ladle out the side-dish. Gálwi (galohí) akó sing isá
ka galó nga kán-on, sópas, sabáw, etc. Give me a ladleful of rice,
soup, broth, etc. Igaló akó ánay siníng tinóla nga natigána sa mga
dumulúaw. Please ladle out this side-dish for the visitors. Ginálwan
akó ni Fuláno sing kárne nga laúya. N.N. scooped out for me some boiled
meat. Indì ka magsabát, kay básì magálwan man ikáw. Don't say a word
or you may catch it, (receive a scolding or the like). (cf. sarók,
kándus).

_galó-gálo, galó-galó_, Dim. and Freq. of galó--to ladle, dip out, etc.

_galô-galô_, To tease, vex, irritate, annoy. Indì mo siá paggalôgalòón,
kay maákig gid siá. Don't tease him, for he will get angry.

_galón_, (Sp. galón) Gallon, liquid measure containing four quarts;
galloon, braid, trimming, strips as used in uniforms, etc., as a
mark of distinction or simple decoration; to provide or furnish
with galloons, etc. Galoní ang íya pakô sing duhá ka galón. Put two
stripes or galloons on his sleeve. Galonón ko lang iníng hénero nga
mapulá. I'll just make galloons of this red cloth. Ang isá ka láta
nga agás may limá ka galón. One can of petroleum contains five gallons.

_gál-um_, Cloud, mist, vapour, haze, fog; to be or become cloudy,
misty, hazy, foggy, overcast, etc. Naggál-um ang kalibútan. The
sky is overcast with clouds. Nagal-umán ang lángit, ádlaw, etc. The
heavens are--, the sun is--, covered with clouds. (cf. ámbon, alopóop,
pangánod, dámpug).

_gal-umón_, Cloudy, lowery, lowering, gloomy, overcast; pertaining
to clouds.

_galúng_, To shorten, cut short, cut back. Galungá ang bohók nga náyon
sa ágtang siníng bátà, kay nagatábon sang íya mga matá. Cut back the
hair on the forehead of this child, for it covers its eyes.

_galúng_, (B) Noise, din, uproar, racket, hubbub, hullaballoo, clatter,
boisterousness; to make a din, noise, etc. Indì kamó maggalúng. Don't
make a noise. Indì akó nínyo paggalungán. Don't disturb me with your
noise. Pagalungá lang silá. Let them make a noise. Dálha dídto sa
únhan ang mga kánding kag idô, kay ipagalúng sa íla katipúnan. Take
the goats and dogs over there to disturb their meeting with the
noise. Pagkagalúng sináng mga bátà! How boisterous those boys
are! (cf. gáhud).

_galyétas_, (Sp. galleta) Hardtack, ship-biscuit; a small vessel
or pan.

_gámà_, To cut, scratch, graze, slit--, slash--, gash--, slightly,
lacerate with a splinter, a sharp piece of bamboo, etc. (cf. gábà).

_gámà_, To fell, cut down, particularly applied to bamboo. Gamáa
ang kawáyan. Cut down the bamboo. Gamái akó sing napúlò ka nahót nga
kawáyan. Cut down ten pieces of bamboo for me. Igámà iníng binángon
sa kawáyan. Cut the bamboo down with this bolo. Igámà akó siníng
ápat ka nahót nga kawáyan. Kindly cut down for me these four pieces
of bamboo. (cf. pulúd, púkan).

_gáman_, Liking, pleasure, inclination, attraction; intention,
care, thought, mind, will, intent, resolve. Walâ siá sing gáman nga
maglakát dídto. He has no intention of going there. He does not care
to go there. May gáman siá sa pagbakál sang ákon báka. He wants--,
wishes--, would like--, to buy my cow. (cf. túyò, katuyoán, bagô,
bagól, túhoy, gána, táman).

_gamáy_, To become or make small, thin, slender, fine, delicate,
little, tiny, slim, to thin, pare down, whittle. Naggamáy ang
pérno sa lakás nga tóktok. The bolt became quite slender through
excessive rust. Gamayá ang biníklan. Thin down the piece of split
bamboo. Ipagamáy ko sa ímo iníng mabahúl nga bastón. I'll hand over
to you this big stick and you will make it slender. Ang kalát nabúgras
sa nagamayán. The rope snapped where it was thin. (gágmay).

_gámbal_, To be or become bulky, awkward to carry. (cf. bángkag,
mabángkag, magámbal).

_gamhánan_, Mighty, powerful, potent, puissant, ruling, commanding,
holding sway, reigning, governing. (cf. gahúm).

_gámhon_, Weed; any useless, injurious or obnoxious plant.

_gamít_. Frequented, resorted to, etc. (cf. damít, daní).

_gamít_, Tool, instrument, utensil, implement, tackle, gear, equipment,
outfit, appliance, apparatus. (cf. galamitón, sángkap).

_gámit_, To employ, use, make use of, resort to, apply, avail oneself
of, utilize. Gamíta lang ang ákon lagárì. Use my saw. Gamíti ang
ídò sing látigo, agúd magpalágyo. Use the whip on the dog so that
it may run away. Gamíta ang páyong, kay nagaulán. Use the umbrella,
for it is raining. Gamítan mo siá sing bastón, kon magsutíl. Give
him the stick, if he gets naughty. Gingámit níya ang ákon arádo sa
íya nga umá. He used my plough for his field. Ipagámit mo sa ákon
ang ímo karabáw sa pagarádo sa buás. Permit me to make use of your
buffalo to-morrow for ploughing. Gingámit níya ang íya palangakóan
sa pagmánggad. He availed himself of his official position to enrich
himself. Gamíta ang tiémpo sing mabúot. Employ your time wisely.

_gámla, gámlon, etc._ See under gamól.

_gámlò_, To perform in person, tackle (it) oneself, etc. See gálhò
id. Gamloón--galhoón.

_gamó_, See gamú.

_gamól_, To grasp, grip, clasp, span, encircle with the hand; to cope
with, be able, competent, capable of. Gámla (gamolá) ang bútkon ko,
kon makagamól ka sinâ. Encircle my arm with your fingers, if you
can. Span my arm, if you can. Indì níya magamól inâ. He is not capable
of doing that. (cf. gakám, etc.).

_gamón_, Disappointment, balk, check, defeat or failure
of--expectation,--hope,--wish,--desire,--intention; to disappoint,
balk, baffle, dash one's hopes, fail one, frustrate one's expectations,
leave in the lurch, defeat of expectation, etc. Nagamón siá, kay
buót siá kuntánì magsakáy pa Manílà, ápang walâ siá makahalín dirí,
kay nagmasakít si nánay níya. He suffered a disappointment, for
he would have liked to embark for Manila, but could not get away
from here, because his mother fell ill. Dî mo akó pagpagámnon
(pagpagamonón). Don't leave me in the lurch, don't fail or
disappoint me. Sín-o ang nagpagamón sa ímo? Who was the cause of your
disappointment? Ginpagamón akó ni Fuláno. N.N. brought my hopes or
expectations to nothing.

_gamót_, Root; to take root, become rooted, put forth roots. Naggamót
na ang gútuk sang tabákò. The tobacco-seedling has taken root. Ipagamót
mo sa tagiposó-on níya ang maáyo nga batásan. Make good habits take
root in his heart.

_gámsa, gámson, etc._ See under gamús--to salt, pickle.

_gamú_, Disturbance, row, riot, trouble, disorder, tumult,
fracas, affray, melee, uproar, squabble, brawl, commotion;
to cause a disturbance, etc., throw into confusion, take away
peace or tranquillity. May gamú silá sa íla baláy. There is some
disorder or commotion in their home. Indì kamó maggamú or magginamú
dirí sa ámon. Don't disturb us here. Don't interrupt our peace
or tranquillity. Ginámwan níya ang bánwa. He caused a commotion
in town. Iníng duhá ka táo may dakô nga gamú. These two men are
at loggerheads, are having a serious fight or quarrel between
themselves. Pagámwa (pagamuhá) lang silá, kay walâ man sing pulús
kon ímo silá husáyon, kay índì silá mamátì. Just let them fight it
out, for it is of no use to try to mediate, as they won't listen to
you. Anó ang nanginkabangdánan siníng gamú? What is the origin or
cause of this riot? (cf. garók, gáhud, galúng, gúbat).

_gamús_, To salt, brine, steep in brine, pickle. Gámsa (gamusá)
ang hípon. Salt down the hipon-fish. Gámsi (gamusí) akó sing tátlo ga
gántang nga tabagák. Pickle for me three gantas of tabagac-fish. Igamús
akó siníng báboy. Please salt and pickle this pork for me. Ipagamús
ko sa kosinéro iníng isá ka búgsò nga kárne. I'll get the cook to
salt down this piece of meat. (cf. asín, lílang, patís).

_gamúsa_, (Sp. gamuza) Chamois; shammy skin, leather made from the
skin of the chamois or of other antelopes.

_gána_, (Sp. gana) Appetite, relish, mind, inclination, leaning,
wish, desire, liking for. Walâ akó sing gána sa pagkáon. I have no
appetite for food. May gána siá sa--. He has a liking or inclination
for--. (cf. úyon, lúyag, gáman, gián, kaduyugán, kabúyok, kaíbug,
táman, wíli, ílà, íma).

_ganánsya_, (Sp. ganancia) Gain, profit return, proceeds; winnings;
to gain, profit, make on, make pay. Nagganánsya siá sing ápat ka
písos. He made a profit of four pesos. Ginganansyahán akó níya sing
tátlo ka pisítas. He had a a gain of sixty centavos from me. Indì akó
malúyag nga magganánsya ka sa ákon sa bágay nga dílì matárung. I do
not like you to get a profit out of me by unfair methods. (cf. gábaw,
sáplid; kasaplidánan).

_ganás_, Insipid, tasteless, savourless, mawkish, watery, wishy-washy
(applied especially to fruits and vegetables). Iníng kalabása ganás
or maganás. This squash is insipid. (cf. marabó--tasty).

_gánas_, Appetite, relish, etc. See gána.

_gánas_, To cut--, hack--, cleave--, through, sever, sunder. Ganása
ang púnà. Cut the mesh. Cut through the net-work. (cf. útud, búgtò,
ótop; galanás, garanás).

_ganás_, Severed, sundered, cut--through,--asunder, cloven. (cf. gánas,
utúd).

_gándo_, Sign, mark, indication, token, presage, prognostic, omen. Walâ
sing gándo ang kalibútan nga magaulán karón. There is no indication
that it is going to rain presently. Walâ man siá sing gándo nga
mapamanílà. There is no sign that he is going to Manila. (cf. aníno,
tándà, timáan, gáman, túyò, pát-in).

_gánga_, An earthen roasting pot with an opening in its side, used
mostly for roasting coffee, rice and corn.

_gáng-gang_, To heat or warm near a stove or fire. Ganggangá ang kamót
mo. Warm your hands. Igánggang ang tiíl mo sa kaláyo. Warm your feet at
the fire. Ganggangá ang báyò mo sa kaláyo túbtub nga magmalá. Dry your
jacket at the fire. Si Fuláno nagagánggang (nagapagánggang) sang íya
kamót sa kaláyo. N.N. is warming his hands at the fire. Gingánggang
níya ang tinápay nga dáan. He toasted the stale bread. (cf. bagáng,
gáang, aráng, baángbáang, paínit).

_gánggong_, Large, tall, big. (cf. dakô, lántyog, hánggud; gánggong
seems to be of Chinese origin).

_gangháan_, Door, gate, gateway, entrance, exit, portal, postern,
wicket. (cf. gawáng, puérta, puertáhan, ganháan).

_ganháan_, Door, etc. See gangháan.

_gánì_, Certainly, surely, of course, therefore, for that very reason,
naturally, there you are, quite clear. Amó gánì. Of course, that is
it. Ginhambalán ko gánì siá sináng mga butáng. As was to be expected,
I talked to him about those matters. Nagsilíng akó gánì nga ----. I
certainly said that ----. (cf. ngánì).

_gán-it_, To pinch, twist, pull (one's nose, ear, hair, etc.). Gan-itá
ang íya dalúnggan. Pinch his ear. (cf. gánit).

_gánit_, To pull, drag, tear at, rumple, tousle (one's hair, etc.);
to twist, pinch (one's ear, etc.). Dílì mo pagganíton ang íya
bohók. Don't rumple his hair. (cf. gán-it, guránit, bútong, gulípat,
kosípad, gurámus).

_ganót_, Tough, stiff, rigid; to stiffen, toughen, make rigid or
inflexible. But mostly used in the form paganót with the meaning:
to be stubborn, tenacious, refractory, unyielding, unbending, hard
to manage, difficult to deal with, to make objection to, offer
resistance to. Iníng bátà nagapaganót sa íya ilóy, kay índì siá
buót magpaúlì. This child objects to go with its mother, for it does
not want to go home. Indì ka magpaganót, kon táwgon ka sa pagpakarí
dirí. Don't be stubborn when you are called to come here. Dálhon ko
gid ikáw dídto, bisán magpaganót ikáw. I will take you there, even
though you offer resistance. Ang makáwat nga nadakúp nagpaganót sa
polís. The thief that was caught resisted the police. Sang pagkádto
námon sa Manílà pinaganotán kamí níya sa dálan, kay índì siá buót
magupúd sa ámon. When we went to Manila he became refractory on the
road, for he did not wish to go with us. Indì mo pagpaganotán ang ímo
ilóy, kon sogóon ka níya nga magpaúlì. Don't be naughty disobeying
your mother, if she orders you to go home. (cf. áwot, húnit).

_gánoy_, To draggle, drag, draw or pull along. Indì mo pagganóyon ang
bátà, kay malayô ang ímo kadtoán. Don't drag your child along, for you
have a long distance to go. Gingánoy gid lang níya ang íya patádyong sa
lúnang nga walâ níya pagbalakínga. She just draggled her skirt through
the mud instead of tucking it up. (cf. gúyud, dalá, sagúmboy, ságnoy).

_gánsa_, (Sp. gansa) Goose.

_gánsal_, Noise, din, racket, uproar, boisterousness; to be noisy,
set up a din, make a--din,--racket,--noise, etc. Daláyon gid lang
ang íla nga paggánsal dirí. They are constantly making a racket
here. Ginansalán akó níla sa idálum sang baláy. They annoyed me with
their boisterousness underneath the house. (cf. gáhud, galúng).

_gansílyo_, (Sp. ganchillo) A little hook, a crochet--hook,
crochet--needle.

_gánso_, (Sp. ganso) Gander. (cf. gánsa--goose).

_gánso_, (Sp. gancho) A hook; a hair-pin, (cf. gansílyo).

_gántang_, A "ganta", a quantity equal to 1/25 of a "pásong"--bushel.

_gantángan_, A measure containing one "ganta".

_gánya_, To like, wish to have, desire, fancy, long for, take to,
go in for, be attracted by or pleased with, hanker after. Nagánya
akó siníng báyò. I like (or am pleased with) this jacket. Kon makítà
mo ang íya bág-o nga baláy magánya ka gid. When you see his new
house, you will certainly like it very much. Ganyahá (paganyahá)
siá sa pagbakál siníng mga sapátos. Make him fancy and buy these
boots. Ginpagánya ko siá sa pagupúd sa ákon. I persuaded him to
accompany me. Nagánya siá sa pagsugál. He has taken to gambling. He
has gone in for gambling. (cf. lúyag, gána, bangá).

_gányat_, See gánya.

_gányat_, To grasp, take--, catch--, hold of, grip, seize, clasp,
etc. Ganyatá ang bastón. Catch hold of the stick. (cf. kapút, kápyot,
úyat).

_gápà_, To droop, bend, hang down, as the branches of a tree,
etc. Ang mga sangá siníng káhoy nagagápà. The branches of this tree
droop. Nagkatulúg kamí sa hándong sang isá ka madábung nga páhò kag
sang paghángin sing mabáskog nagapáan kamí sang íya mga sangá. We
were sleeping in the shadow of a dense mango-tree and when the
wind blew strongly its branches bent down low over us. (cf. dábung,
gáway, káway).

_gápas_, To fell, cut down. Gapása ang káhoy. Cut down the
tree. (cf. tapás).

_gápas_, (Sp. gafas) Spectacles, eye-glasses; to wear or use
spectacles. Iníng táo nagagápas or nagapanggápas. This man wears
spectacles.

_gapás_, Talon, fang, claw, nail; a clutch, clench, firm grip,
grasp. Ang kailó nga pisô pinilásan sang matístis nga mga gapás sang
isá ka mabangís nga salagyáwan. The poor chicken was wounded by the
cruel talons of a ferocious hawk.

_gápì_, A breaking by--doubling up,--bending,--folding; to break
by bending, etc. Gingápì sang hángin ang humáy. The rice was bent
and broken by the wind. Gapía ang amákan. Break the bamboo mat by
doubling it up. Gapíi akó siníng baníslak. Break this piece of split
bamboo for me. Kon may bágyo madámò nga mga támbò nga lawásan ang
magápì. If there is a storm many tall bamboo shoots will be bent and
broken. (cf. bálì, gípik).

_gapî-gápì_, Dim. and Freq. of gápì. Gapîgapía ang sin túbtub nga
maútud. Bend the zinc to and fro till it falls apart.

_gáplang_, A slice of meat, or the like. See paláng id.

_gapó_, Dust, grit. (cf. yáb-ok).

_gapó-gapó_, Dim. of gapó. Pahíri ang gapógapó sa tulungtúngan. Wipe
the dust off the table. Dust the table.


_gapús_, Fetter, shackle, manacle, gyve, bonds, chain, handcuff,
string, cord; fettered, bound, shackled, etc.

_gápus_, To bind, tie, fetter, trammel, pinion, handcuff,
gyve, shackle, manacle, chain, put in bonds. Gapúsa ang íya mga
kamót. Bind his hands. Gingápus níla ang báboy, kay dálhon sa tiénda
kag ibalígyà. They have trussed up the pig, for they are going to
take it to the market to sell it. Gapúsi akó siníng mga manók nga
binakál ko. Tie the legs (of some) of these chickens I bought. Igápus
akó siníng mga manók. Please tie the legs of these chickens for
me. Gindakúp sang polís ang makáwat kag gindalá níla sa bánwa nga
nagápus ang íya mga kamót. The police caught the thief and brought
him handcuffed to town. (cf. higót, gáid, bángot).

_gará_, (B) To allure, entice, induce, persuade, prevail
upon. Nagará siá sa pagbáile. He was enticed to dance. Gingará siá
sa pagtámbong sa íla píknik. They prevailed upon him to assist at
their picnic. Garahá siá sa pagupúd sa áton. Persuade him to come
along with us. (cf. gánya).

_garabáhan_, Anxious, afraid, upset, nervous, fearful of grave
consequences on account of a small matter, of a slight illness,
etc. Garabáhan siá kaáyo, kay bisán diótay lang ang balatían sang
íya anák nagapangúlbà sing dalô. She is very easily upset, for even
if her child is but slightly ill, she is trembling all over with
fear. (cf. darabáhan, garapáhan).

_garabáyan_, (B) See galabáyan, gabayán, alobáybay, gabáy.

_garagadáng_, A kind of small frog. (cf. mánwit, mánlà, pakâ,
pánkà). A small drum, tambour. (cf. tambór, tamból). Not up to the
mark or standard, imperfect, not very good, defective. Ang orkésta
nga inâ garagadáng gid lang. That orchestra is not very good, (does
not play well). (cf. kúlang, dílì maáyo, mínus).

_gará-gára_, To stroll, roam about, saunter; converse, have social
relations with. (cf. higála, higára).

_garáhe_, (Sp. garage) Garage, a shelter for automobiles.

_garaló_, Ladle, scoop, dipper, large spoon. (cf. kalándus, luág,
galó).

_garámpà_, Thoughtlessness, carelessness; rash, hasty, happy-go-lucky,
listless, heedless, without consideration for the consequences,
without distinction or difference; to do in a happy-go-lucky way,
etc. Ginagarámpà gid lang níya ang amó nga báyò sa mga ádlaw nga
piésta kag sa matagádlaw. She uses the same dress without distinction
on feast-days and work-days. Garampaá lang silá nga tanán sang amó
nga tráto. Just treat them all alike without distinction. Indì nínyo
paggarampaón ang pagsílhig. Don't sweep perfunctorily. (cf. saláma,
pasalipákpak, pasapayán, pasaburák, pasipákpak; dagumák, saguláy).

_garanás_, Knife, especially one used for cutting meshes, repairing
nets, etc. (cf. urutúp, galanás, súndang, kotsílyo, lansítas).

_garanátsa_, (Sp. echar granos) To waste, squander, spend freely,
be prodigal, lavish, thriftless, extravagant; spendthrift,
improvident. Garanatsahá lang ang pílak mo, kon amó ang buót
mo. Waste your money, if such is your will. Ang buhahâ nga táo amó
ang nagagaranátsa. The spendthrift squanders money. Napúto siá, kay
gingaranátsa gid lang níya ang kwárta. He became bankrupt, because
he spent money too freely. (cf. granátsa, garnátsa, hinguyáng, úsik).

_gárang_, Small thorns, pricks, spines, points of prickles, as on
the leaf-stalks of the buri-palm, etc.

_garángan_, See galangán.

_garáng-gárang_, Dim. of gárang. Madámò sing garánggárang iníng
tanúm. This plant is covered with sharp prickles.

_garansíang_, A kind of small bird.

_garányon_, (Sp. garañón) A jackass, the male of the ass; wild,
noisy, mischievous, rude. Iníng bátà daw kabáyo nga garányon. This
boys is--as wild as a jackass,--is very noisy,--is boisterous,--is
always up to tricks.

_garápa_, (Sp. garrafa) Carafe, decanter.

_garapáhan_, Easily troubled or upset. See garabáhan, darabáhan.

_garapáta_, (Sp. garrapata) Tick, sheep-tick. (cf. kalapáta, id.).

_garapátan_, Common property, in common, joint, that belongs to
several persons in common. Garapátan níla iníng kalubihán. This
coconut plantation is their joint property, belongs to them in
common. (cf. guráptan, guráput).

_garapón_, (Sp. garrafon) A large decanter or carafe; carboy, demijohn.

_garás_, Rough, unpolished, provincial, uncultivated, uneven, rude,
rustic, not smooth; to be or become rough, etc. Garás nga hénero,
papél, lamésa, hámbal, etc. Rough cloth, paper, a rough table, rude
or coarse speech, etc. (cf. magarás).

_gáraw_, The opening in a lobster-pot or other kind of trap. The animal
can enter, but cannot get out owing to points around the opening that
turn inwards. (gálaw id.).

_garáy_, Saying, saw, proverb, maxim, dictum, aphorism, truism, adage,
motto, epigram. (cf. hurubáton).

_garáy-garáy_, Dim. of garáy.

_garbánso_, (Sp. garbanzo) The chick-pea, tare, garvance, dried peas.

_gárbo_, (Sp. garbo) Elegance, ease, distinction, dignity, graceful
carriage or demeanour; to have or show elegant airs or gracefulness;
show off, pretend, put on airs, give oneself airs, assume superiority,
be pretentious, natty, genteel. Garbohí siá. Show him your graceful
bearing. Indì ka magpagárbo. Don't be ostentatious, don't show
off. Sang pagkitaáy námon buót siá magpagárbo sa ákon. When we met she
wanted to impress me with her elegance. (cf. aíre, padayáw, kiáykíay,
kisáykísay, etc.).

_garbóso_, (Sp. garboso) Elegant, spruce, spick and span, natty,
dapper, genteel, graceful; ostentatious, giving oneself airs,
displaying elegance of manner, etc. (cf. elegánte, dikumpotók, hípig;
agrót, hámbug, hádak, apót, bugalón, etc.).

_garí-gári_, (B) To provoke, tease, urge on, incite. (cf. galít,
garít, súdyot, tulúd).

_gáring, garíng_, (B) See gáling, galíng id.

_gáring_, (B) See ugáling id.

_garís_, Severe, cruel. See barís.

_garís_, Restless, lively, naughty; to be or become restless,
etc. Garís nga bátà, táo, etc. A naughty boy, a restless man,
etc. (cf. harásharás, darándarán).

_garít, garítgarít_, (B) See galít, galítgalít id.

_garíta_, (Sp. garita) Sentry-box, guard-house,
observation-post. (cf. bantáyan).

_garnátsa_, To spend to no purpose, to waste. (cf. garanátsa,
granátsa).

_garó-garó_, A talker, chatterer, chatterbox; glib, garrulous,
loquacious, talkative, talking at random, rambling in one's
conversation, voluble in one's speech, unreliable, untruthful;
to prattle, chatter, babble, talk without consideration or without
scruple as to whether a thing is true or not. Garógaró nga táo. A
great talker, chatterbox. Indì ka maggarógaró. Don't talk at
random. Gingarógarohán akó níya. He talked to me in a careless,
thoughtless manner. (cf. tarádag, wákal, hádak, búrà, etc.).

_garók_, Rotten, decayed, etc. See gabúk, dunút.

_garók_, Riot, commotion, turbulence, tumult, turmoil, uproar; to
disturb, cause a commotion, etc. See gamú. Ginagarokán ang bánwa. The
town is in an uproar.

_garót_, Near together, dense, thick, packed, crowded; voluble of
speech. Garót nga pagtánum. Close-set rice-planting. Iníng kalubihán
garót kaáyo. This coconut plantation is too thickly set. Garót ang
íya nga hámbal. He talks very quickly or volubly. (cf. íkit, sorótsot).

_garotílyo_, (Sp. garotillo) Quinsy, croup, inflammation of the
tonsils, windpipe and other organs of the throat.

_garúgad_, To insert one's finger,--a feather,--a piece of
wood, etc. into a small apperture with a boring motion, dig,
bore, probe. Indì mo paggarugáron (--ádon) sang ímo túdlò ang ímo
dalúnggan. Don't dig your finger into your ears. Garugári sing lipák
ang buyúg sa búhò. Prod with a piece of wood the wasp that is in the
hole. Igarúgad iníng búlbul sa ilóng mo túbtub nga mangátsi ka. Put
this feather up your nose till you sneeze. (cf. kalíkog, kolíkog,
kilíkog).

_gas_, (Sp. gas) Petroleum, kerosene, lamp-oil. (cf. agás).

_gása_, (Sp. gaza) Gauze, very thin, fine and transparent cloth;
incandescent mantle of a lamp.


_gásod_, A kind of tree with bitter fruit used for medicinal purposes.

_gásod, gasód_, To give a rough answer, show displeasure at being
ordered to do something, object to or complain of an order received
from a parent, superior, etc. Indì ka maggásod (maggasód). Don't
answer back. Gingásdan níya si nánay níya. He spoke roughly to his
mother. (cf. sátsat, panátsat, bátok, sabát, panabát).

_gasolína_, (Sp. gasolina) Gasoline, petrol.

_gáspang_. Roughness (of skin); to be rough (of skin). (cf. káspang).

_gásta_, (Sp. gastar) To sell, get rid of, dispose of. Gingásta
níya ang tigúlang níya nga karabáw. He sold or got rid of his old
buffalo. Gastahá lang iní. Get rid of it. Dispose of it by sale,
or the like. (cf. balígyà).

_gastádo_, (Sp. gastado) Spent, worn-out, old, useless,
threadbare. Gastádo nga báyò. An old jacket. Gastádo nga
káro. A worn-out cart. Gastádo na ang góma. The rubber (tire)
is worn-out. (cf. dáan, ulasón, lumâ, umál, guríbhay, gurísnay,
gúsbat, gisî).

_gastár_, (Sp. gastar) To spend, disburse, lay out, expend,
pay; consume, use up, wear out, make the worse for wear, waste,
squander. Nagastár na ang pérno. The iron bolt is worn thin. Gingastár
níya ang madámò nga pílak sa walâ sing pulús. He spent much money to no
purpose. Indì mo paggastahán sing lakás ang mga kalingawlingáwan. Don't
spend money extravagantly on diversions. Pilá ka galón nga gasolína
ang igastár mo sa isá ka pagpakádto-pagpakarí? How many gallons of
gasoline do you use up in one round-trip? (cf. gásto, hinguyáng).

_gásto_, (Sp. gasto) Expense, outlay, expenditure, disbursement;
to spend, expend, disburse, pay out. Pilá ang gásto (ginagásto)
mo sa isá ka simána? How much do you spend weekly? Gingastohán ko
na sing duhá ka líbo ka písos ang bág-o ko nga baláy kag walâ pa
mahumán. I have spent two thousand pesos on my new house, and it
is not finished yet. Maggásto ka sing pilá ka gatús ka písos kag
saráng mo mailísan ang atóp nga kógon sing sin.--Húo, matúod man,
ápang walâ akó sing ikagásto. Spend a few hundred pesos and you can
change your cogon-roof for one of galvanized iron.--Yes, quite true,
but I have not got the wherewithal. Batóna iní nga igásto sa imo nga
hinákay. Take this to pay your fare. (cf. uyáng, hinguyáng, úsik).

_gastóso_, (Sp. gastoso) Lavish, prodigal, thriftless, improvident,
extravagant, wasteful; expensive, costly, (cf. máhal, buhahâ, buhâ,
maámbas, kostóso).

_gatâ_, The juice of the coconut extracted by pressure. When boiled
it becomes coconut oil.

_gátas_, Milk; to milk. Gátas nga malapúyut, gátas nga
malángyaw. Condensed milk, liquid milk. Ginagatásan iníng báka,
karabáw, etc. This cow, buffalo, etc. is being milked, is a milch
cow, a milch buffalo. Maggátas ka siníng karabáw or gatási iníng
karabáw. Milk this buffalo. Igátas akó anáy siníng kánding. Kindly
milk this goat for me. (cf. létse).

_gatasán_, Milch, giving or yielding milk. Gatasán nga báka. A
milch cow.

_gatílyo_, (Sp. gatillo) The trigger of a gun. (cf. pilítkon).

_gáto_, (Sp. gato) A male cat, tom-cat; money-bag; cock, hammer,
trigger of a gun. (cf. kutî, kuríng; púyo, sulúdlan-pílak; gatílyo).

_gatóng_, Firewood, fuel. (cf. galatóng, gátong).

_gátong_, To use as fuel, etc. Igátong iníng káhoy sa kaláyo. Use
this wood as fuel for the fire. Gatóngi ang tiníg-ang. Put some
fuel under the boiling rice. Ginagátong na lang níla ang mga halígi
sang dáan níla nga baláy. They are now using the posts of the old
house for firewood. Ipagátong ko na lang iníng kodál nga gabúk sa
digamohán. I'll order this rotten fence to be used as fuel in the
kitchen. (cf. alámak, paámak--kindling).

_gátud_, Curse, malediction, expletive, imprecation, anathema;
to curse, damn, execrate, swear at, imprecate. Anó ang gátud níya
siní! What damned nuisance is this! Walâ pa paggátdi sang Diós iníng
táo! Isn't this man an abomination in the sight of God! Gátdan ikáw,
kon índì ka maghípus. Curse you! If you don't keep silent. Gátud! Damn
it all! A curse upon it! The deuce take it! (N.B. Gátud is often used
as a merely emphatic exclamation like yáwà, líntì, yámat).

_gatús_, Hundred; century. Isá ka gatús ka táo. One hundred men. Isá
ka gatús ka túig. One hundred years. A century. Napúlò sa gatús. Ten
per cent. (cf. ginatús--by the hundred, hundreds, hecatombs).

_gaúd_, An oar, paddle, scull. (cf. búgsay).

_gáud_, To oar, row, paddle, scull, propel by means of oars. Gaúri
(--údi) ang sakayán. Row the boat. Igáud ang búgsay sa baróto. Use
the oar to propel the ferry-boat. Igáud akó ánay siníng bóte. Kindly
row this boat for me. Sang pagpalapít sang bágyo gingaúran (ginaúran)
níla kamí sa túman kadásig pa dungkáan. When the storm approached
they rowed us very swiftly into (towards) the harbour. (cf. búgsay).

_gáuk, gaúk_, Hollow, hole, cavity, etc. (cf. gáhuk, gahúk id.).

_gául_, To shout, vociferate, yell, bellow, roar, talk very
noisily. Ang mga bátà nagagául or nagaginául sa nakawáan sang
bánwa. The children are very noisy in the public square. Indì mo akó
paggaúlan. Don't shout at me. Gául ka. Shout. Gaúli siá, kay índì siá
makabatî kon índì mo pagigául ang ímo tíngug. Shout at him, for he
cannot hear you, unless you raise your voice to a roar. (cf. gúal,
sínggit, gáuy).

_gaúl-gául_, Dim. and Freq. of gául.

_gaúng_, Figment, chimera, fancy, phantasm, phantasy, creation
or coinage of the brain, visionary project, building castles
in the air; to talk about visionary projects, etc. Indì ka
maggaúng--or--magginaúng. Don't build castles in the air. Daláyon gid
lang silá nagaginaúng. They are constantly talking about visionary
projects. Gingaungán akó níya. He told me of his rose-coloured
schemes. Pagaungá lang siá, kay siá íya malúyag magginaúng, kag kitá
áton malúyag man magpamátì sang íya nga pagginaúng. Let him speak
of his imaginary plans and accomplishments, for he likes to build
castles in the air, and we also like to listen to him speaking about
such schemes. (N.B. ginaúng is more in use than gaúng).

_gáup, gaúp_, A hollow; to cave in, etc. (cf. gáhuk, gahúk, gáuk,
gaúk, dáup, daúp).

_gaúp_, The removable lid-like bottom of a portable fish-trap, such
as báw-an, páta, etc.

_gáuy_, To shout, etc. (cf. gául, gúal, sínggit, turayáw, pugaás).

_gáwa_. Somewhat, rather, middling, considering, mediocre, passable,
tolerable, not very much or excellent, but still somehow satisfactory
under the circumstances. Komústa ka man karón?--Maáyo na akó gáwa. How
are you now?--I am pretty well. Maáyo na man ang ímo palatikángan?--A,
dílì maáyo gid, ápang, húo, maáyo na gáwa. Is your business
running very well now?--Oh, no, not very well, but, yes, passably
well. Malápad gáwa ang ímo umá. Your field is rather wide. Madámò
gáwa ang nagtalámbong. A rather large crowd attended. (cf. bolobáyhon).

_gáwa_, To observe, look at, view, gaze at, eye, keep an eye on,
watch from a window or the like. Gawáha kon sín-o ang sa idálum. Look
out and see who is below. Igáwa akó kon sín-o ang nagaámba dirâ sa
hágdan. Kindly look out and see who is singing on the stairs. Dáyon
lang siá nagagáwa sa bintánà sa mga umalági sa idálum. She is always
looking out of the window to watch the passers-by below. Magbulúsbúlus
kamó maggáwa sa gawáng sa mga nagalubás sa dálan kag kon ínyo makítà si
Fuláno pahapíta siá dirí. Watch in turns from the window the passers-by
on the road, and if you see N.N. invite him up here. Gawáhi sing
sugâ ang táo dirâ sa atubángan sang baláy. Take a light and observe
the man there in front of the house. Ginawáhan níya sing pasílak ang
makáwat. He watched the thief by means of a flashlight. (cf. bántay,
tíid, áwhog, áwhang, ánghaw).

_gáwad_, To get at a price, to recover--, redeem--, a pawn, to replevy,
replevin, pay off a--mortgage,--a debt on a mortgage, claim something
lost from the finder. Gawára (gawáda) ang ímo dútà nga naprénda
sa kay Fuláno sing kalíman ka mángmang. Pay off the debt on your
land mortgaged to N.N. for fifty pesos. Gawári akó sang arítos nga
naprénda ni nánay sa ahénsya. Redeem the ear-rings for me which
mother gave as security at the pawn-broker's. Igáwad mo akó ánay
siníng kalubihán. Please reclaim for me this coconut plantation. Ari
ang napúlò ka písos nga igáwad mo sang ímo karabáw. Here are the
ten pesos to redeem your buffalo. Magagáwad akó kuntánì sang ákon
báboy nga gindakúp sang polís, ápang walâ akó sing ikagáwad. I would
reclaim my pig caught by the police, but I have not got the amount
necessary. Maggáwad ka sa madalî sang ímo sédula. Buy your cedula
quickly. (cf. tubús, báwì).

_gawahán_, Watch--tower, observation post, look-out,
window. (cf. gáwa).

_gáwak_, Hole, cavity, hollow, etc. See gáwhak id. (cf. gáhuk,
gahúk, etc.).

_gawáng_, Door, gate, gateway, portal, exit, entrance; window,
look-out. (cf. ganháan, gangháan, puérta, puertáhan; gawahán,
talámbwan, talamwáan, bintánà).

_gáwas_, Except, without, not including, excluding, exclusive of,
to the exclusion of. (cf. luás).

_gáway_, The tentacles of the octopus and of similar animals.

_gáway_, Anything that hangs down or dangles freely, as hair,
tendrils, fringes, tassels, etc.; to hang down, dangle. Ang gáway
sang kométa. The comet's tail. Nagagáway ang íya bohók sa ágtang. Her
hair hangs down over her forehead. Isáblay mo iníng isá ka búgkos
nga lánot sa kátre, ápang índì mo (paggawáyon) pagpagawáyon ang íya
nga tángkap. Put this bundle of hemp on the bed, but do not allow
the ends to hang down. Pagawáyi lang ang likód sang bátà sang íya
bohók. Just let the girl's hair hang down her back. (cf. káway, kábit).

_gawáy-gáway, gawáy-gawáy_, Dim. and Freq. of gáway. Any slight,
slender appendage dangling in the air or hanging down freely and
loosely. (cf. kawáykawáy, kabítkábit).

_gawáy-gáway_, A tree whose leaves and flowers are edible and whose
juice is very useful for plastering cracks in earthen pots, etc.

_gáwgaw_, A tiny branch, twig, sprig. Banggií akó sing gáwgaw siníng
káhoy. Break off for me a few twigs from this tree. (cf. símsim).

_gáwhad_, To stretch out one's arm in order to get hold of something,
make a long arm, reach for, try to get hold of. Gawhará (--hadá) ang
pínggan. Stretch out your arm and get hold of the plate. Igáwhad akó
sináng báso. Reach me that glass. Gawharí akó sing isá ka gulút nga
laúya nga árà sa bandehádo. Pass me a slice of boiled meat from the
large dish. Gawharí akó sing isá ka báso nga bíno, kon makagáwhad
ka sang botílya. Give me a glass of wine, if you can reach the
bottle. Ipagáwhad sa íya ang laráwan sa díng-ding. Let him reach
down the picture on the wall. Let him take down the picture from the
wall. (cf. dáb-ot).

_gáwhak_, Hollow, hole, cavity, trace, said of what has been taken
from a heap of rice, sand, corn or the like; to delve or dig into,
scoop a hole in, make encroachments or inroads on a heap of ashes,
flour, rice, etc. Nabúsdik ang sáko kag ang íya sulúd nga humáy
nagáwhak. The sack burst open and a hollow was made in the rice it
contained. Sín-o ang naggáwhak siníng túmpok nga humáy? Who encroached
on this heap of rice? Who delved into this rice-heap? Huy, mga bátà,
índì nínyo paggawhakán ang túmpok nga balás. Hello, you boys there,
don't scoop holes in the sand-heap. Ginawhakán ni Fuláno iníng túmpok
nga balás, kay íya kinuháan sing isá ka láta sa agás. N.N. dug into
this sand-heap, for he took away an oilcanful. Gingawhakán sang makáwat
ang ákon ápog. The thief made a hole in my lime. (cf. gáhuk, etc.).

_gáwì_, Custom, manner, behaviour, habit, inclination, propensity,
character. Ang íya mga gáwì maláin--or--maláin siá sing gáwì. He has
bad habits. (cf. batásan, kinaanáran, kostúmbre).

_gáwì_, Face, cheek. (cf. guyá, pangguyáhon, nawóng, písngi, bagíing).

_gawíd_, Band, cord, string, tie, fetter, fastening, bond, ligature,
fraenum (frenum), anything that retains or holds something in
place. Ang bátà gingutában sang íya gawíd. The baby's umbilical cord
(navel string) was severed or divided. (cf. hawíd, higót, tabíd).

_gáyo_, The commencement of labour, approach of travail or labour;
to feel the approach of--labour,--travail,--confinement; to cause--,
to have--, stomach-ache. (cf. kútoy).

_gayó-gáyo_, Dim. and Freq. of gáyo and more in use than
gáyo. Nagagayógáyo na ang íya tiyán--or--ginagayógáyo na siá. She
feels the approach of labour.

_gayón_, To be or become comely, pretty, nice, fair, beautiful,
handsome. Naggayón na ang altár, kay napunihán sing madámò nga
búlak. The altar was made beautiful, for it was decorated with many
flowers. Nagayonán akó gid siní. I like this very much or I consider
it very nice. (cf. tahúm, ayóáyo, ányag).

_gayúd_, Real, true, perfect, thorough; very, verily, truly, really,
in very truth, in truth, of a truth, in fact, forsooth, in sooth,
absolutely, thoroughly, utterly, quite, wholly, perfectly. Ang
íya nga kaísug amó ang isá ka kaísug nga gayúd. His bravery was
bravery indeed. Patíha akó, kay ang ginasilíng ko sa ímo matúod
nga gayúd. Believe me, for what I am telling you is absolutely
true. (cf. gid).

_géra_, (Sp. guerra) War, warfare, combat, hostilities, fighting; to
war, go to war, fight, wage war. Nagagéra--or--nagageraháy silá. They
are at war. Gingéra sang mga Insik ang mga Hapón. The Chinese fought
the Japanese. Anó ang íla ginageráhan? What are they fighting or waging
war for? What is the reason why they are at war? (cf. áway, ináway).

_gí_, (B) An exclamation of (mostly joyful) surprise. Gi, tulúka
iní. I say, look at this. Gi, kanámit siní. Why, this tastes fine. Ari
na dirî si tátay, gí! Father is here, hurrah! (cf. kananáks, aráw,
ihím). Interrogative: Really? Indeed? Nagkádto ka dídto, gí? Did
you go there, indeed? Húo, nagkádto akó dídto.--Gi, gi? Yes, I went
there.--You don't say so? Really? (cf. galî).

_gía_, (Sp. guia) Guide, leader, conductor, rule,
guard. (cf. manugtóytoy, manugmándò, manugbántay; pagsolóndan,
palanganináwan, etc.).

_gía, gíà, giá, giâ_, (B) Come here. Present yourself. Contr. of
pánaw rúgya, ágtò rúgya. (cf. karí ka dirí).

_gíab_, A small hole, hollow, cavity, recess. Ang mga ilagâ nagapúgad
sa mga gíab sang padér. The rats build their nests in the holes of
the stone wall. Also verb: Indì kamó maggíab sang padér--or--índì
nínyo paggiában ang padér. Don't make holes in the wall. (cf. búhò,
gáhuk, gahúk, etc.).

_gián_, Liking, desire, craving, longing, hankering after,
avidity, keenness. May gián siá sa ápyan. He has a craving for
opium. (cf. lúyag, íbug, hánggab, yánggaw, himúlat, hándum).

_gibungán_, River-mouth. See gibwangán id.

_gíbwang_, To mingle the waters with, join, flow into (of
rivers). Iníng sapâ nagagíbwang sa subâ, kag ang subâ nagagíbwang sa
dágat. This brook joins the river, and the river flows into the sea.

_gibwangán_, The mouth of a river, or its junction with another river.

_gíd_, Very, truly, in truth, in very truth, of a truth, really,
indeed, certainly, surely, in fact, forsooth, in sooth, sheer,
perfectly, absolutely. Dakô gid nga baláy. A very large house. Masakít
gid iní. This is very painful. Matúod gid iní. It is perfectly
true. Amó gid iní. That is it, exactly. Magkádto ka gid dídto. Be
sure to go there. Go there without fail. (cf. gayúd).

_gíding_, Edge, rim, border, cant, an external or salient
angle. (cf. bibíg, binít, bínka).

_gihâ_, An irregular hole, gap, opening or apperture in a roof, floor,
partition or the like; to make such a hole. Sin-o ang naggihâ sang
díngding? Who made that hole in the partition? Indì mo paggihaán ang
salúg. Don't make holes in the floor. Nagasulúd ang ulán, kay may
gihâ galî ang atóp. The rain comes in, for the roof, sure enough,
has a hole in it. (cf. kinitáan, ángkat, tohók, búslot, lubô).

_gíhab_, To break--open,--in,--through, etc. See gúhab.

_gihápon_, (H) Ever, constantly, always, evermore, continually,
perpetually, at all times or hours. Ari kamí sa maáyo nga láwas
nga súbung sang sa gihápon. We are in as good health as ever. Iníng
táo nagatámbong sa gihápon sa bulangán. This man is always at the
cock-pit. Si Fuláno nagatámbong pa gihápon sa bulangán. N.N. is
still at the cock-pit. (i.e. he has been there for some time and
is there yet). Komústa man ang masakít?--Amó gihápon. How is the
sick person?--The same as ever. Kon madámol ang úlan may bahâ sa
gihápon. Whenever there is a heavy rain, the river rises. (cf. dáyon,
daláyon, pírme).

_gíhay_, Tear, rent, fissure, hole (in garments, etc.); to rend, tear,
etc. May gíhay ang íya nga báyò--or--nagíhay ang íya nga báyò. His
jacket is torn. Anó ang naggíhay sang ímo nga báyò? What was it that
tore a hole in your jacket? Indì mo paggiháyon ang íya nga báyò. Don't
tear his jacket. Giháyi ang íya nga báyò sa likód. Tear his jacket
at the back. (cf. gísì, gisî).

_gíhit_, To move, remove, budge, change the place of, shift to
another position, transfer, shift, push or pull along the ground
without lifting or carrying the object. Gihíta ang síya. Shift the
chair. Bulígi akó sa paggíhit siníng mabúg-at nga tulungtúngan. Help
me to move this heavy table to another position. Kon magsílhig kamó
sang hulút, gihíti sang lamésa iníng lugár. When you sweep the room,
shift the table to this place. Igíhit akó ánay siníng mga síya,
kay may bisíta nga maabút. Kindly arrange this chairs in another
position, because visitors are coming. Gihíti akó siníng síya. Move
this chair for me. (i.e. move it towards me or away from me according
to circumstances). (cf. pasáylo).

_gihít_, See gíhit.

_gihít-gíhit_, Freq. of gíhit. To move repeatedly, shift. Indì nínyo
paggihítgihíton ang mga bángkò sa buluthóan. Don't be always moving
the school-benches about.

_gihít-gihít_, Dim. of gíhit, gihít. To move a little, shift
slightly. Gihít-gihitá ang lamésa. Move the table just a little. Walâ
níla magihít-gihít ang bató, kay támà kabúg-at. They could not budge
the stone, because it was too heavy.

_gího_, Movement, motion, stir, sign of life; to move, stir, budge,
shake to and fro, writhe, wriggle, twitch, squirm, give signs of
life. Walâ na siá sing gího. He does not stir any longer, he is quiet
now. Walâ na siá sing gího nga makádto sa bánwa sa buás. He does not
show any sign that he will go to town to-morrow, he has apparently
no intention of going to town to-morrow. Indì na siá makagího, kay
tigúlang man siá kaáyo. He cannot move (stir) now, because he is very
old. Gihóa (gihóha) ang íya bútkon agúd magbúgtaw. Shake his arm to
rouse him from sleep. Igího ang láwas mo. Shake yourself. (cf. húlag,
húblag).

_gihó-gího_, Dim. and Freq. of gího. Igihógího ang abága mo. Move
your shoulder a little. (cf. hulághúlag).

_gíkab_, Cave, cavern, hollow in the ground, den, applied as a rule to
cavities larger than a "gíab" and smaller than a "kwéba" (Sp. cueva).

_gíkam_, Rice sticking to the bottom of a cooking pot. Ang kán-on
nga nagadukút sa kólon ginatawág nga gíkam. The rice that sticks to
a kettle is called "gíkam". (cf. ríka, ríkam).

_gíkan_, From, out of, derived from, originating from, resulting or
proceeding from; to come, result, be derived from. Gíkan sa katámad
nagímol siá. Through laziness he became poor. Silá nga duhá naggíkan sa
amó nga panimaláy. Both of them came from the same stock or family. Anó
ang ímo nga gingikánan (ginagikánan)? What stock or family do you
come from? (what is your origin?) Kon sa karón nga mga tinúig madámò
nga mga pamatán-on maláut sing pamatásan, nagagíkan inâ sa íla nga
pagtuón sa mga buluthóan nga walâ sing pagtóo. If many young people
nowadays misconduct themselves it is due to the fact that they are
attending godless schools. Nabáton ko ang isá ka balítà gíkan sa
Manílà. I have received news from Manila. (cf. halín, humalín).

_gíkas_, To cut lengthwise, diminish the width or breadth of, to
narrow, separate a part from. Ang pagbúhin sang kalaparón sang hénero,
papél, tápì, etc. ginatawág nga paggíkas. To lessen the width of cloth,
paper, planks, etc. is called "paggíkas". Gikási ang papél sing duhá
ka pulgáda. Cut two inches off the width of the paper. Ginikásan ko
iníng papél, kay támà kalápad sa ákon makinílya. I cut this paper
for it was too wide for my typewriter. Sa mahábul nga sinsél índì ka
makagíkas sing maáyo sang sin. With a blunt cold chisel you cannot
cut the galvanized iron well. Gikása iníng báhin sang papél. Tear
off this part of the paper.

_gikás_, Part, bit, parcel, portion, section, fraction, division,
piece taken off a whole, plot of ground divided off from a field. Isá
ka gikás nga dútà. A plot of ground. Isá ka gikás nga hénero. A piece
of cloth (cut from a larger piece). (cf. báhin).

_gikasón_, A part that is to be separated or taken from a whole;
coupon, section of a ticket. (cf. gikás).

_gíkos_, The traces, the rope connecting a draught-animal with the
plough, harrow or the like. (cf. góta).

_giláng_, (H) To cut off, sever, especially applied to
the ears. Gilangá ang dalúnggan sang báboy. Cut off the pig's
ears. Gilangí ang báboy sing isá ka dalúnggan. Cut off one ear of
the pig. Igiláng mo ang binángon sa íya dalúnggan. Cut off his ear
with the bolo. Igiláng mo akó sang dalúnggan sang báboy nga iníhaw,
kay makaúyon akó sinâ. Please cut off the ears of the pig that has
been killed, for I like to eat them.

_giláng_, (H) Having one's ears cut--, lopped--, off; to cut--, lop--,
off. Táo nga giláng. A crop-eared man. (cf. galúng).

_gilayón_, (H) Without delay or interposition, at once, forthwith,
immediately, instantly, suddenly, straight-away, directly, off hand,
on the spur of the moment, out of hand, on the spot, promptly,
with dispatch, without an interval of rest. Sang pagabút níya dirí
nagsákà siá gilayón sa ámon baláy. When he arrived here he at once
came to our home. Sa tápus ang prosesyón gilayón magasúgud ang Mísa
Máyor. After the procession High Mass will begin at once. Magdalágan
ka dídto, kuháon mo ang ákon koríyo sa madalî, kag gilayón dálhon
mo dirí. Run over there, get my mail quickly and immediately bring
it here. Magpahúay ka ánay, índì ka maglakát sa gilayón. Take a rest
first, don't go on immediately. (cf. dáyon, lági, lagílági).

_gílhum_, To suppose, guess, surmise, think, expect, imagine, assume,
take for granted. Gingilhum níla nga ----. They guessed (thought,
calculated, surmised, etc.) that ----. (cf. máy-om, lágpat, hunáhúnà).

_gilihoón_, What is to ----, can ----, should ----, ought to ----,
be moved or shifted; movable. (cf. gího).

_gilinháw-an_, The windpipe, trachea. (cf. ginháwa).

_gílò_, The compound form panagílò is mostly used; to glean, gather
what is left on the field after the harvest or the like. Ang mga babáe
nagapanagílò sing humáy sa inányan. The women are gleaning the ears
left on the rice-field. Panagilóa ang sinálà nga humáy. Gather the rice
that has been left. Ginpanagilóan níla ang búg-os nga inányan. They
gathered the leavings from the whole rice-field. (cf. panálà).

_gílok_, (H) Fine, prickly hairs or down on various grasses which
cause an unpleasant irritation, if they come in contact with the skin;
paleae, chaff. Also verb: Nagilókan ang ákon bútkon kag batíis sang
bugáng. The prickly hairs of the bugáng-grass clung to my arms and
legs. (cf. gírok).

_gilókon_, Full of--, pertaining to--, gílok--prickly hairs, down.

_gím-ang_, Miry, muddy, sludgy, slushy, soiled with soft or watery mud,
muddied, wet and dirty; to be or become wet and dirty, etc. Gím-ang
ang dálan, kay nagulán. The road is muddy (slushy) on account of the
rain. Naggím-ang ang salúg sang ákon hulút, kay nagsulúd si Fuláno nga
mabasâ kag mahígkò ang íya sapátos. The floor of my room was muddied,
because N.N. entered with his wet and dirty boots. (cf. raíng, rísmò,
hígkò, bulíng, músing).

_gimáw_, To stick out, project, protrude, be visible, appear. Sa baláy
ni Fuláno may nakítà akó nga úlo nga nagagimáw sa gawáng, ápang walâ
akó makasáyod kon kay sín-o yádto. At N.N.'s house I saw a head at the
window but I do not know who it was. Sang ámon pagbalikíd sa bánwa
nga ámon tinalíkdan walâ na sing pamaláy nga saráng námon makítà
kóndì ang atóp gid lámang sang kampanáryo nga nagagimáw. When we
looked back at the town we had left we could not see a single house,
but the roof of the belfry was still visible. (cf. gitíb, girím).

_gimáw_, The form pagimáw is mostly used in the meaning of: to peer or
peep slyly or stealthily out of a window, etc., drawing back one's head
at once, if seen by others. Nagapagimáw siá sa bintánà. She is peeping
out of the window, (taking care not to be seen). Indì ka magpagimáw,
kay táwgon ka nga baó nga nagasálup sa íya baláy kon makítà ka sang
táo. Don't peep through openings, for, if you are seen, people will
call you a turtle withdrawing into its shell. Ginpagimawán níya akó
sa gihâ. He peeped at me through a hole. Ipagimáw ang úlo mo. Put
your head out cautiously and look about. (cf. tikâ, língling, óplok,
íplok, tíid, paníid).

_gimáw-gímaw_, Dim. and Freq. of gimáw. Púnggi ang maláin mo nga
kaduyugán sa pagpagimáwgímaw. Curb that tendency you have to peep
and peer.

_gímik_, Fold, bend, crease; to crease by folding or doubling,
etc. Nagímik ang ákon maléta, kay tinungtungán níla sing mabúg-at
nga kárga. My suitcase was quite crushed, for they had put heavy
baggage on top of it. Indì mo paggimíkon ang bakág ko. Don't bend my
basket out of shape. Gimíki ang amákan sa púsud. Fold and crease the
bamboo-mat in the corner. Sín-o ang naggímik sang sin? Who bent the
sheets of galvanized iron? (cf. gípik, gápì, bálì).

_gin-, gina-_, Particles prefixed to verbs and denoting the Perfect
and Present Passive respectively, e.g. silíng--to say. Ginsilíng
(ginasilíng) níya nga ----. It has been (is being) said by him
that ----.

_ginábut_, Protrusion of the bowels. Ang ginábut sang bátà ginúlì
ni nánay níya. The child's protruding bowel was put back by its
mother. (cf. gábut--to pull out).

_ginaestarán_, Place where one stays or lives, abode, residence,
dwelling, quarters, home. Diín ang ginaestarán mo? Where do you
live? Where have you been put up? Where are you staying? (cf. estár;
pulúy-an).

_ginagíhan_, Incidents, occurrences, events, episodes in one's life,
experiences, what one has gone through. Ang mga ginagíhan sang Aton
Ginúo. The events in the life of our Lord. (cf. ági; tabô, pinaniíran,
pinanilágan).

_ginagútum_, Hungry, feeling hunger, famine-stricken. Ginagútum akó. I
am hungry. (cf. gútum, gutúm).

_ginágyan_, See ginagíhan.

_gináhab_, Breath; stomach; life. (cf. ginháwa; solóksolók; kabúhì;
gáhab).

_ginaka-_, A verbal prefix denoting the present passive of intransitive
verbs, e.g. ginakalipáyan ko iní. I am glad of it. I enjoy this.

_ginakatuháyan_, Difference, variation, dissimilarity, unlikeness,
distinction. Ang ginakatuháyan sináng duhá ka butáng amó ----. The
difference of these two things is ----. (cf. túhay; kalaínlaínan).

_ginamús_, Pickles, especially pickled fish. (cf. gamús, lílang,
patís).

_gínang_, Lady, Madam, Mrs., wife. (cf. ginúo--Mr.; gíning--Miss).

_ginát-an_, Containing--, mixed with--, the juice of coconut meat;
a dish prepared from rice and mixed with the juice of coconut
meat. (cf. gatâ).

_ginatús_, By the hundred, hundreds, hecatomb. (cf. gatús).

_ginatuyó_, Sleepy, drowsy. Ginatuyó siá. He is sleepy. (cf. tuyó).

_ginaúhaw_, Thirsty. Ginaúhaw silá. They are thirsty. (cf. úhaw, uháw).

_ginaúng_, To build castles in the air. See gaúng.

_ginawî_, To behave oneself, deport oneself. Nagaginawî siá sing
maáyo--or--maáyo ang íya nga pagginawî. He is behaving himself
well, (his behaviour, customs, manners, demeanour, habits are
good. (cf. gáwì).

_gindút-an_, Place of contact, union, meeting, junction, juncture;
the horizon. (cf. doót).

_gíngaw_, A fish of the size of a "tulíngan".

_gingáw-gingáw_, To frolic, play, sport, disport, spend one's leisure
in play. (cf. hámpang, sipál, hinúgyaw).

_gíngging_, A darling (female). (cf. akáy, índay, néna, néning, bábay).

_gínggon_, A kind of cotton cloth chiefly used for making trousers;
gingham.

_gíngham_, See gínggon.

_gíngì_, Blade, lamina, leaf (of plants, especially of herbs and
grasses).

_gingikánan_, Origin, beginning, source, start,
commencement. (cf. gíkan).

_ginharían_, Kingdom, realm, domain. (cf. hárì).

_ginháwa, ginháwà_, Breath, life, respiration, inhalation and
exhalation of air; feeling, sensation, consciousness; to breathe,
respire. Nabúgtò ang íya ginháwa. The thread of his life snapped
(i.e. he died). Nagalaút ang íya ginháwa. He is feeling out of
sorts. Nawádan siá sing ginháwa. He lost consciousness. Mabúdlay
ang íya pagginháwa, kay ginapung-után siá. It is difficult for him
to breathe, because his nostrils are stuffed up. Daw sa dílì akó
makaginháwa dirí. I can scarcely breathe here.

_ginhawaán_, Breathing system, organs of breathing; breath, air.

_ginháw-an_, See ginhawaán. (cf. ginháwa).

_ginikánan_, Parent, parents. (cf. gíkan; gingikánan).

_ginikanánhon_, Parental. (cf. ginikánan).

_gíning_, Young lady, maid, maiden, girl, lass, single woman,
Miss. (cf. gínang, ginúo).

_ginka-_, A verbal prefix denoting the perfect passive of intransitive
verbs. See ginaka-, the corresponding prefix for the present.

_ginkamunóan_. Start, beginning, commencement, origin, source; initial.


_ginkamunoánan_, See ginkamunóan. (cf. púnò, pamúnò, kamunóan).

_ginóo_, Lord, master, boss; gentleman, Mr. (cf. gínang, gíning).

_gín-ot_, Sultriness, closeness, stuffiness (of heat and air); to
be or become close, sultry, etc. Naggín-ot karón ang ádlaw. The day
has turned sultry. Nagin-otán kamí dídto sa punsyón, kay gutúk. We
were in a close atmosphere there at the social gathering, because
it was too crowded. Kon mamiésta ka sa bánwa pagagin-otán gid ikáw,
kay madámò nga mga táo ang magatámbong sa mísa. If you assist at the
Feast in the town you will certainly feel the close heat, as many
people will go to hear Mass. Sa búlan sa Máyo magagín-ot gid ang
tiémpo. In the month of May it certainly will be very hot. (cf. bóhot).

_ginsákpan_, See ginsakúpan.

_ginsakúpan_, Subjects, dependents, subordinates; members of a society
or confraternity, etc. (cf. sákup, sinákup).

_ginsáng-an_, Intersection, junction, cross-road, point or centre from
which branches radiate, as the branches of a tree from the main stem,
side roads from the main road, the tributaries of a river from the
principal stream or the like. (cf. sangá).

_ginsugúran_, (H) Beginning, start, commencement,
inception. (cf. súgud; ginkamunóan, gingikánan).

_gintaípan_, Horizon, everything in sight or under one's
observation. (cf. taíp, tuíp).

_gintotón-an_, Disciple, pupil, student, scholar. (cf. toón;
magtotóon--teacher).

_gintúng-an_, Centre, midst, middle, mid-point. (cf. tungâ).

_ginumón-gúmon_, Complication, confusion, disorder; complicated,
confused, disordered; to put in--, be in--, confusion or
disorder. (cf. gómon).

_ginúnting_, A kind of war-knife, large bolo. (cf. siántong, sandúkò,
binángon, íwà).

_ginútlan_, Between, that is between or wedged in. Sa ginútlan sang
baláy kag sang digamohán. Between the house and kitchen. (cf. ulút).

_gíob_, Hole, hollow, cavity. Gióbi giábi. (cf. gíab).

_giohánan_, The sky, heavens, firmament, welkin; atmosphere.

_gión_, (Sp. guion) Ensign, standard, gonfalon, gonfanon, but
especially the ensign carried before the Blessed Sacrament.

_gióng-gíong_, Stir, motion, movement, sound. (cf. litóklitók,
lihóklihók, kinuyúngkúyung, kuyúngkúyung).

_gíos_, To move, stir, jostle, brush against, show life by motion. Indì
kamó maggíos. Don't move. (Don't jostle each other). Indì mo akó
paggiósan. Don't jostle (or brush against) me. Sang nagasulát akó
giniósan akó níya kag nagdáplang ang ákon plúma. Whilst I was writing
he brushed against me and my pen spluttered. (cf. íwos, híos, íyos,
húlag).

_giós-gíos_, Dim. and Freq. of gíos.

_gípak_, To break by bending or twisting, cause to give way under a
superimposed weight, fracture. Sín-o ukón anó ang naggípak sang ímo
páa? Who or what broke your leg? Nahúlug siá sa karabáw kag nagípak ang
íya bútkon. He fell off the buffalo and broke his arm. Nagipákan siá
sang íya batíis. He had his leg broken. Gingípak sang trak ang soléras
sang táytay. The truck broke the cross-beams of the bridge. (cf. bálì).

_gipák_, Broken, fractured; a fracture, break. Gipák ang íya páa. His
leg is fractured. Iníng táo índì makapanrabáho, kay gipák siá. This
man cannot work, for he has a broken arm (or leg). Andam ka dirâ sa
pántaw, kay may báhin nga gipák, básì mahúlug ka. Be careful there
on the kitchen balcony, for part of it is broken and you may fall
through. (cf. balî).

_gíphang_, A kind of rice-bread or rice-biscuit, as often sold by
Chinese merchants. The name seems to indicate its Chinese origin.

_gípì_, A small roll or bundle of hemp-fibre made ready for weaving.

_gípik_, Crease, bend, fold; to crease, etc. Gipíka-gimíka. See gímik.

_girámon_, At peace with oneself, being at one's ease, having a quiet
heart or mind, enjoying tranquillity. Indì siá girámon túbtub nga
magáyo ang íya masakít nga bátà. She will have no peace of mind till
her sick baby recovers. (cf. dalamúnon, darámnon, ogkánan).

_gíray_, To tear or cut in strips, make stripes or streaks of. Giráya
ang ísdà, kárne, etc. Cut the fish, meat, etc. in strips. Giráyi akó
sing isá ka giráy nga báboy. Cut me off a strip of pork. (cf. kirís).

_giráy_, A strip, stripe, streak, an oblong piece. Pilá ka giráy
nga báboy ang dalá mo? How many strips of pork have you brought with
you? (cf. kirís).

_gírhom_, See gálhom.

_girî_, A crack, cleft, fissure, rift, split; to crack, split,
cleave, rive, etc. Naggirî ang glóbo sang kínke. The lamp-globe
cracked. Naggirî ang íya delárgo sa túhud. His trousers have split
at the knee. (cf. litík, balanâ).

_girí-girí_, Not prominent, of the common run, small, obscure,
uninfluential, ordinary. Girígirí nga táo. A common man, an ordinary
citizen. "The man in the street". Ang mga girígirí sang bánwa. The
common townsfolk, the ordinary inhabitants of a town, the obscure
members of a community (as distinct from the more prominent
members). (cf. witíwití).

_girigíta_, (Probably a corruption of the Sp negrita). A term
of contempt for women: a worthless, despicable or dissolute
woman. (cf. hirigíta).

_girigityáw, girigítyaw_, A kind of bird whose name resembles
its cry; to flirt, attract notice, show off, try to make a good
impression on others or to impose on them. Tulúka yanáng mga dalága
nga nagagirigityáw. Look at those coquettish girls.

_girím_, To stick out, hang out, project, protrude, stand out a little
so as to become visible to the eye. Nagagirím ang pányo sa íya nga
bólsa. The handkerchief is sticking out--, hanging out--, a little from
his pocket. Pagirimá sing diótay ang púnyo sang ímo kamisadéntro. Let
the cuff of your shirt show a little. (cf. gitíb, gimáw).

_girnáldas_, (Sp. guirnaldas) Garland, wreath, festoon.

_gírok_, (B) Chaff, paleae, fine prickles on grass, etc. See gílok.

_girúm_, Dark, cloudy, lowering, murky, gloomy, overcast; obscure, to
be or become dark, etc. Nagagirúm ang kalibútan. The sky is becoming
dark (or cloudy). Naggirúm ang íya nawóng sa lakás nga patíal. His
face has become swarthy from much exposure to the sun. Girúm ang
pánit sang íya bútkon. The skin of his arm is browned. (cf. ilúm,
itúm, góom, gúnum).

_gisá_, (Sp. guisar) To bake, to baste, fry or prepare with any kind
of fat. Gisahá ang manók sa mantékà. Fry the chicken in lard. Gisahí
akó sing isá ka búgsò nga kárne. Prepare me a piece of meat. Igisá
akó ánay siníng ísdà. Kindly fry this fish for me. (cf. príto).

_gisádo_, (Sp. guisado) Ragout, fricassee, anything prepared or cooked
by the use of fat, lard, butter or olive-oil.

_gisáng_, Rough, sharp, raspy, rasping, not smooth, painful or harsh
to touch, ragged. (cf. gísrang).

_gisántes_, (Sp. guisantes) Sweet-peas.

_gisáw_, A fish much esteemed for food; a young or small
balának-fish. (cf. gusáw).

_gísì_, To tear, slit, split, rend, break asunder, make a hole
in. Gisía láng iníng sulát. Tear up this letter. Sín-o ang naggísì
siníng papél? Who tore this paper? Nagisían ang púsud sang íya nga
báyò. The corner of his jacket was torn. Ang mga bátà batíd gid maggísì
sang panápton. Boys have a genius for tearing clothes. Iníng hénero
matíngting; índì magísì (magkagísì) sa madalî. This kind of cloth is
strong; it will not tear soon. (cf. gíhay).

_gisî_, Torn, rent, slit, split, ragged, full of holes; rent,
fissure, split, slit, tear, rift, hole (in garments, etc.). Gisî
(nagísì, nagkagísì) ang báyo mo. Your jacket--is torn,--has a hole
in it. (cf. gísì).

_gísing_, The temple (of the head). (cf. agigísing, dungándúngan).

_gisión_, Torn, rent, ragged. Ientregár mo ang gisión mo nga delárgo
sa manugtábas agúd íya kaayóhon. Hand your torn trousers over to the
tailor for mending. (cf. gisî).

_gíska_, To be or become harsh, severe, cutting, sharp, biting,
incisive, trenchant (of speech). (cf. ísug, padás, parás).

_gísok_, (Sp. guijo) A kind of tree and its valuable timber.


_gísrang_, Harsh, ragged, rough to the touch. See gisáng id.

_gitára_, (Sp. guitarra) Guitar. (cf. rabél, sísta).

_gití_, See ditíl.

_gitíb_, To stick out, hang out, protrude or project a little,
so as to become visible. Nagagitíb ang nágwas (enágwas) níya. Her
petticoat shows a little below her skirt. Pagitibá lang ang pabílo,
índì mo pagpaulbohón gid. Let the lamp-wick just project a little,
but do not turn it up too high. Pagitibí akó sang ímo baráha. Let me
see a little of your card. Gumitíb na ang ádlaw sa sidlangán. The sun
is already visible in the east, has risen a little above the horizon
in the east. (cf. girím, murá, gimáw).

_gitíng_, A small mouse, young mouse. (cf. atutúyò).

_gitíng-gíting_, Dim. of gitíng. Also: the first sprout or shoot of
cereals and grasses. (cf. ógbos).

_gítlon_, Used mostly in the form panagítlon--to swallow with some
effort, try hard to swallow. Magpanagítlon or managítlon ka siníng
bulúng. Make an effort to swallow this medicine. Panagitloná lang ang
láway mo, índì mo pagidúplà sa salúg. Swallow your saliva, don't spit
it out on the floor. (cf. tulún).

_gitô_, To break, disjoint, put out of joint, dislocate, disunite,
by twisting a finger or the like. Nagitô ang íya túdlò. His finger
was broken at the joint. Gingitô níya ang túdlò ni Fuláno. He broke
(by twisting) the finger of N.N. Gingitoán níya si Fuláno sing isá
ka túdlò. He twisted and broke one of N.N.'s fingers. He dislocated
one of N.N.'s fingers. (cf. líw-as, súlpò).

_gíwà_, To separate or cut off part of something, take off a
piece. Giwáa lang ang isá ka punâ sang ímo dútà kag ibalígyà mo,
kon walâ ka sing kwárta. Stake off a piece of your land and sell it,
if you have no money. (cf. gíkas).

_giwâ_, A piece, bit, portion, part, parcel, share,
division. (cf. gíwà; gikás, gikasón, báhin, gulút, búgsò, kusî, punâ).

_giwá-os, giwáos_, Dearth, famine, misery, trouble, hard lines,
straitened circumstances. (cf. hiwáos).

_gíway_, To protrude, stick out, hang out. Nagagíway ang mga tinái
sang binunô. The intestines of the man that has been stabbed are
hanging out. (cf. diwál, gáway, búgway).

_giyán_, A liking for, inclination, desire, craving. (cf. gián).

_gládì_, (B) A kind of dágmay that is usually fed to
pigs. (cf. kaládì).

_glóbo_, (Sp. globo) Globe, ball, sphere, orb; globular
lamp-shade. (cf. manipólon, matipúlon).

_glória_, (Sp. gloria) Glory, honour, fame, renown, blessedness,
beatitude, bliss; heaven. (cf. himáyà; purúng; kabulahánan; lángit).

_glorióso_, (Sp. glorioso) Glorious, excellent, blessed,
blissful. (cf. mahimayáon).

_gobernadór_, (Sp. gobernador) Governor. Gobernadór
Probinsyál. Provincial Governor. (cf. pangúlo-puód).

_gobiérno_, (Sp. gobierno) Government, management, direction of
affairs, sway, control; to govern, direct, hold sway. Sín-o ang
nagagobiérno sang baláy mo, kay walâ ikáw dídto? Who manages your
household at present, as you are not there? Ginagobiernohán silá sing
maáyo. They are well ruled, (under good government or management),
(cf. pangulohán, dulumaláhan, dumála, pangúlo; gahúm, kagamhánan).

_gódgod_, To go in--search of,--quest of, search for, look for, pursue,
be on the trail of, follow up. Godgorá (--odá) ang bátà. Search for the
boy. Igódgod akó ánay sang ákon báboy nga nakagwâ sa tángkal. Kindly go
after my pig that has escaped from the sty. Gingódgod--or--ginódgod siá
sang íya nga amáy, kay walâ siá magpaúlì sa táknà sang panyága. His
father was looking for him, because he did not come home at
dinner-time. Ang mga buyóng ginagódgod sang mga soldádo sa búkid. The
robbers are being pursued by the soldiers in the mountains. Ang idô
nagagódgod sang talunón sa talúnan. The dog is on the trail of the
wild pig in the jungle or forest. (cf. ábat, sághap, dúngas, hingabút).

_gógo, gógò_, A kind of tree and its bark. The latter is used like
"salangkógi" for cleaning the scalp and hair.

_gólgol_, To saw off, to cut by moving the cutting instrument
to and fro, like a saw. Golgolá ang líog sang manók. Cut off the
chicken's neck. Igólgol ako ánay sang líog sang gánsa, kay akó ákon
mahádluk maggólgol sinâ. Please cut off the goose's neck for me, for
I am afraid to do it. Gingolgolán siá sang manugbúlung sa páa. The
physician cut into his leg. Amó iní ang gingolgolán sang buyóng sang
líog sang makaloló-oy nga táo. This is the place where the brigand
cut the poor fellow's throat. (cf. golót, gorót).

_gólò_, (H) To thrust, poke, put, stick or introduce one's finger, arm
or anything fit for the purpose into a hole, crack, fissure, etc. Igólò
ang kamót mo sa búhò. Put your hand in the hole. Gingolóan níya sang
bastón ang haló sa búhò. He poked his stick against the iguana in the
hole. Golóa sang biníklan ang gwáb sang káhoy, kay daw may mán-og sa
sulúd. Poke the bamboo into the hollow of the tree, for it looks as if
there is a snake inside. Si Sánto Tomás buót maggólò sang íya túdlò sa
ági sang lánsang sa kamót sang Aton Ginúo. St. Thomas wished to put his
finger into the hole made by the nails in Our Lord's hands. (cf. górò).

_gólob_, (H) To cut, trim, crop, clip, dock, lop, shear (hair, grass,
a hedge or the like). Golóba sang gúnting ang bohók sang bátà, kay
nagagáway sa íya ágtang. Trim with a pair of scissors the child's hair,
for it hangs down over its forehead. Golóbi siá sang íya bohók. Clip
his hair. Igólob sa kógon iníng gúnting, kay nagalabáw sa balisbísan
sang atóp. Use this pair of shears to cut off the cogon-grass, because
it sticks out beyond the eaves of the roof. Maálam ka maggólob sang
íkog sang idô? Do you know how to dock a dog's tail? Pagolóbi ang
kabáyo sang íya bungáybúngay. Have the horse's mane cropped.

_golób_, (H) A fold, crease, especially one in the skin due to fatness.

_gologúgma_, Dim. of gúgma. A small or slight love-affair.

_golót_, (H) A cutlet, rasher, fillet, piece, slice, part cut off;
to slice, cut in pieces. Gótli akó sing tátlo ka golót nga kárne
sang báka. Cut me off three slices of beef. Gótla ang lúbid. Cut the
string. Igolót iníng kotsílyo sa báboy. Use this knife to carve the
pork with. Panggótla ang báka. Cut up the beef into slices. (cf. gorót,
gólgol).

_gólpe_, (Sp. golpe) Bang, whack, thwack, wallop, buffet, blow,
stroke, hit, knock, jolt, jog, jerk, shock; a sudden mishap, fit,
accident or action. Sing (Sa) gólpe. All at once, suddenly, all of a
sudden, unexpectedly, without preparation or premonition, with great
force or impetus. Ginakígan níya siá sing gólpe kag gintíklod. All
at once he got angry with him and pushed him aside. Napatáy siá sing
gólpe. He died suddenly, quite unexpectedly. Also verb: Gingólpe níya
ang pagdóksol sa kay Fuláno. He suddenly or impetuously attacked
N.N. Golpehá ang paglámpus sang wásay sa káhoy. Swing the axe
with all your might against the tree. Inâ nga bátà nagagílagíl,
kay may gólpe. This boy was stunted in growth on account of an
accident. (cf. hinálì, hinalî; lámpus, bálbal; samád).

_golpeáda, golpiyáda_, (Sp. golpeadura) Blow, beating, percussion,
knock, stroke; all at once, in one go, etc. See gólpe. Ginkáon níya
ang isá ka kám-aw nga linúgaw sing (sa) isá gid lang ka golpeáda. He
ate a large bowlful of rice-porridge in one go. (cf. ándo).

_góma_, (Sp. goma) Celluloid. Ang ákon husáy góma. My comb is made
of celluloid.

_góma_, (Sp. goma) Rubber; rubber-tyre. Naglupúk ang góma. The tyre
burst, blew out.

_gómi_, (B) A small, slender piece of wood or bamboo, sliver, splint,
splinter.

_gómok_, To squeeze or compress so as to crush or break. Nagómok
ang ítlog. The egg was crushed. Gomóki akó siníng bató. Crush this
stone for me. Igómok mo akó ánay siníng bató nga bukáy, kay ákon
pagabókbokón kag ihínis sa ngípon ko. Please crush this white stone
for me, for I am going to powder it and clean my teeth with it. Indì
mo paggomókon ang olokabá sang alimángo. Don't break the sea-crab's
shell. (cf. dúgmok, lumâ, pusâ, rúbsak, rúpsak).

_gomón_. Entangled, disordered, complicated, dishevelled, rumpled,
disarranged, jumbled, topsy-turvy, all mixed up.

_gómon_, To entangle, disarray, dishevel, ravel, tousle, rumple,
upset, put in disorder, become entangled or complicated. Naggómon
ang bunáng. The yarn became entangled. Indì mo paggomónon ang íya
tinágak nga lánot sa tagakán. Don't upset the hemp she arranged nicely
in the basket. Gingómon níya ang hílo nga sóklà. She entangled the
silk. Gomóni ang íya lánot. Tangle some of her hemp. Gomóna ang íya
lánot. Tangle her hemp. Nagagómon na gid ang íla pagsinalayó. Their
community life is quite upset. Naggómon ang íya úlo. His brain
reeled. His thoughts were thrown into confusion. (cf. búkag, bukágkag,
sarabusáb, tingkarág).

_gónggong_, Fool, ass, idiot, dolt, crazy fellow. (cf. búang, lóko,
kólò, tampuháw, búngaw, pákok, etc.).

_góod_, Hollow, hole, cavity. Sa góod sang káhoy nakítà ko ang
mga ítlog sang píspis. In the hollow of the tree I saw the bird's
eggs. (cf. gwáb, gíab).

_góom_, To be or become cloudy, overcast, lowering, gloomy,
overspread with clouds, dark. Nagagóom na ang kalibútan. It is getting
dark. (cf. gúnum, girúm).

_goóm-góom_, Dim. and Freq. of góom.

_goóp_, The door or lid at the bottom of a certain kind of
fish-trap. (cf. gaúp id.).

_góos_, String, band, rope, cord, thong, line, guy; to tie, bind,
fasten with a string, lash, string, rope. Igóos mo iníng kalát
sa tuód. Tie this rope to the stump. Goósi sing písì ang gákut
nga humáy. Bind the bundle of rice. Goósa ang kalát. Fasten the
rope. Igóos akó sang pinutús. Kindly tie up the parcel for me with
string. Makalámbut ka balá sa paggóos sang pugáwa sa úkbong sang
búgsok? Can you reach high enough to bind the cross-piece to the top
of the paling? Naglóslos ang góos. The rope got loose. (cf. higót).

_góot_, To get or sink into a hole, ditch or the like, to be ditched,
to descend, go down. Ang alíling sang íla trak nakagó-ot sa embornál
kag mabúdlay kaáyo ang pagpahalín. The wheel of their truck got
into the ditch and it was difficult to get it out. Andam ka, índì
mo pagigóot sa búhò ang káro. Take care not to drive the cart into
the hole.

_goót-góot_, Dim. and Freq. of góot. Ang áwto naggoótgóot sa mga
nadalúman sang dálan. Now and again the automobile had to pass through
deep holes on the road.

_góra_, (Sp. gorra) Cap, bonnet.

_górdo_, (Sp. gordo) Fat, stout, plump, corpulent, obese,
fleshy. (cf. matámbok, matábnol, mabahúl, baragóok, matibúnog).

_górdo_, To take or use something that belongs to another with the
intention of giving it back. (Only used amongst friends). Gingórdo lang
níya ang ákon páypay. She merely borrowed my fan. Indì mo paggordohón
ang íya sang ibán. Don't take what belongs to others. (cf. ángkon,
kúhà, buúl; karipón, lámang, lábni; gulámni, kulámi).

_gorgoríta_, (Sp. gorgorita) A water-cooler made of earthenware;
a narrow-mouthed jar or pot for cooling water.

_góro_, (Sp. gorro) Cap, coif. (cf. góra).

_górò_, (B) To thrust or stick in, etc. See gólò.

_górò_, To hiss, bubble, effervesce, fizz, fizzle, sing, froth,
foam, gurgle as rice when nearly boiled, a soda-water bottle on being
opened or the like. Nagagórò na ang tiníg-ang. The boiling rice is
hissing (i.e. is nearly cooked). Magagórò ang serbésa kon búksan ang
botílya. Beer fizzes when the bottle is opened. (cf. bórò, sórò).

_gorogotó_, (B) To distrust, mistrust, be skeptical as to, question,
doubt the fairness or justice of. Nagagorogotó ang ákon buót sang
pagbáhin níla sang maís. I suspect unfairness in their division of
the corn. (cf. sabít).

_gorogotóng_, A partially developed egg in a hen's ovary.

_goróng-górong_, A kind of plant with medicinal properties.

_gorót_, (B) To cut, etc. See golót. Gótron--gótlon.

_góso_, (Sp. gozo) Joy, pleasure, glee, merriment, mirth, gladness,
gaiety, cheerfulness; verses sung in honour of a Saint. (cf. himáyà,
kalípay).

_gósok_, Rib.

_góta_, Yoke; the rope or traces attaching a harrow, plough, etc. to
a draught-animal. (cf. síngkaw; gíkos).

_góta_, (Sp. góta) A drop of liquid. Gótas
amárgas. Bitters. (cf. tolô).

_gotás_, Cracked, split, chapped; to crack, split, form fissures,
chap. Naggotás ang pánit sang íya tiíl tungúd sang lakás níya nga
pagtánum. The skin of his foot became full of cracks on account of
his working too long at planting rice. Nagotasán ang íya kamót sa támà
nga paglabá. Too much clothes-washing chapped her hands. (cf. litík,
bángag).

_gótgot_, To get hot, exasperated, excited, vexed, annoyed, cross,
provoked, aggravated, irritated, enraged, angered. Nagagótgot ang buót
ko siníng táo. I am vexed (exasperated) with this man. Gingotgotán
akó níya. He was very angry with me. (cf. aligótgot, ákig, sílag,
ugút, pangínit, sabít).

_gótgot_, To notch, nick, mark, whittle, incise, grave, groove, flute,
blaze (a tree), snick. Gotgotí ang lápis mo kag hígtan sing lúbid agúd
índì madúlà. Cut a notch in your pencil and tie a string to it, so that
it may not be lost. Igótgot iníng kotsílyo sa bastón mo. Whittle your
stick with this knife. Igótgot akó ánay siníng pasók. Please mark this
bamboo tuba-vessel for me. (cf. márka, tándà, bádlit, kúdlit, kúris).

_grábas_, (Sp. grava) Gravel. (cf. dakáldákal).

_grábe_, (Sp. grave) Grave, serious, dangerous, mortal, fatal, deadly,
critical. Ang masakít grábe na. The sick person--is now seriously
ill,--is in danger of death. (cf. sugúng, mabúg-at, tagumatáyon).

_grádo_, (Sp. grado) Grade, class, degree, quality, attainment,
category. (cf. bágay; túig, halíngtang).

_gráma_, (Sp. gramo) Gramme, gram.

_gráma_, (Sp. grama) A medicinal plant: grama-grass, dog's grass,
couch grass, creeping cynodon.

_gramátika_, (Sp. gramatica) Grammar. (cf. lantipúlong).

_grána_, (Sp. grana) Scarlet cloth; scarlet colour.

_granáda_, (Sp. granada) Pomegranate; hand-grenade, shell.

_granátsa_, To waste, etc. See garanátsa.

_gráno_, (Sp. grano) Pustule, pimple; tumour, boil, ulcer, carbuncle.

_grapinyéra_, (Sp. garapiñera) Ice-box, refrigerator, ice-cream
freezer, wine-cooler.

_grása_, (Sp. grasa) Fat, suet, grease, dripping, lard. (cf. támbok).

_grásya_, (Sp. gracia) Grace, divine assistance;
gracefulness. (cf. bugáy; kagayón, kaányag).

_grásyas_, (Sp. gracias) Thanks. Thank you. (cf. salámat).

_gratipikasyón_, (Sp. gratificación) Gratuity, fee, tip, reward,
remuneration, gift. (cf. hátag, dúlut, regálo).

_grátis_, (Sp. gratis) Free, gratis, gratuitous, for nothing, without
reciprocity or equivalent return. (cf. sa walâ sing báyad).

_gréka_, (Sp. greca) Fret, Grecian fret; ornamental trimmings on
garments, etc.

_grípo_, (Sp. grifo) Faucet, cock, tap, spigot.

_gruésa_, (Sp. gruesa) A gross. (Napúlò kag duhá ka doséna).

_gruméte_, (Sp. grumete) Sailor, mariner, sea-faring man, blue-jacket,
tar, Jack-tar, seaman. (cf. sakayánon).

_guâ_, See gwâ.

_gúal, gú-al_, To shout, talk loudly, vociferate, be noisy (of
voices). Indì kamó maggúal--or--magginúal. Don't talk so loudly. Don't
shout so much. (cf. gául, sínggit, turayáw, gáuy).

_guál-gúal_, Dim. and Freq. of gúal.

_gubâ_, To destroy, demolish, undo, pull--, break--, to pieces, pull
down, break up, knock down, reduce to ruins, raze to the ground, tear
down. Gúb-a (gubaá) lang ang dáan mo nga baláy. Pull down your old
house. Gúb-i akó siníng gabúk nga tángkal. Break up for me this rotten
pigsty. Nagúb-an siá sang kisamí kag napílas ang íya páa. The ceiling
collapsed and he was wounded in the leg. Igubâ akó siníng dáan nga
padér. Please knock down this old wall for me. (cf. búngkag, ránggà).

_gubán_, Together, in common, general. Gubán silá nagabút dirí. They
came here together.

_gubán_, Decision. (cf. památbat).

_gúbat_, War, revolution, upheaval, great disturbance; to fight,
wage war, storm, fall upon, assault, attack, assail, rush or advance
upon, pitch into, dash at. Gubáta siá. Attack him. Gingúbat níla ang
bánwa. They took the town by storm. (cf. gúbut).

_gubát_, Old, worn-out, useless, ruined, in ruins, reduced to
ruins. Gubát nga báyò. An old, worn-out jacket. (cf. gúbat; gastádo,
lumâ, ulasón, gunâ).

_gúbot_, To be uneasy, restless, anxious, full of anxiety,
perturbed. Used chiefly in the form kinagúbot. Nagakinagúbot ang mga
táo, kay may súnug. The people are uneasy (walking about anxiously
or in fear), because there is a conflagration. May kinagúbot sa
bánwa. There is some restlessness (uneasy feeling) in the town. (gúbut
id.).

_gúbuk, gubúk_, To attend, go to, gather, come together, assemble,
assist, be at, congregate, collect, be present at. (cf. dúguk,
támbong, típon).

_gúbut_, Uneasiness, perturbation; strife, revolution, war; to
make trouble, cause an uproar, go to war, etc. (cf. kagúbut, gúbot,
kinagúbut).

_gúgma_, Love, affection, attachment, fondness, tenderness, charity,
regard, consideration, infatuation. (cf. higúgma, hagúgma, kahagúgma).

_gúhab_, To break in or through, make an opening or hole through
an outer covering, wrapping or partition, so as to get at what is
behind, to pierce, perforate. Guhábi ang malíndog, díngding, ganháan,
etc. Make a hole in the rice-container, the partition-wall, the door,
etc. Sín-o ang naggúhab sang kurúng sang manók? Who broke open the
poultry-pen? Ginuhában sang manugbúlung ang búsung ni Fuláno, kay íya
ginusísà ang samád sa sulúd kag kuháon. The doctor cut open N.N.'s
stomach to find out what was the cause of the trouble and removed
it. (cf. gíhab).

_guhád_, To cut off near the ground or roots, cut off close so as
to leave the shortest possible stump. Guhará (--adá) ang kawáyan
nga pulúnton. Cut down close to the ground the bamboos for building
fish-corrals. Guharí akó siníng mga púsug, kay ibúgsok ko sa kodál. Cut
down these bamboo-stumps for me and cut them level with the ground,
for I am going to use them as fence-stakes. (cf. pasóop).

_gúhak_, To burst open, split, crack. Nagúhak ang sáko kag nakagwá
ang kóprak. The sack burst open and the copra fell out. (cf. búsdik).

_guhák_, Burst open, cracked, split, rent, ripped, riven,
rift. (cf. gúhak).

_gukóm_, A handful, what can be grasped between the thumb and fingers,
applied to objects the ends of which protrude from the hand; to grasp,
grip, clench, clutch within thumb and fingers. Gukomá ang bastón,
lipák, kamóti, etc. Grasp the walking stick, the piece of split bamboo,
the sweet potato, etc. Gukomí akó sing duhá ka gukóm nga bunáng. Take
up two handfuls of yarn for me. (cf. gakáp, gamól, gakóm, gakám).

_gúkop_, The calyx or calycle, cup-shaped sepals on the peduncle of
some plants. Ang talóng my gúkop. The eggplant has a calycle.

_gúlà_, Noise, racket, boisterousness, commotion, alarm, tumult; to
be noisy, etc. Indì kamó maggúlà or magginúlà. Don't make such a noise
or disturbance. Nagaginúlà kamó nga daw pánkà. You are making a noise
like a lot of frogs. (cf. gául, gúal, gáhud, gánsal, galúng, gamú).

_gulâ-gúlà_, Dim. and Freq. of gúlà--noise, etc.

_guláman_, An edible sea-grass. Láktan mo sing páhò ang guláman,
kay manámit. Mix the "guláman" with mangoes, for it tastes
well. (cf. aguláman).

_gulámni_, To take without much ado, seize, appropriate. (cf. lábni,
kulámi, lámang).

_guláng_, (B) To shout, scream, yell. Gulangí siá. Shout to
him. (cf. gául, gúal, gáuy, turayáw, sínggit, pagaás, pugaás).

_gúlang_, (H) Old, ripe, ready to be plucked or harvested; to be or
become old or ripe, ripen, mature. Gúlang na ang humáy mo; aníha
(ánya) na lang. Your rice is ripe; harvest or reap it. Naggúlang
na iníng mga ságing, búsà túb-on mo kag ibalígyà. These bananas are
ripe now; therefore cut them and sell them. Indì mo ánay pagpopóon
iníng mga páhò, kóndì pagulánga gid. Don't pick these mangoes yet,
but let them ripen well. Pagulángi akó sing tátlo ka bílog nga talóng,
kay binhión ko. Let three egg-plants mature for me, as I wish to use
them for seed. (cf. lútò; tigúlang).

_guláng-gúlang, guláng-guláng_, (H) Dim. of the foregoing
gúlang. Nearly ripe, etc. Nasamálang ko ang isá ka táo nga
gulángguláng. I met an elderly man, a person neither old nor young,
a middle-aged man.

_guliláy_, Part, piece, share, portion, division, cut, cutlet,
strip. (cf. giráy, gikás, báhin, búgsò, gulút, kusáhos).

_gulínat_, (H) To twist, wring. Gulináta ang íya dalúnggan. Twist
his ears. Igulínat akó sang dulúnggan siníng sutíl nga bátà. Please
twist the ears of this naughty boy. (cf. gulípat, gusípad, kusípad).

_gúlò, gúlob, gulób, gulót_, (H) See gólò, gólob, golób, golót.

_gulumúron_, (H) A grumble, growl, ill-natured complaint, muttering;
to grumble, growl, murmur, mutter with discontent, make ill-natured
complaints, (cf. gúmud, kúmud, kulumúron, ngúrab).

_gúlung_, (B) To trim--, cut off a little of--, the hair. (cf. gúnting,
bulúg, alót).

_gúlung_, A wheel; any circular frame or disk. (cf. alíling, aríring,
ruéda).

_gúlus_, (H) Rash, eruption, cluster of small pustules or pimples; to
form pustules, etc.; to begin to bear fruit, said especially of cereals
that grow their grains in clusters. May gúlus siá sang arikís. He is
covered with pustules of (the skin disease called) arikís. Nagagúlus na
sa íya láwas ang bungang-ínit. Prickly heat is breaking out in patches
on his skin. Nagagúlus na ang maís ko sa kaingín. The corn on my land
that I cleared by burning is beginning to form cobs. (cf. gúrus).

_gulús-gúlus_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of gúlus. Also: Impetigo, an itchy
skin disease with eruptions of pustules in clusters.

_gulút_, To cut, slice, etc. See golót.

_gulut-ánon_, (H) Grudge, antipathy, resentment, animosity, pent-up
hatred, ill will due to envy or a sense of injury. (cf. gurut-ánon,
gutô, agutílò, aligótgot, kasíb-ot, dumút).

_guluwáan_, (H) Exit, outlet, escape, way of departure, passage out
of a place, egress. (cf. gwâ).

_guluyúron_, (H) Worthy of--, fit or suitable for--,
being--drawn,--dragged,--pulled,--hauled,--transported; what is to
be drawn, etc. (cf. gúyud).

_gúmà_, To pound (rice) for the first time, start the rather lengthy
process of pounding rice by hand. Gumáa ang humáy. Pound the rice
(for the first time). Gumái akó sing isá ka lusóng nga humáy, kay ákon
dasdasán. Pound for me a mortar-full of rice, as I am going to pound
it the second time. Igúmà akó ánay siníng humáy sa lusóng. Kindly
start pounding the rice in the mortar. (cf. bayó, dásdas, totó,
líg-as, ríg-as).

_gumáa_, A kind of fish that is often cut, salted and dried in the sun.

_gumaláhum_, Powerful, holding sway, mighty, influential,
authoritative; authorities, those in power. (cf. gahúm, gamhánan,
makagagáhum).

_gumát_, Resentment, indignation, dudgeon, strong displeasure or
aversion, a deep sense of injury, grudge. (cf. aligótgot, gunát,
gulut-ánon).

_gúmi_, (B) Splinter, etc. See gómi.

_gúmud_, (B) To murmur, grumble, complain, be discontented. (cf. kúmud,
agúmud, ngúrab, gulumúron, kulumúron).

_gúna_, Scythe; sickle. (cf. galáb, gálab).

_gunâ_, Wasted, worn out, spent, useless. (cf. gubát).

_gunát_, Indignation, resentment, dudgeon. See gumát. (cf. gulut-ánon,
aligótgot, kasíb-ot).

_gúnaw_, To go oneself or personally on an errand, go or come
in person, dare, risk, venture (a voyage, etc.). A, ikáw gid ang
nagagúnaw, haw! Why, are you actually going (coming) yourself! Naggúnaw
ikáw? Ngáa man nga walâ ka magsógò sa ibán? Did you go yourself? Why
didn't you send somebody else? (cf. kúdaw, dúkaw, súdsud).

_gúnda_, To shake, jolt, jerk, bump. (cf. úndag).

_gúnda_, To deteriorate, wane, decline, worsen, fall off. Nagagúnda
na ang láwas níya, kay tigúlang na man siá. His bodily strength is
declining now, for he is getting old. Naggúnda ang mga palatikángan
tungúd sang kaíwat sang pílak. Business has declined on account of the
scarcity of money. Kon mínus ang patubás, magagúnda ang komérsyo. If
the harvest is bad, commerce will fall off.


_gúng-an_, Prominent, well known; expert, an old hand, well practised,
experienced, etc. Gúng-an nga pánday, manuglúto, manunúon, etc. An
expert carpenter, cook, teacher, etc. (cf. anád, batíd, gákud,
kadalagkuán, lutáw, bántug).

_gúnghaw_, Insipidness, vapidity, rottenness; to taste and smell bad,
decay, go bad, rot, get stale, to be on the turn, vapid or insipid,
be tainted, contaminated, spoilt, (particularly of fish). Naggúnghaw
ang pinákas nga gumáa. The salt "gumáa" has become stale. Amligán
mo ang pagbódo, kay kon dílì magagúnhaw ang ísdà. Be careful
in salting fish, for otherwise it will spoil or go bad. Indì mo
pagpagunghawón ang bantaláan. Don't allow the bantaláan-fish to lose
its flavour. (cf. gúnhaw id.; hurô, lúb-ok).

_gún-gun_, (B) To yield, cede, give way, move, stir, budge. Iníng
bató índì magúngun sa kabúg-at. This stone will not budge, it is
so heavy. Indì ka na makadókdok, kay índì magúngun sa kagutúk ang
mga kataóhan sa sulúd sang simbáhan. You cannot squeeze in, for the
people in church are so crowded that there is no room left.

_gúnhat_, (B) Relapse; to relapse, to have--, suffer--, a relapse, fall
sick again. Nagúnhat siá, kay nagpangabúdlay siá sing lakás nga bág-o
pa lang nagáyo sa balatían. He had a relapse, for he worked too hard,
although he had only just recovered from an illness. (cf. búghat).

_gúnhaw_, To rot, spoil, etc. See gúnghaw id.

_gúnit_. To break hemp, scutch, to separate fibre by beating,
tear in strips, strip. Guníta ang burí, magí, lánot, etc. Strip
(or break) the buri-stalk, the agave (maguey), the hemp, etc. Guníti
akó sing tátlo ka pakláng nga burí, kay idápat ko sa tambárà. Tear
three buri-stalks in strips for me, as I am going to use them for
the scaffolding. Igúnit akó ánay sing isá ka pakláng. Please tear a
stalk into fibres for me. (cf. láknit, lúknit).

_gunít_, Stripped, scutched, torn, broken up (of hemp, etc.); old,
torn, useless (of clothes, etc.).

_gunô_, A small fish resembling the "balinô". Ang gunô, balinô, kag
tabagák ginaasinán sing masúnsun kag ibulád. The gunô--, balinô--,
and tabagák-fish are often salted and sun-dried.

_gúnting_, Shears, a pair of scissors; to shear, clip, cut with a
pair of scissors. Guntingá ang ákon bohók. Cut my hair with a pair
of scissors. Guntingí ang ákon bohók. Trim my hair with a pair of
scissors. Igúnting akó ánay sang búlbul siníng karnéro. Kindly clip the
wool from this sheep. Kindly shear--, fleece--, this sheep. Guntingí
si tótò. Cut the little boy's hair. Mapagúnting akó sa barbéro. I
am going to the barber to have my hair cut, to have a hair-cut. Sa
siníng mahábul nga gúnting índì ka makagúnting sing maáyo. With this
blunt pair of scissors you cannot cut well. (cf. alót, bulúg).

_gúnting_, Shears, a hoisting apparatus consisting of two or
more poles tied together at the top from which depends the
tackle. (cf. salagúnting).

_gúnum_, To be or become dark, leaden, cloudy, overcast,
lowering. Nagagúnum ang lángit. The sky is overcast, lowering, is
getting dark or cloudy. (cf. góom, girúm).

_gúnut_, To pull or draw out with a jerk, to jerk out, tug or tear
at, extract, pluck--, pick--, wrench--, out. Gunúta ang pintál sa
ganháan. Shoot back the door-bolt. Gunúti akó sang kapulúngan sa
estánte, kay may kinahánglan akó sa madalî. Get me the dictionary from
the book-stand, for I need it at once. Igúnut akó sang íkog sang haló
sa búhò. Please pull the tail of the iguana that is in the hole. Indì
akó makagúnut sang hunúshúnus sang aparadór, kay maáwot. I cannot pull
out the drawer of the cupboard, for it is stuck fast. (cf. hábnus,
húnus, tábnus, bíngkas, hosô).

_gunút-gúnut_, Dim. and Freq. of gúnut. Also: A drawer (of a cupboard
or the like). (cf. hunúshúnus).

_guób_, To fill, pervade, occupy completely, leave no vacant space,
particularly applied to sounds and odours. Ang íya nga tíngug
nagguób sang malápad nga simbáhan. His voice filled the large
church. (cf. tugúb, tuób).

_guód, gúom, gúop, gúos, gúot_, See goód, góom, góop, góos, góot.

_gúpak_, See gípak.

_gupák_, See gipák.

_gúphal_, State of being dry and difficult to swallow, roughness;
to be or become dry, etc. Also applied to roughness of skin or
the like, but chiefly to food. Iníng pagkáon walâ sing gúphal
(kagúphal). This food--is easy to swallow,--is not rough or difficult
to swallow. Naggúphal iníng tinápay. This bread is dry and difficult
to swallow. Kagúphal sang ímo pánit! How rough your skin is!

_gúpì_, Crease, bend, fold, etc. See gípik, gímik. Gupía--gipíka,
gimíka.

_gúpud_, (B) To cut down, chop down, fell, lay low. Gupúda
(--úra) ináng mga káhoy. Fell those trees. Gupúdi akó sing tátlo
ka páyhod. Cut down for me three payhod-trees. Igúpud akó siníng
páhò. Kindly cut down this mango-tree for me. Nagupúdan iníng talámnan
sing tátlo ka dúldul. Three kapok-trees have been cut down in this
field. Igúpud iníng wásay sa lubí. Use this axe for felling the
coconut palm. (cf. pulúd, tapás, púkan).

_gupúd-gúpud_, Dim. and Freq. of gúpud.

_gúra_, See góra.

_gurábon_, To grasp and tear out grass, hairs or the like, pull--,
pluck--, weed--, out. A, karón gurabónon ko ang bohók mo. Ah, now
I'll tear your hair out. Gingurábon níla ang hilamón sa hardín. They
pulled up the grass in the garden. Gurabóni siá sing bohók. Pluck
out a few of his hairs. Igurábon akó siníng mga gámhon. Please pull
up these weeds for me. Ipagurábon sa mga bátà ang dalúkut. Let the
boys weed out the dalukut-grass. (cf. guráput).

_gurámos_, To rumple, tousle (the hair, etc.); to grasp and pull
(with the hand). (cf. hámrus, hámgud, guránit, gán-it).

_gúrang_, (B) See gúlang.

_guráng_, (B) To sit down, take a seat. Pagurangá ang mga
bisíta. Invite the visitors to sit down. (cf. púngkò, língkod).

_guránit_, (B) To twist--, pinch--, one's ears, etc. (cf. gulípat,
kosípad, kulípat).

_guráput_, (B) To grasp, seize, clutch, hold fast to. (cf. kapút,
kápyot, ángkon).

_guráptan_, (B) Joint, in common; property owned in common by several
persons. (cf. garapátan).

_guráy_, Stripe, streak, line, coloured threads in stripes. Pilá ka
guráy ang (sa) sulúd sang isá ka sámay? How many threads are there
in one stripe?

_gúray_, To be straight, upright, vertical, perpendicular, from top to
bottom. Nagagúray ang sámay sang íya báyò. The stripes in his jacket
are upright (run from top to bottom).

_guráy-gúray_, Dim. and Freq. of gúray--to stripe, etc.

_guráy-guráy_, Dim. of guráy--a stripe, etc.

_guríbhay_, Dilapidated, frayed, the worse for wear, torn, old,
shabby, stained and soiled, deteriorated or injured by wear; to be
frayed, etc. Guríbhay na ang ákon delárgo. My trousers are old and
worn out. Nagguríbhay ang íya puróy sa dáyon nga paggámit. His shorts
are worn out by constant use. (cf. gurísnay, gúsbat, gubát, gunít).

_gurínat, gurípat_, To twist, etc. See gulínat, gulípat).

_gurísnay_, Old, torn, useless, etc. See guríbhay, gúsbat.

_gúrob_, (B) To crop, trim, etc. See gólob.

_gúrung_, Pail, bucket, vessel for drawing water or other liquids;
a helper, abettor, procurer. (cf. tímbà, tampulingán, pasók; kabúlig,
mangangapín).

_gúrus_, (B) Pustule, etc. See gúlus.

_gúrus_, Indisposition caused by over-indulgence in eating; to swell--,
dilate--, distend--, the stomach, cause flatulence. Ang lakás nga
pagkáon sing maís kag paginúm sing tubâ naggúrus sa íya. Excessive
eating of corn and drinking of toddy distended his stomach. Indì
ka magkáon sing lakás, kay básì magurúsan ka. Don't eat too much,
for you may suffer from wind in the stomach. (cf. búros).

_gurús-gúrus_, (B) Impetigo; a kind of skin-disease that spreads in
clusters of pustules. (cf. gulúsgúlus).

_gurut-ánon_, See gulut-ánon.

_gusáb_, To insist on, press, be persistent or peremptory. (cf. patúsà,
pagusáb, pagâgâ, pagusá).

_gús-ab_, To bite, snap, nip, gnaw, champ, manch, crunch, craunch,
nibble (a bone or the like). Gingus-abán sang idô iníng túl-an. The
dog has gnawed this bone. Halá, gus-abá lang sing maáyo ang ímo
báyò, kay madámò ang pílak mo nga inugbalakál! You just bite the
sleeve of your jacket, as you have so much money to buy (a new)
one! (sarcastically said to children biting their sleeves in anger or
disappointment). Ipagús-ab lang sa idô iníng mga túl-an. Give these
bones to the dog to gnaw. Andamí ang idô, kay daw buót siá maggús-ab
sang ímo pusúpusuán. Beware of the dog, for he looks as if he means
to nip you in the calf of the leg.

_gusáng_, Split, burst open, pop; to burst (as some kinds of
peas and beans, when boiled in water, etc.). Nagagusáng na ang
mónggo. The monggo is bursting. Lúndi na sing talóng, kay gusáng
na ang mónggo. Now put in some egg-plant, for the monggo has burst,
(i.e. is properly cooked). Pagusangá ánay ang mónggo; índì mo ánay
paglúndan sang dáhon sang balúnggay. First let the monggo burst;
do not put in the balunggay-leaves before. (cf. lusáng; butî).

_gusáno_, (Sp. gusano) Worm, grub, caterpillar, maggot. (cf. úlud,
atatálo).

_gusáw_, A young or small balának-fish. See gisáw id.

_gúsbat_, Worn out, old, torn, etc. See guríbhay, gurísnay.

_gusípad_, To pinch, twist (the ear, etc.). See gulínat, gulípat;
gusipáda, gusipára--gulipáta, etc.

_gusód_, Dense, near together, thickset, crowded, crammed, packed,
rammed, to be crammed, etc. Gusód nga kalubihán. A close-set coconut
plantation. Gusód ang pagpamánggas nínyo sang maís. You planted your
corn too thickly. Naggusód ang humáy. The rice was crowded. (cf. íkit).

_gústo_, (Sp. gusto) Zest, relish, contentment, pleasure, liking,
complacency, whim, fancy, caprice, delight; to like, care for,
etc. Nagagustohánay silá. They like each other. Pagustohí lang
silá. Let them do what they like. Pagústo lang ikáw. Please yourself,
or: Do what you like. Gústo ko man kuntánì ang pagtámbong dídto,
ápang si nánay índì malúyag. I would like to be there with you,
but mother does not wish it. (cf. lúyag, wíli, úyon).

_gútab_, (B) To cut off, sever, separate, divide, part
(transitive). Gutába na sa hinabúl ang isá ka patádyong. Cut off
from the woven cloth sufficient for one skirt. Gutábi akó sing
isá ka delargohón. Cut off for me a piece sufficient for a pair of
trousers. Igútab sa kalát iníng kotsílyo. Cut the rope with this
knife. (cf. útud).

_gutás_, To crack, chap, split. See gotás.

_gútib_, To get or take a piece from; obtain a favour. Indì mo
paggutíban ang tinápay. Don't break a piece off the loaf. Indí ka
makagútib siníng táo--or--índì mo magutíban iníng táo. You cannot
easily prevail on this man to assist you. (You cannot get a favour
from this man). (cf. daríri, gábing; búhin).

_gutíng_, Decay of the teeth. See agutíng.

_gutingón_, See agutingón.

_gútlab_, To chop off, cut through, sever. See gútrab id.

_gútlò_, To notch, nick, indent, mark, incise. Gutloí ang kawáyan,
tápì, bastón, etc. Notch the bamboo, plank, stick, etc. Igútlò iníng
kotsílyo sa lápis mo. Mark your pencil with this knife. (cf. gótgot).

_gútò_, (B) To chop or cut up a bunch of onions or the like. Gutóa ang
sebúyas. Cut up the onion-stalks small. Gutói akó sing tagábang. Chop
up (cut up) for me some tagábang. (cf. kías, kíyas, gulút, tóktok).

_gutô_, (B) Tight, compressed, packed, crammed, rammed, jammed,
close together, crowded; to be tight, etc. (cf. gutúk).

_gútrab_, To chop or cut off with a knife, with a pair of scissors,
etc. Gutrabí akó sing duhá ka bára siníng hénero. Cut off for
me two yards of this cloth. Ginútrab níya ang písì. He cut the
line. (cf. gútab, útud).

_gútuk_, A seedling, sapling, a plant to be transplanted. Gútuk
sang tabákò, repólyo, talóng, kamátis, etc. Tobacco--, cabbage--,
egg-plant--, tomato--seedlings, etc.

_gutúk_, Tight, compressed, etc. Naggutúk ang mga táo sa sulúd sang
simbáhan;--or--nagutukán ang simbáhan sang mga táo. The people in
church were closely packed together,--or--the church was crammed
with people. Bisán dakô ang simbáhan gutúk pa gihápon kon ádlaw nga
piésta. Although the church is large, yet it is not large enough on
the day of the town-feast. (cf. gutô).

_gutúm_, Hungry, famished, starved, unfed, fasting, underfed, weakened
through lack of food.

_gútum_, Hunger, starvation, famine, want--, dearth--, scarcity--,
of food; to cause hunger, etc. Ginagútum akó. I am hungry. Pagagútmon
ka gid sa dálan kon magkádto ka sa malayô. You will certainly get
hungry on the road, if you go far. Ang pagpangabúdlay nagpagútum sa
íya. The work made him hungry. Ginapagútman níya ang íya kabáyo. He is
keeping his horse on a hunger-diet. Kon sa pílak ímol silá, matúod,
ápang kon sa pagkáon maáyo ang íla kahimtángan, kay walâ silá sing
gútum. They are poor in money, that is true, but as regards food
they are well off and there is no famine amongst them. Kon amó ang
baláy nga ímo ginadayónan índì ka gid magútum, kay mainamomáhon
silá kaáyo. If you stay at that house you will surely not go hungry,
for they are very hospitable.

_gútung_, (B) To cut off branches, shrubs, small trees, etc. for
firewood. Gutúnga ang sibúkaw. Cut fuel from the sebucao-plant. Gutúngi
iníng káhoy. Cut some firewood off this tree. Igútung lang ang ákon
binángon sa ághò. Use my bolo to cut the agho.

_gutúng_, A kind of thornless bamboo; a kind of plant with large
prickly leaves. The leaves are used as a remedy for wounds.

_guyá_, (H) Face, facial expression, mien, visage, countenance; aspect;
cheek; audacity, temerity, shame. Ang íya guyá maitúm. His face is
black. Kon magkádlaw siá ang duhá níya ka písngi nagapakítà sang
magtímbang nga yupúk sang íya guyá nga makawiwíli tulúkon. When she
smiles her two cheeks dimple in a way pleasant to look upon. Si Fuláno
may guyá sa pagbutángbútang sa íya sa likód kag waláy guyá sa pagutís
sa íya sa atubángan. N.N. has the face to slander him behind his back
and is not ashamed to flatter him in his presence. (cf. pangguyáhon,
nawóng, uyahón, guyahón).

_guyá-gúya_, (B) Diversion, relaxation, amusement; to divert oneself,
to relax, to amuse--, distract--, oneself. (cf. lingáwlíngaw).

_guyahón_, Face, countenance. (cf. guyá).

_guyákab_, A kind of crab that is smaller than a katáng-crab.

_gúyguy_, To drag, trail, haul, pull along the ground, carry
along. (cf. gúyud, bútong, gánoy, dalá).

_gúyud_, Pulling, tugging, hauling, haling, dragging, lugging,
trailing, traction; to haul, drag, pull, hale, tug, trail along
the ground. Maggúyud na kitá sang mga kawáyan nga pulúnton. Let us
now haul in the bamboos for the fish-corrals. Guyúda (--yúra) ang
kawáyan. Drag the bamboo along the ground. Ginagúyud lang níya ang
kóla sang íya sáya. She is trailing the train of her gown along the
floor. Anó ang igúyud mo sa káhoy? Báka, ukón karabáw? How will you
haul in the wood? By means of an ox or a buffalo? Paguyúdi (--yúri)
akó sa íla sing ísa ka gatús ka bílog nga kawáyan. Let them haul in
for me one hundred pieces of bamboo. Ipagúyud ko sa karabáw iníng
halalígyon. I'll make the buffalo tug this tree that is to be made
into a post. (cf. gánoy).

_guyúd_, A kind of coconut-palm that does not grow very tall. Hence
the name from gúyud--to trail, pull along the ground. (cf. dahilì).

_gúyum_, A kind of small, black ants, that are a great nuisance, for
they seem to be everywhere and will attack all sorts of food-stuffs.

_gwâ_, That is outside, exterior, outward, without, external, on
the surface, superficial, apparent, forthcoming; upshot, outcome,
result, final issue, conclusion; to go or come out, appear, show,
make one's appearance (on a stage, etc.). Makaín balá iní? Anó balá
ang gwâ siní? Where will this end? What will be the final outcome? Sa
gwâ. Outside. Sa gwâ sang baláy, sang bánwa, sang Iglésya Katólika,
etc. Outside the house, the town, the Catholic Church, etc. Gwâ
(maggwâ) kamó. Go outside. Go away. Come forth, appear on the scene,
make your appearance on the stage, or the like. Ang amó nga talanáwon
pagagwaán ni Fuláno. That play will have N.N. as an actor. N.N. will
appear in that play. Pagwaí silá sing matahúm nga sínta. Show
them a fine reel (film). Pagwaá ang mga bátà. Make the children go
outside. Send the children away. Pagwaí na kamí sang beláda. Start
the play. Raise the curtain. Let the curtain be raised. Maáyo silá
sa gwâ, ápang maláin sa sulúd. Outwardly they appear to be good, but
their intentions are bad. Ginpagwâ níla ang tanán nga walâ magbáyad
sang inogsulúd. They--put outside,--put out,--turned out,--expelled,
all those that had not paid the entrance-fee. Indì siá makagwâ sa íya
hulút, kay ginlyabihán ko ang ganháan sa gwâ. He cannot leave his room,
for I have locked the door from the outside. N.B. Instead of pagwaón,
pagwaán, etc. pagwáon, pagwáan, etc. are also used, especially in
(B). (cf. luás, halín, búhì, lakát).

_gwáb_, Hollow, cavity, hole, said especially of rotten wood;
decayed teeth, or the like. Iníng káhoy may gwáb sa sulúd. This
tree is rotten inside, is hollow. May gwáb ang íya ngípon. His tooth
is--hollow,--decaying.

_gwabaná_, (Sp. guanabano, guanabana) A tropical tree and its edible
fruit, bullock's heart, soursop. (cf. babaná).

_gwabón_, Hollow, rotten, decaying. (cf. gwáb).

_gwánta_, To bear, suffer, etc. (cf. agwánta, batás, ántus, íro).

_gwántes_, (Sp. guantes) Gloves.

_gwardabrísa_, (Sp. guardabrisa) A glass shade for
candles. (cf. birína).

_gwárdya_, (Sp. guardia) Guard, watch; body of armed troops
for defence or protection. Gwárdya sibíl (guardia civil). Rural
police. (cf. bántay).

_gwarnisyón_, (Sp. guarnición) Harness, gears, traces of mules and
horses, complete equipment for a riding--or draught--horse; garrison
(of soldiers).

_gwâ-sulúd_, Coming and going, in and out; to come and go alternately,
to pass each other, some entering, some leaving (a shop, church,
place of entertainment or the like).

_gwayábas_, (Sp. guyaba, guyabo) The guava-tree and its fruit. Haléa
sang gwayába (Jalea de guyaba). Guava jelly. (cf. bayábas).




H


_h_, This letter is always aspirated in Visáyan.

_ha_, An interjection or exclamation: Ha! well! why! Ha, ha,
makakaládlaw gid inâ. Ha, ha, that is indeed ridiculous.

_ha_, An interrogative particle expressive of doubt, inquiry or
slight surprise. Eh! Indì ka magpangákig, ha? You will not get angry,
will you? Don't get angry, eh? Nagkádto ka dídto, ha? You went there,
didn't you? Did you actually go there? Often used colloquially. Ha? I
beg your pardon. What did you say? I didn't understand you.

_ha-_, A prefix denoting a chance coincidence, reciprocity or
separation, but used mostly for euphony's sake without any apparent
change of meaning. (cf. hi-).

_haágum_, To obtain, enjoy the possession of. (cf. águm, hiágum).

_hábà_, To be or become long. See lábà id.

_habágat_, The south or the southwest wind, simoom, simoon,
sirocco. (cf. amíhan, kanáway, túgpo, laságas, salátan, tímug).

_habagátnan_, The South. (cf. bagátnan).

_habagatnánon_, South, southern. (cf. bagatnánon).

_habál_, Inflamed, reddish, yellowish, swollen and red; coloured,
ripe, ripening, turning red or yellow. Habál na ang hubág. The
tumour is--red and swollen,--nearly ripe. Habál na ang maís. The corn
is--yellowing,--getting ripe. (cf. pulá, dalág, lútò, gúrang).

_habál, hábal_, To be inflamed, become red and swollen; to ripen,
redden, change colour. Naghabál ang kinádtan sang idô. The place bitten
by the dog became inflamed. Nahabalán na ang maís ko sa talámnan. My
corn in the field is ripening. Indì mo ánay paglungí-on ang maís,
kóndì pahabalón mo gid. Don't pluck the corn yet, but let it first
ripen fully. (cf. hábok).

_habál-hábal_, Dim. and Freq. of habál. Ginahabálhabálan na ang
mga sirigwélas. The plums are ripening. Many plums are beginning to
change colour.

_hábas_, (Sp. haba) A tumour, particularly a tumour in the palate of
a horse.

_hábas_, To chafe, fret, excoriate, wound, injure. (cf. píla, gádras,
pák-ad, báklis, pákris, taís).

_hábay_, To strike--, beat--, knock--, down or over with a sweeping
motion. Habáya lang ang kodál. Just knock the fence down. Ginhabáyan
níya kamí sang masiók nga kógon, agúd maghapús ang ámon pagági dirâ. He
beat down the dense cogon grass, in order to make it easy for us
to pass. Ihábay mo ang ímo bastón sa mga gámhon nga nagabalábag
sa dálan. Beat down with your stick the weeds in the middle of the
road. Ihábay mo akó ánay sináng mga tígbaw, kay ipaági ko ang ákon
kángga. Please beat down that tigbaw reed, because I wish to pass
with my cart. (cf. hápay, hiláy).

_habáy_, Struck or beaten down. (cf. hábay, hapáy).

_hábhab_, To eat like an animal, putting one's mouth into the food
or into a plate without the use of a spoon. Habhabá lang ang kán-on
súbung sang isá ka idô. Just eat your food like a dog. Hinabhabán
ang íya nga sinámò sang idô. The dog took a mouthful of food from his
plate. Habhabí lang ang pínggan. Put the plate to your mouth. Ihábhab
ang bábà mo sa pínggan. Put your mouth to the plate. (cf. áb-ab,
láklak, dílap).

_hábig_, To take with, invite, lead to, induce, request one's
presence or companionship. Indì mo akó paghabígon sa maláut. Don't
take me with you for an evil purpose. Don't induce me to do something
bad. (cf. dápit, ágda, hágad, kángay, dáhan, dalá).

_habíg-hábig_, Dim. and Freq. of hábig. Nagahabíghábig siá sa
ákon kon sa diín siá magkádto. He takes me with him wherever he
goes. Ginahabíghábig gid níya si Fuláno sa tanán nga mga píknik. He
brings N.N. with him to every picnic. Habíghabíga siá sa pagupúd sa
áton, kay masinadyáhon siá sa katipúnan. Invite him to accompany us,
for he is so cheerful in society.

_habílhabíl_, To hang down loosely, dangle. (cf. kabílkabíl,
kawáykawáy).

_hábiog_, To rock, move--, shake--, swing--, to and fro. Habiogá ang
dúyan. Swing the hammock. Habiogí ang bátà. Rock the baby. Ihábiog
akó ánay sang duyándúyan, agúd maghípus ang bátà. Kindly rock the
cradle for me to quieten the baby. (cf. ábiog, hábyog).


_habiogán_, A swing, hammock, anything suspended and used as a
swing. (cf. abiogán, halabiogán, dúyan, batóng).

_háblog_, To rock, swing, dangle. (cf. hábiog, hábog).

_háblon_, Anything to be woven, as yarn, thread, silk, cloth,
etc. (cf. habúl--to weave).

_hábnus_, To snatch--, draw--, pull--, jerk--, out rather quickly,
take hold of with a jerk or with a swift pulling motion. Habnusá
iníng pilá ka sókdap nga gabúk sang amákan kag ilísan mo sing mga
bág-o. Pull out these few rotten slips from the bamboo mat and replace
them with new ones. Habnusí ang díngding sing isá ka tádtad. Pull off a
tád-tad-strip from the partition-wall. Ihábnus akó ánay siníng liníyas
nga kawáyan sa kodál. Please pull this piece of split bamboo out of
the fence. Ihábnus akó sing pilá ka nahót nga lánot nga talagakón,
kay ákon sugponón kag tagákon. Please jerk a few hemp-fibres (off
the line) and give them to me, because I am going to connect them
and arrange them neatly. (cf. húnus, gúnut, bíngkas, tábnus).

_hábò_, To surfeit, glut, cloy, cause loathing by eating to excess or,
especially, by eating food that contains much fat or sugar. Nabábò
ang ginháwa ko sang pagkáon, kay busúg na akó. I feel an aversion
to food, for I am completely satisfied. Ang lakás nga dólse nga íya
kináon naghábò sang íya ginháwa. The sweets he has eaten to excess
have cloyed him. (cf. taká, sumó, súm-od).

_hábog_, (B) To swing, rock. See hábiog.

_hábok_, To loosen, inflate, blow up, swell up, distend, become soft
and bulky. Nagahábok ang íya hubág. His boil is swelling. Pahabóka ang
dútà maglíbut sa kamátis--or--pahabóki sing dútà ang kamátis. Loosen
the earth around the tomatoes. Ginpahábok níya ang balokán sang
báboy. He blew up (inflated) the pig's bladder.

_habókon, habokón_, Swelling, distending; swollen, inflated, distended;
proud, haughty, over-bearing, stuck-up. (cf. hábok).

_háb-on_, To throw down in a heap or in disorder. Indì mo pagiháb-on sa
salúg ang ímo mga naúg. Don't throw your clothes on the floor. Hab-oní
lang ang salúg sang ímo lalábhan. Just throw your dirty linen on the
floor. Ginháb-on níya ang íya mga panápton sa higád. He threw his
clothes in a heap in the corner. (cf. hál-id, dúm-ok).

_habón_, (Sp. jabon) Soap; to soap, use or apply soap. Haboní gid
ang pányo kon lábhan mo. Soap the handkerchief well when you wash
it. Manghabón ka kon manghináw ikáw. Use soap when you wash your
hands. Ihabón akó siníng mga pínggan, kay tinloán ko. Please put some
soap on these plates, for I am going to clean them. Hugásan mo ánay
sing maínit nga túbig ang pánit kag ugáling habonán. Clean the skin
first with hot water and then apply soap.

_habóng-hábong_, A screen, shelter, canopy, blind, jalousie, shade,
curtain, awning to keep off the sun; to put up a screen, etc. against
the sun or the like. Butangí sing habónghábong ang bintánà. Put a
blind on the window. Screen the window against the sun. Ihabónghábong
akó sang bintánà, kay masílak kaáyo ang ádlaw. Kindly put a shade on
the window, for the light of the sun is quite dazzling. Habónghabóngi
kamí, kay maínit. Draw the blinds, for it is hot. Habónghabóngon
ko lang iníng hábul. I'll just use this blanket to keep off the
sun. (cf. hándong, lámbung).

_habót_, Worn-out, used-up, exhausted, dead-beat, done-up; to wear
out, etc. Habót na gid akó sa lakás nga pagpangabúdlay. I am now
quite worn out by hard work. Habót na ang delárgo ko. My trousers
are frayed--or--the worse for wear. Indì mo paghabotón ang bág-o
mo nga ulús. Don't wear out your new clothes. Ginahabót gid lang
níya ang láwas níya sa walâ sing pulús nga trabáho. He is wearing
himself out with useless labour. Nagahabót ang ginháwa ko. I am
becoming exhausted. Habót nga háblon. A frail, fragile, warp or an
old, worn-out cloth. (cf. gubát, rabanít, rabót, gurísnay, gúsbat,
pulinás, kulirô, lapát).

_habóy_, (H) To throw, fling, cast, hurl, shoot, pitch, toss,
chuck. Ihabóy sa ákon ang isá ka nahót nga tabákò. Throw me a
cigar. Haboyí akó sing bóla. Pitch me a ball. Ginhabóy akó níya sing
madámò nga mga bató, ápang walâ siá makaígò sa ákon. He flung many
stones at me, but did not hit me. (cf. pilák, bálang).

_hábug_, See hábog.

_hábug_, To fling, hurl, throw; throw away. (cf. habóy, pilák).


_hábul_, To be, become or make blunt, dull (said of edged or pointed
tools, etc.). Naghábul ang binángon. The bolo has become blunt. Indì
mo paghabúlon ang tigíb. Don't blunt the chisel.

_hábul_, Blanket, rug. (cf. kápay).

_habúl_, To weave (cloth). Hábla iní. Weave this. Hábli akó sing duhá
ka pánid nga pányò. Weave me two handkerchiefs. Ihabúl mo akó ánay
sang ákon háblon, dílì sang íya sang ibán. Please weave (into cloth)
my materials first and not those of others. Maálam ka balá maghabúl? Do
you know how to weave? Húo, kay ang ákon nánay bántug nga manughábul,
kag íya man akó gintudloán sang tanán nga bágay sang haláblon. Yes,
for my mother was a well-known weaver and she taught me all kinds of
weaving. (cf. lála, rára--to weave wicker-work).

_habúl_, Blunt, dull, not cutting well (of edged tools; cf. hábul).

_hábwà_, To seize--, grasp--, take--, grab--, much of, be eager to
get, scramble or make for, make a run at, struggle to obtain, rush
upon. Ginhábwà lang níla ang kárne sa ilihawán, ang humáy sa alányan,
etc. They rushed upon the meat at the butcher's, upon the rice in
the harvest-field, etc. Indì kamó maghábwà sang tinápay--or--índì
nínyo paghabwaón ang tinápay. Don't make such a scramble for the
bread. Diín siá nakahábwà sing pílak kay manggaránon siá karón? Where
did he pick up the money, for he is rich now? (cf. káka, kúhà, ágaw,
típon, karipón).

_hábyog, habyogán_, See hábiog, habiogán.

_hádak_, To prate, prattle, babble, jabber, gabble, twaddle, chatter;
rattle on, vaunt, boast, brag. A, nagahádak lang siá. Ah, he just
talks for the sake of talking. Indì mo pagihádak ináng mga waláy
pulús nga butáng. Don't twaddle about such silly things. Ginhádak níya
sa ákon ang íya mga ginagíhan. He boasted to me of what he had gone
through. Ginhadákan níya akó túbtub nga nasum-orán akó. He rattled
on at me till I got sick of it. (cf. wákal, búrà, hámbog).

_hadakán_, A chatterbox, boaster, braggart; garrulous, loquacious,
glib, flippant. (cf. wakalán, buraán).

_hádal_, To dull, blunt, take off the edge; be or become
blunt. Halá, hadála ang lansítas ko. Hey, take the edge off my
pocket-knife. Naghádal ang binángon, kay ginpaági mo sa bató. The
bolo is blunted, for you passed it over a stone. (cf. hídal, hábul).

_hádluk_, Fear, fright, timidity, apprehension, anxiety, diffidence,
consternation, alarm, dismay, dread, terror, awe, funk, scare,
panic; to fear, be apprehensive, etc. Indì ka magkahádluk. Don't
be afraid. Have no fear. Ginakahadlukán ko siá. I am afraid of
him. Ipahádluk sa íya iní--or--pahadluká siá siní. Overawe him with
this. Nahadlukán silá. They were scared, dismayed. Dílì mo igkahádluk
ang amó nga mga butáng. Don't get alarmed over such things. Pahadluká
siá. Make him afraid. Nagakahádluk silá nga ----. They are apprehensive
of ----. They are afraid, lest ----. (cf. táhap, dírham, kúlbà,
lísang, kúgmat).

_hadô_, (B) To kiss. (cf. halúk).

_hádok_, Wave, billow, surge, swell, roller, breaker, white horses;
to form breakers, etc. May hádok sa subâ--or--nagahádok ang subâ. The
river is choppy.

_hádoy_, To roam, loaf, ramble, saunter, walk about idly, take
a stroll, idle. Igò lang ikáw sang hádoy--or--daláyon lang ikáw
nagahádoy. You are a loafer--or--You are always idling.

_hadóy-hádoy_, Dim. and Freq. of hádoy. Nagahadóyhádoy lang silá. They
are just roaming, loitering or walking about idly. Hadóyhádoy lang
ikáw kay walâ ka man sing palamúgnan. Take a stroll as you have no
job. (cf. hagóyhágoy, lagáwlágaw, landólándo, tiyógtiyóg).

_hádug_, To prattle, vaunt, boast, brag, be very loquacious,
etc. (cf. hádak, hágak, wákal, búrà).

_hágad_, (H) To do often or customarily. (cf. ságad, sáli).

_hágad_, To invite, persuade, request, tempt, induce, bias, move,
bring--over,--around, allure, entice, ask--to come,--assist,--to
take part in. Hagáda (--ára) siá sa paghápit dirí. Invite him to
call here. Ginhágad akó níya sa pagtámbong sa bulangán. He tempted
me to go the cock-pit. Hagádi (--ári) akó sing mga táo nga magabúlig
sa ákon olobráhon. Get some men to help me in my work. Hinagáran
níla ang íla bádò sing madámò nga bisíta. They invited many guests
to their banquet. Ihágad akó ánay sa íya. Please invite him on my
behalf. Indì ka maghágad sa íya sa pagdúguk sa mga kalingáwlingáwan nga
maláut. Don't entice him to take part in harmful diversions. (cf. ágda,
kángay, dápit, dáhan).

_hágak_, See hádak. Indì ka maghágak. Don't prattle, boast or
brag. Ginhagákan akó níya sang íya kaálam. He boasted to me of his
learning. Pahagáka lang siá. Get him to brag--or--Let him rattle on.

_hagakán_, Chatterbox; boaster, braggart; boasting, bragging,
vaunting. (cf. hadakán).

_hágal_, To grasp, take hold of, cling to (as a child clings to
its mother).

_hágal_, To gasp, pant for breath. Sa lakás nga dalágan nagahágal ang
idô. Too much running makes a dog pant for breath. (cf. hágkal, diwál).

_hágan_, To lighten, ease, alleviate, relieve, moderate, allay,
assuage, temper, make or become less burdensome or heavy, abate. Hagána
ang íya pangabúdlay. Lighten his work. Give him less work. Nahagánan
siá sa íya mga buluhatón, kay ginbulígan siá ni Fuláno. His duties
were made lighter, for N.N. helped him. Naghágan na ang kasakít,
kay nagbúswang ang hubág. The pain has abated, for the ulcer has
burst. Ang bulúng nga gindápat sang médiko nagpahágan sang ákon
balatyágon. The medicine applied by the doctor eased my pain.

_hagánas_, To murmur; rustle. See hugánas id.

_hagán-hágan_, Dim. and Freq. of hágan. Also adjective: Lightened,
eased, bearable, sufferable, supportable, tolerable, endurable. Masakít
pa ang pilás mo?--Húo, ápang hagánhágan na. Is your wound still
painful?--Yes, but it is bearable now. (cf. gaángáan).

_hágap_, To look for, forage, go in search (of eatables,
etc.). Nagahágap siá sang íya pagkáon. He is looking for something
to eat. Hagápi akó sang ákon panyagáhon. Get me some dinner. Look
out for some dinner for me. Ihágap akó ánay sing ísdà, kay igasúd-an
ko. Please look for some fish for me; I want to eat it as a side
dish. Ginahágap ko ang ákon ginháwa. I am trying to get back my breath
(after a swoon or fainting fit, etc). Ginahágap ko lang ang pagtahî,
kay walâ akó sing anteóhos. I am sewing by touch, because I have no
spectacles. (cf. lághap, sághap, ságap).

_hágas_, To waste, wear out, grow--lean,--thin,--weak,--faint (of body,
voice, etc.). Nagahágas na ang íya tíngug. His voice is weakening. Ang
maláwig nga pakigpúlongpúlong nagpahágas sang íya tíngug. The lengthy
discourse made his voice grow faint. Nakahágas ang íya láwas. He grew
thin, wasted away. (cf. kág-as).

_hagás_, Wasted, worn-out, lean, thin, lank, gaunt, skinny,
emaciated. (cf. maníwang, mahágpis, mahágwos).

_hagáshas_, To draw, pull, draggle, shuffle, push noisily along a floor
(as shuffling the slippered feet, etc.). (cf. sagúdsud).

_hagáw_, Weak, thin, soft, faint (of voice). Naghagáw ang íya
tíngug. His voice became weak. (cf. hágas).

_hagáy_, To air, give things an airing, take things out (from
boxes, cupboards, etc. and spread them in the open air, lest they
should spoil), set out, bring forth, show openly. Ihagáy ináng mga
panápton. Give those clothes an airing. Hagayá ang mga dáhon sang
tabákò. Spread the tobacco-leaves in the open air. Hagayí akó siníng
mga maís. Spread these corn-cobs in the air for me. Ihagáy akó ánay
siníng mga ulús. Kindly air these clothes. (cf. bulád, háway, kúyang).

_hágbas_, To cut--, mow--, down grass, shrubs and the like. Hagbasá
ang mga gámhon. Cut down the weeds. (cf. tapás, háwan).

_hágbong_, Shadow, shade, obscurity, gloom, umbrage, murk, dusk; to be
or become shadowy, dark, etc. May hágbong sa pihák sang baláy. There
is shadow behind the house. Mapasílong kitá sa baláy ukón makádto lang
kitá sa hágbong sang káhoy? Shall we enter a house or shall we just
go under the shade of a tree? Nagahágbong ang kalibútan kon madámò
ang gál-um. It becomes dark if there are many clouds. (cf. hándong,
lándong, háron, lámbung).

_hágdan_, Stair, staircase, stairway, ladder, flight of--stairs,--of
steps, step-ladder; to apply or use a ladder. Hagdaní ang baláy
mo. Provide your house with a flight of steps. Ihágdan ko iníng
káhoy sa ákon baláy. I'll use this wood to make stairs for my
house. Ginhagdanán níla ang baláy sing tápì, agúd maghapús ang
pagsákà. They made a stair of planks to their house to make it easy
to go up. Diín ang hágdan? Where is the ladder?

_hagdánan_, Staircase, place where the stair or ladder is attached;
entrance. Diín ang hagdánan sang ínyo baláy? Where is the entrance
to your house? (cf. hágdan).

_hágdò_, To touch, feel, handle, stroke, caress, fondle. (cf. tándog,
kúhit, híkap, káblit, kámlò, kámlot, hílam, híkam).

_hagdô-hágdò_, Dim. and Freq. of hágdò. Also: to pet, fondle, play
with. (cf. aró-áro).

_hághag_, To shake, remove by shaking or agitating. Ihághag ang
hilamón túbtub nga madágdag ang dútà. Shake the (bunch of) grass till
the earth drops from it.

_hághag_, Interstice, opening, loose connection, separation at seams;
loosely connected or woven, not well joined, far apart; to weave
loosely, etc. Abáw, dalágkò ang mga hághag sang ímo salúg! Goodness
me, how far apart your flooring is spaced! Haghagá ang paghabúl siníng
hénero. Weave this cloth loosely. (cf. hayághag, malakâ, lakâ).

_hágkal_, To pant, gasp for breath with the tongue sticking
out. Ginpahágkal ang idô sang talunón. The wild boar made the dog
pant. (cf. hágal).

_hágkot_, Dregs, sediment; to adhere or stick to. (cf. dágkut,
dokót, pilít).

_hágmak_, To fall down prone, head foremost, headlong, head first,
fall on one's face. Nakahágmak siá. He fell down foremost. Itíklod
siá sa likód, agúd maghágmak. Push him from behind so that he may
fall on his face. (cf. dúsmò, dágpà, sukámod).

_hágmuk_, To soften, mollify, ease. (cf. hálmok, hagánhágan).

_hágnà_, Proposal, motion, bill; to propose, purpose, intend. Hágnà nga
pagbulút-an. A bill to be--brought in,--introduced, a project of law.

_hagnáya_, See agnáya.

_hágnop_, To inspire fear, cause a feeling of uneasiness, to
haunt. Nagakahágnop silá sádtong baláy, káy may amaránhing,
konó. They are afraid of that house, because, they say, it
is haunted by a ghost. Nahagnopán akó. I feel uneasy, nervous,
apprehensive. Ginakahagnopán sang ibán iníng lonók, kay may tumáo,
konó. Some are afraid of (coming near) this mangrove, for, they say,
it is inhabited by goblins. (cf. hádluk, dírham, kúlbà).

_hágò_, To tire out, fatigue, weary, wear out, exhaust. Hagóa siá sa
trabáho. Tire him out with work. Ginhágò siá sang pagtánum. He was
exhausted from planting rice. Ihágò ko sa íya iníng trabáho. I'll
give him this tiresome job. Patrabahóhon ko siá túbtub nga mahágò
siá. I'll make him work till he becomes tired-out. (cf. búdlay, lúyà,
luyâ, pául).

_hagô_, Tired, fatigued, weary. (cf. luyâ, paúl).

_hágok_, To snore. Nagahágok siá kon nagakatulúg. He snores when
he sleeps. Hágok--or--maghágok ka, agúd ang nagasákà maghunâhúnà
nga nagakatulúg ka na. Snore, so that the one who is coming up may
think you are already asleep. Indì mo siá pagpukáwon kóndì pahagóka
lang siá. Don't awaken him, but just let him snore on. (cf. hulágok,
hurágok).

_hág-on_, To buy up, buy wholesale, contract for all that is for
sale. Ginhág-on ko ang íya ságing. I bought up his bananas. Ginhag-onán
ko siá sang tanán níya nga ságing. I made a contract with him for
all his bananas. Ihág-on akó sang íya kamóti. Kindly buy up for me
his sweet potatoes. Ipahág-on mo sa ákon ang ímo kalámay, índì mo
ánay pagibalígyà sa ibán. Let me have all your sugar; don't sell it
to others. (cf. ságib).

_hagónoy_, A medicinal herb.

_hág-os_, To be lean, etc. (cf. hágwos, níwang, hágpis).

_hagóyhágoy_, To loaf, roam, loiter, ramble. See hadóyhádoy.

_hágpis_, To be or make lean, thin, slender, skinny, gaunt,
lank. Naghágpis ang láwas níya. He has grown slender. Pahagpisá siá
sa pangabúdlay, kay lakás katámbok sa íya. Make him thin by work,
for he is too fat. (cf. hágwos, nipís, níwang).

_hágpok_, To be or make crisp, crimp, friable, short. Naghágpok
iníng kiníhad nga tinápay. These slices of bread have become
crisp. Pahagpoká ang pánit sang letsón. Let the skin of the roast
pig turn into crackling.


_hágrak_, To snore, breathe with difficulty due to stuffed nostrils
or the like. (cf. hulágok, hurágok).

_hágrak_, The death-rattle; to breathe heavily in agony. Malapít
na ang hágrak níya. His death-rattle is approaching. Madalî na lang
mautás ang íya ginháwa, kay nagahágrak na siá. He will soon breathe
his last, for the death-rattle has begun. (cf. tingâ).

_hágrok_, To croak, emit a low hoarse sound as of a frog or raven;
a croak. (cf. kálà, kalâkalâ).

_hagúbhub_, Echo, reverberation, repercussion; a low, heavy,
rumbling sound; to echo, reecho, reverberate, rumble, boom, thunder,
roar. (cf. dagúbdub, hagúnghung, lághong).

_hagúbhub_, Moist, well-watered; to be or become moist,
etc. (cf. lanág).

_hagubhúban_, Moist, well-watered soil. (cf. lanág, longasóg).

_hágud_, To oil, anoint, grease, rub in fat, tallow, etc. Hagúda
(--úra) ánay ang hénero, agúd maghapús ang pagtahî. Rub some fat into
the cloth, that it may be easy to sew. Ginhágud níya ang háblon sing
táro, kay kon dílì masápnot ang pagsodó sang ángkub. She first rubbed
tallow into the materials for weaving, for otherwise it is difficult to
beat the weft up to the web with the reed. Metaphorically: to waste,
misspend, wear out. Nagahágud lang siá dídto sang íya nga ádlaw,
panápton, etc. He merely wastes his time there, wears out his clothes,
etc. (cf. pálhit, háplas; úsik, uyáng).

_hagúk_, One who snores; one that growls, grumbles or utters
ill-natured complaints.

_háguk_, To snore. See hágok.

_hagukâ_, Loose, slack, not tight. (cf. halúg, halungkakâ, hugakâ,
tugák).

_hagúlut_, To whizz, fizz, bubble; to throb, drum, din, sing,
ring. Nagahagúlut ang dalúnggan ko sa gútum, sa ínit, etc. There is a
ringing in my ears on account of hunger, the heat, etc. (cf. hagúrut).

_hagúmhum_, To hum, coo; rumble, roll, boom. Nakabatî akó sang hagúmhum
sang mga balúd. I heard the rumbling of the waves. (cf. hágung).

_hágung_, To hum, coo, rumble, roll, boom. Nagahágung ang mga kanyón
sa malayô. The cannons are booming in the distance. (cf. hagúnung).

_hagúnghung_, A dull, rumbling sound, boom, rumble, rolling; to emit
such a sound. (cf. hágung, hagúnung, hagúmhum).

_hagúnoy_, To drone, buzz, hum, chirp; to roll, rumble. (cf. huní,
hagúmhum).

_hagúnung_, To hum, roll, boom, emit a dull, rolling, rumbling
sound. Nagahagúnung ang dakô nga linggánay. The big bell is
booming. (cf. hágung, hagúnghung).

_hagúnus_, The howling, noisy blowing of wind; to blow, howl,
whistle, shriek, scream, screech (of wind). May hagúnus sang hángin
nga ginapamatián ko. I hear the howling of the wind. Nagahagúnus ang
hángin. The wind is blowing strongly. (cf. unús, mádlus).

_hagúot_, Low, sunk, sunken; hard, trying, difficult. (cf. gúot;
lapígot).

_hagúp_, To be tame, domesticated, broken in, gentle, meek,
docile. Naghagúp na ang iláhas. The wild chicken has become tame
now. Pahagupá ang simarón nga karabáw, báka, etc. Tame the wild
buffalo, cow, etc. Pahagupí akó siníng períko. Tame this parrot for
me. Ipahagúp ko sa ímo iníng kabáyo, kay índì akó makasaráng. I'll give
this horse to you to train (break in), for I cannot do it. (cf. ántà,
mánso).

_hagúrut, hagurút_, See hagúlut.

_hagús_ See hág-os.

_hágut_, To straighten, smooth, squeeze empty (by passing through
the hand a wire, string, gut, piece of cloth, etc.). Hagúta ang tinái
túbtub nga maggwâ ang hígkò. Squeeze the guts to remove the dirt.

_hágwos_, To become lean, thin, etc. See hágpis, hágas, níwang, hág-os.

_hágyò_, Sign, gesture; to gesticulate, make signs and gestures;
to swing, move (the arms, legs, etc.; cf. hágyon).

_hágyon_, To swing one's arms to and fro. Nagalakát siá nga
nagahágyon. He walks with swinging arms. Ginahágyon níya ang toó,
ápang ang walá walâ, kay nagabítbit sang maléta. He is swinging
his right arm, but not his left, because he is carrying his
suit-case. (cf. háyon).

_hágyon_, Gesture, sign; indication, intention, plan. (cf. túyò,
tándà, timáan).


_hagyón-hágyon_, Dim. and Freq. of hágyon. Also: Gesture,
gesticulation.

_háha_, To say "ha-ha", to guffaw, laugh aloud. (cf. halákhak,
talángkaw).

_hâhâ_, To strip, tear off; disembowel (an animal). Hâhaá ang
pánit sang káhoy. Take the bark off the tree. Strip the tree of its
bark. Hâhaí ang báka sang íya tinái. Disembowel the cow. (cf. ák-ak,
bákbak, rîrî).

_haín_, Where, at, or in, what place? (cf. diín, kaín).

_hákab_, To desire vehemently, crave, yearn for, hanker after, long
for, be bent upon, wish for, like to. Nagahákab gid siá sa pagtán-aw
sang síne. She likes very much to see the motion-picture. Indì ka
maghákab sinâ. Don't hanker after that. (cf. hánggab, wíli, lúyag,
íbug, híngyo, hándum, pangabáy, úyon).

_hákad_, To take out the contents of, empty a box or the like, remove
from a receptacle. Hakáda ang ákon ulús sa baúl, kay inanáyan. Take
my clothes out of the trunk, for they have been attacked by white
ants. Hakádi (--ári) akó sang kán-on sa kólon. Empty the rice out of
the kettle for me. Ihákad  akó ánay sang sulúd sang ákon maléta. Kindly
take the things out of my suit-case. (cf. súkad--to ladle or scoop
out rice from the pot, etc.).

_hákal_, To talk big, vaunt oneself, brag, boast, prattle, talk
proudly of one's achievements, be a great chatterbox. Indì ka
maghákal. Don't talk big. Hinakálan akó níya. He talked to me with
great self-assertion. Ihákal mo lang ang agrót mo kon nagadúmdum ka
nga madámò ang mga búang nga magapáti sang ímo nga hámbug. Go on with
your foolish chatter if you believe there are many simpletons that
will give credence to your silly stories. (cf. hádak, hámbug, etc.).

_hakalán_, Boasting, bragging, vaunting; chatterbox;
braggart. (cf. hadakán, wakalán, buraán).

_hákbut_, To flick, strike, beat. Ihákbut ang ímo bastón sa íya nga
talúdtud. Beat him on the back with your stick. (cf. háplik, hánot,
búnal, etc.).

_hákhak_, To eat like an animal. Indì mo pagihákhak ang ímo bábà sa
pínggan súbung sang ísa ka báboy. Don't put your mouth to the plate
like a pig. (cf. hábhab).

_hákhak_, To cut in small pieces, chop up. Hakhaká ang sákwa
kag idamóg sa báboy. Chop up the banana stump and feed it to the
pig. (cf. tóktok).

_hakíd_, (B) To scoop out rice from a kettle, etc. Kon maghakíd ka
sang tiníg-ang, ímo ánay kalikádon (--áron). When you scoop out the
boiled rice, stir it up first with the ladle. Patakídla ang kólon,
kalikádon mo ang kán-on kag hakidón (--irón). Lean the kettle, stir the
rice with the ladle and scoop it out. Ihakíd akó ánay sang tiníg-ang
sa kólon. Please take out the boiled rice from the pot. (cf. súkad).

_háklap_, To cover with, spread upon, superpose, overlay, plate,
veneer, coat. Haklapí ang lamésa sing mantél. Cover the table with
a cloth. Iháklap ang mantél sa lamésa. Spread the table-cloth on
the table. Ang háklap sang husáy níya buláwan--or--ang íya husáy
nahaklapán sing buláwan. Her comb is plated with gold. (cf. táklap).

_háklò_, Inhalation; to inhale, breathe in, draw in. Hakloá
lang ang asó, kon malúyag ka, ápang akó sing ákon magahalín na sa
digamohán. Breathe the smoke, if you like, but I for my part will get
out of the kitchen. Hakloá ang tuób nga mahamút sang roméro. Inhale
the scent of the fragrant rosemary. (cf. hákon, súyup).

_hákmal_, To bite, seize or tear with the teeth. Ginhákmal sang idô
ang batíis ko. The dog bit the calf of my leg. (cf. kagát, gús-ab).

_hakô-hákò_, To challenge, defy, provoke, dare. (cf. ángkat, ákyat,
hákyat).

_hák-on_, To breathe, sniff or suck in through the nose. Ihák-on
or hak-oná ang kahamút siníng insyénso. Sniff the fragrance of this
incense. (cf. háklò).

_hakón-hákon_, To despatch quickly, work under pressure, work against
time, perform or work with despatch, be anxious to do something
quickly. Ginhakónhákon níya ang íya buluhatón. He performed his work
with great dispatch. Ginahakónhákon níla ang íla mga kaáway, kay
ginapanán-aw níla nga dáan ang íla nga pagdaúg. They are anxious to
fight their enemies, for they are convinced that they will overcome
them.

_hákpon_, From hákup--to scoop up with the hands.

_hákroy_, Used mostly in the compound form panghákroy, panhákroy--to
moan, complain, sigh, heave a sigh, groan, wail, bewail,
mourn, lament. Indì ka manghákroy sing lakás. Don't lament too
much. Pinanghakroyán níya ang kamatáyon sang íya ilóy. He bewailed
the death of his mother. Ginpanghakroyán níya akó, agúd tabángan ko
siá. He besought me with sighs to come to his assistance. (cf. bákhò).

_hakúb-hakúb_, To palpitate, thump, pulsate, throb, hammer,
race, beat quickly or violently; palpitation, etc. Nagahakúbhakúb
ang íya tagiposóon sa kahádluk. Her heart throbs violently with
fear. Kon kulbaán akó dáyon ang hakúbhakúb sang dúghan ko--or--dáyon
nagahakúbhakúb ang dúghan ko. When I am scared my heart begins at
once to palpitate. (cf. pitík, kubákubá).

_hákug_, To need, cost, want, use up, consume or take much, be greedy
of, be expensive. Indì ka maghákug sang ikáon. Don't finish too much
of the side-dish. Ginhákug níya ang paginúm sang bíno kag nahubúg. He
took too much wine and got drunk. Hinakúgan gid níya ang pagkáon sing
báboy. He gorged himself with pork. Iníng paghímos mo sang talóng
nagahákug sang mantékà. Your preparation of the egg-plant in this
way takes a lot of lard. (cf. ámbas).

_hakugán_, Avaricious, greedy, covetous, voracious, ravenous,
gluttonous; a glutton, gourmand, gormandizer; expensive,
costly. (cf. hákug; maámbas).

_hakúl_, The compound form panhakúl, panghakúl is mostly used. To
plead, beseech, implore, complain, lament, cry out in grief or sorrow,
ask with tears. Indì ka magpanghakúl sing lakás, kay ánhon mo? Ang
karabáw nga patáy índì na mabánhaw. Don't lament too much, for what can
you do? The dead buffalo will not rise again. Ginpanghakulán akó níya
sa pagpahulám sa íya sing kwárta. He implored me with tears to lend him
some money. Nagapanghakúl kamí sa ímo ----. We beseech thee ----. We
are crying out to thee ----. (cf. hákroy, bákhò, pakilóoy, pakitábang).

_hákul_, To be--red and swollen,--bruised,--suffused with
blood. Naghalákul ang íla mga nawóng. Their faces were red and
swollen. (cf. habál, hanóg).

_hák-um_, To sniff, etc. See hák-on.

_hákup_, A (double) handful; to take up, ladle out with one hand or
with the two hands put together. Hákpa (hakúpa) lang iníng balás,
kag isulúd sa kahón. Just scoop up this sand with your hands and put
it into the box. Hákpi akó sing tátlo ka hákup nga balingón. Get me
three handfuls of small dried fish. Ihákup akó siníng mga ságbot
nga sinílhig. Kindly take up in your hands these sweepings. Sín-o
ang nagkúhà sing isá ka hákup nga maís, kay hílmon gid nga hinákpan
iníng túmpok? Who has taken a (double) handful of corn, for it is
apparent that this heap has been encroached upon with hands put
together? Ihákup iníng papél sa tái sang kuríng. Use this paper to
take up the cat's excrements.

_hakús_, An embrace, hugging; to embrace, hug, clasp in one's arms,
cuddle, press to one's bosom. Háksa--or--háksi siá. Embrace him. Sang
pagabút níya sa baláy hináksan (hinakusán) siá sing hugút sang íya
nga ilóy. When he arrived at his home his mother pressed him closely
to her bosom. (cf. púgus, abráso).

_hákut_, Cartage, carriage, conveyance, portage, porterage, freight;
to carry, cart, ship, transport, bear, convey, fetch, bring,
take, in successive loads. Hakúta iníng mga bató sa baláy. Cart
these stones to the house. Sín-o ang magahákut sang ímo humáy? Who
will bring in your rice? Hakúti akó siníng mga napúlò ka pásong
nga humáy sa ákon tambóbo. Carry these ten bushels of rice to my
granary. Diín silá?--Nagahákut silá sing káhoy nga halalígyon sang ákon
baláy. Where are they?--They are hauling in the wood for the posts
of my house. Ihákut ko iníng karabáw sa humáy. I'll use this buffalo
to fetch the rice. Ihákut akó siníng túmpok nga kawáyan sa ákon umá,
kay himóon ko nga kamálig. Kindly transport this pile of bamboo to
my field, for I am going to build a hut with it. (cf. dalá, dúl-ung).

_hákwat_, To raise, lift, heave, hoist, take up from the
ground. Hakwatá iníng bató. Lift this stone. Hakwatí ang dálan
sináng mga bató. Take those stones off the road. Indì siá makahákwat
sináng bató, kay lakás kabúg-at. He cannot lift that stone, it is
too heavy. Ipahákwat lang ináng bató nga mabahúl sa ímo nga mánong,
kay ikáw índì makasaráng. Let your elder brother lift that stone,
for you cannot do it. (cf. púlut, gíhit, ínkà, álsa; ógkat--to take
up a corpse).

_hákyat_, To challenge, defy. (cf. ákyat, hángkat).

_halá_, An exclamation to invite attention. Hello, halloo, halloa,
hullo, hi, hey, now then, or the like. Halá, lakát na kamó. Now then
march. Halá, pamurús kamó nga tanán. Hi! Put all your strength into
it, all of you. Halá, halín kamó. Quick now, clear out.

_hála_, To shout "halá". Kon haláhon ang mga bátà magahúyab silá. If
one shouts "halá" to the boys, they will scamper off. Haláha ang mga
bátà nga nagagináhud sa atubángan sang baláy. Shout "halá" to the
children making a noise in front of the house (and drive them away).

_halâ_, (B) To be very loquacious, prate, prattle, talk nonsense. Indì
ka maghalâ sing lakás. Don't prattle so much. (cf. búrà, ngálngal,
hádak, etc).

_hálab_, (H) To graze, crop or eat grass, pasture, browse. Ang
mga karnéro nagahálab sa latagón. The sheep are browsing in the
field. Ginhálab sang mga báka ang ámon mga maís. The cattle were
eating our corn. Pahalába (pahálba) ang mga karabáw. Put the buffaloes
out to grass. Drive the buffaloes to pasture. Pahalábi (pahálbi)
lang ang bungálon sang ímo kabáyo. Just let your horse graze in the
zacate-field. Pasture your horse in the zacate-field.

_halábà_, Long. See malábà.

_haláblan_, A loom, hand loom; weaving. (cf. haláblon).

_haláblon_, (H) Weaving, weaving materials, things to be woven into
cloth. Nakabakál akó sing tátlo ka ágpang nga bunáng nga haláblon. I
bought three hanks of yarn to be woven. Pilá ka patádyong ang haláblon
mo? How many skirts have you to weave? (cf. habúl).

_halabúab, halabú-ab_, (H) Sediment; offspring, etc. See alabú-ab id.

_halabwáan_, (H) Assets, the wherewithal, etc. (cf. alabwáan, hábwà).

_halabyogán_, (H) A swing; place where a swing is. (cf. hábyog,
habyogán).

_hálad_, Offering, sacrifice, donation, gift, present, grant, oblation,
immolation; to offer, sacrifice, bestow, grant, confer, donate,
immolate, give. Haládi (--ári) ang Diós sang ímo paghigúgma--or--ihálad
mo sa Diós ang ímo paghigúgma. Offer to God your love. Ginhaláran
níla ang Mahál nga Bírhin sing madámò nga mga búlak. They offered
many flowers to the Blessed Virgin. Ang Sántos nga Mísa amó ang
labíng malahálon nga hálad. The Holy Mass is the most precious
sacrifice. Ang íya pangabúdlay kag ang íya kabúhì hinálad níya
sa hinigúgma níya nga natubúan. He gave his work and life for his
beloved native country. Nahálad na ang íya tagiposóon, índì na siá
makahálad sinâ sa ibán. Her heart is already bestowed upon someone,
she cannot offer it to another. (cf. hátag, dúlut).

_halagáyan_, Place where things are spread or set out, as a table,
shelf, ledge, board, etc. (cf. hagáy).

_halagunús_, To howl, roar, blow strongly (of wind); to rush, run, pass
by so swiftly as to cause a current of air. (cf. hagúnus, halaguyón).

_halaguyón_, (H) To rush, run, scamper, come near or go away from
with quick steps. Nagahalaguyón ang mga kánding kon tabúgon. The goats
scamper off, when they are driven away. Kon singgitán mo ang mga bátà
"halá, halín kamó" magahalaguyón silá. If you shout to the boys "Hi! Be
off!" they will quickly take to their heels. Nagahalaguyón dirí ang
mga bátà, kay nakabatî silá nga may tábad. The children rushed here,
for they had heard that there was a banquet. (cf. halagunús).

_halákhak_, A guffaw, loud laugh, a burst--, peal--, roar--, shout--,
of laughter; to guffaw, shout--, roar--, with laughter, etc. Ngáa
man nga nagahalákhak ikáw? Why are you laughing so much? Kay
halakhakán--or--halalakhakán gid ang ginsúgid níya. Because what
he said deserves a hearty laugh. Ang amó nga tabô hinalákhakán
níla nga tanán. When that happened they all burst into peals of
laughter. (cf. talángkaw, harákhak, arókok, aríkik, háha).

_halakô_, Unskilful, badly done or made, botched, bungled, mean. Halakô
ang pagbúhat níla siníng aparadór. They have made this cupboard badly
(or roughly). (cf. hilakô, bástos).

_halákson_, (H) Worthy to be embraced, what is or should be accepted,
received and cherished. (cf. hakús).

_halakwáton_, (H) That is to--, can--, should--, be lifted or taken
up. (cf. hákwat).

_halalabán, halalában_, (H) Field of grass, meadow, grazing ground,
grass land, pasturage, pasture land. (cf. hálab, halálban).


_halalábon, halalabón_, (H) Browse, grass, fodder, herbage. (cf. hálab,
halálbon).

_halaláran_, (H) Person or object on whose behalf a sacrifice,
etc. is made. (cf. hálad).

_halalarán_, (H) Altar, place of worship or sacrifice. (cf. halarán).

_halálban_, (H) See halalában id.

_halálbon_, (H) See halalábon id.

_halalígyon_, (H) Tree, wood, or any other material to be used for
posts. (cf. halígi).

_halambalánon_, (H) Chat, talk, conversation. (cf. hámbal; halambálon,
hambárò, sugilánon).

_halambálon_, (H) See halambalánon.

_halambúyan_, (H) An arm-rest, the arm of a chair. (cf. hámbuy).

_halámlan_, (H) Salt fish, pickled meat or the like to be mixed with
"halamúl", which see. Anything that is to be, or should be, desalted
before it is eaten. (cf. hamúl, halamúl).

_halampángan_, (H) Campus, play-ground, playing-field, recreation
ground; play, game; toys, playthings. (cf. hámpang).

_halampangánan_, (H) See halampángan.

_halampángon_, (H) Play, game; playthings, toys.

_halámpul_, (H) Plaster, unguent, salve, ointment, poultice or the
like applied externally as a remedy against various diseases and
injuries. (cf. hámpul; talámbal).

_halamúl_, Rice porridge, gruel, ground maize, etc. used to desalt
pickled meat or fish. (cf. hamúl, hámlan, halámlan).

_halanasón_, That is--, can--, should be practised or trained. Mga
mangangawáy nga halanasón. Recruits. Soldiers in training. (cf. hánas).

_halan-áyan_, Beam-roll, warp, cloth to be woven on a
loom. (cf. hán-ay).

_halandumánan_, (H) Memorial, recollection, remembrance, reminder,
keepsake, souvenir, memento. (cf. hándum).

_halandúmon_, (H) Memorable, worthy to be remembered, recorded or
cherished in thought, to be kept in mind with gratitude. (cf. hándum).

_hálang_, To be sharp, pungent, biting (of taste; cf. káhan, hárang).

_halangarón_, (H) To be looked up to, etc. See halángdon.

_halángdon_, (H) Worthy to be looked up to, high, exalted, great,
praiseworthy, respectable; honourable, excellent. Ang halángdon nga
pangúlo-puód. His Honour, the Provincial Governor. Ang halángdon nga
pangúlo-púngsud. His Excellence, the Governor General. (cf. hangád,
halangarón).

_halángpon_, That is to be--guessed,--understood,--inferred,--implied,
difficult to understand. (cf. hangúp).

_halánì_, Near, nigh, close, at hand. (cf. lapít, malapít).

_halánig_, (H) A covering or inside lining in the bottom of a kettle
or pot to prevent food from burning or sticking. (cf. haníg, haránig).

_hálap_, Cover, film. (cf. kúlap).

_halápad_, (H) Wide, broad, spacious; to be wide, etc. See lápad,
malápad.

_haláplas_, (H) Salve, ointment, unguent, liniment. (cf. halámpul,
talámbal, ungwénto).

_halápon, halapón_, Covered with a film; dim, not clear. Halapón ang
matá (panúluk) níya. His sight (eyes) is (are) dim. (cf. kulápon,
harápon).

_halaponán_, (H) Roost, perch, chicken-house, pole or rod to perch upon
(for chickens, etc.). (cf. hapón).

_halarán_, (H) Altar. (cf. halalarán).

_hálas_, A kind of sharp-edged grass. (cf. háras).

_halasohasán_, (H) A pair of bellows. (cf. asohasán).

_halasohasánan_, (H) Smithy, stithy, anvil. (cf. asohasánan).


_halasoón_, (H) Soft, pliant, one amenable to flattery,
easily--cheated,--tricked,--cajoled,--wheedled,--imposed
upon. (cf. hásò).

_halatudandulús_, Telegraph office, place where telegrams are received
or despatched. (cf. hatúd, dulús, hatuddulús).

_haláw_, To be anticipative of something unfavourable, fearful of what
may be coming, in dread, apprehensive, fearful, faint-hearted, timid,
timorous, shy, easily taking fright. Napatáy galî sí Fuláno?--Hóo,
naghaláw akó nga dáan sádtong íya balatían waláy sapayán sang pagsilíng
sang madámò nga sa madalî magaáyo siá. So, N.N. is dead?--Yes, I had a
presentiment (was in dread, saw it coming) at the time he contracted
that disease, though many were of the opinion that he would recover
soon. Ginhalawán níla ang amó nga mga páhò, kay, konó, maáslum,
ápang amó tapát ang naúrut sang bakál sa tiénda. They thought those
mangoes would not sell, because they were suspected of being sour,
yet they were bought up to the last on the market. Nagahaláw siá
sa pagtabók sa subâ, kay may bahâ. He is afraid to cross the river,
for it is in flood. Indì ka maghaláw sa pagpanáysay sa íya sang ímo
kinahánglan. Don't be shy to explain to him your need. Naghaláw
(hinaláw) siá sang pagkakítà níya sang kabáskug sang láwas ni
Fuláno nga índì na siá buót magdúmug sa íya. When he saw the strong
build of N.N. he was so intimidated that he would not wrestle with
him. (cf. hádluk).

_haláwhaw_, To marvel, wonder, be amazed, astonished, spell-bound,
stunned dumb-founded, staggered, surprised. Nagahaláwhaw akó sang
kadámò sang íya nga kináon. I was amazed at the large amount of food
he took. Ginahalawhawán níya ang kadakô kag katahúm sang baláy. He
is astonished at the size and beauty of the house. Kon makítà mo ang
simbáhan ni San Pédro sa Róma pagahalawhawán mo gid ang dìmaísip nga
mga kamahálan sa sulúd sinâ. If you see Saint Peter's Church at Rome
you will marvel at the innumerable precious things there. (cf. búlung,
tingála).

_haláwig_, Long, lasting, extended, protracted, prolonged, lingering,
dragging on, spun out, drawn out (of time). (cf. láwig, maláwig).

_haláy_, To put on a string or line, hang out to dry (clothes,
etc.). Ihaláy (halayá) ang mga linábhan. Hang the washed linen on the
line. Halayí iníng písì sang ímo mga panápton túbtub nga magmalá. Hang
your clothes on this line till they are dry. Kuháa sa madalî ang mga
hinaláy nga ulús, kay malapít na lang ang ulán. Take the clothes off
the line at once, for it is coming on to rain. (cf. sáblay, haláyhay).

_haláyan_, Clothes-line, rope, string, long pole, on which clothes
are hung out to dry. (cf. haláy, bílog, sabláyan, salabláyan).

_halayáon_, (H) Weeping, crying, shedding tears, sighing; to weep,
cry, shed tears, lament; that is to be wept over (as a corpse,
etc.). (cf. háyà, balakhóon, hilibíon).

_haláyhay_, Plural form of háyhay--to sigh, mourn, etc.

_haláyhay_, To suspend from a horizontal pole, throw over a bar or rod,
hang, tie or sling to a spar; that which is suspended. Ihaláyhay ang
mga maís, tabákò, etc. Hang the corn-cobs, tobacco-leaves, etc. on
a pole. Nagahaláyhay silá sing maís sa idálum sang atóp. They are
hanging corn-cobs on poles under the roof. Ang mga bagát, ághò,
etc. ginahalayhayán sing masúnsun sang mga maís sa idálum sang atóp
sang mga baláy. Bamboos, agho-poles, etc. are often used for hanging
up maize-cobs under the roof of houses. May duhá pa silá ka haláyhay
nga maís sa íla baláy. They have still two rows of corn-cobs hanging
in their house. (cf. haláy, sáblay).

_haláy-hálay_, Dim. and Freq. of haláy--to suspend from, etc.

_halayô_, To be far, distant, etc. See hilayô, layô.

_haléa_, (Sp. jalea) Jelly.

_hálhag_, To space apart, etc. Ginhálhag níla ang mga tápì sa salúg,
kay nakulángan silá sing káhoy. They spaced the planks apart on their
floor, because they were short of wood. (cf. hághag).

_hálhal_, With a protruding lower lip, having a prominent lower
lip. Táo nga hálhal. A person with a projecting lower lip. Indì ká
magpahálhal. Don't pout, don't stick out your lower lip. (cf. hílhil,
sámbil).

_halí_, Hello, hey, etc. Halí, nagabút na si tátay! Halí, ginbáklan
níya akó sing bág-o nga báyò! Oh, Father has arrived! Oh, he has
bought a new jacket for me! (cf. halá).

_háli_, To shout "halí". Halíha ang mga bátà. Shout "halí" to the boys
(to scare them off or the like). (cf. hála),

_hál-id_, To litter, throw down--, spread--, scatter--, in
disorder. Ihál-id lang sa báid ang mahígkò nga panápton. Just throw
your dirty linen in the corner. Indì ka maghál-id sang mga papél
sa salúg. Don't litter the floor with those papers. Hal-idí (--irí)
ang pamúsud sang hulút siníng mga ulúnan. Throw these pillows in the
corner of the room. (cf. dúm-ok, háb-on).

_halídhid_, Rim, edge; something very small, little, puny, tiny,
diminutive, wee, miniature, minute, insignificant (as compared with
something else). Walâ gid bisán sa halídhid lang sang mga kasákit
sa Purgatóryo ang mga kasákit dirí sa kalibútan. The pains in this
world are beyond compare less than those in Purgatory. (cf. lándong,
dámgo; sídsid).

_halígi_, (H) Post, pillar, column, shaft, support, upright; to use,
make or provide a post, etc. Halígya iníng páyhod. Make a post of this
páyhod-tree. Ihalígi ko iníng kamúnsil sa ákon baláy. I am going to
use this camunsil-tree as a post for my house. Pagahalígyan ko ang
ákon kamálig sing káhoy. I'll put up wooden posts for my hut. Ang
mga hinalígi sang isá ka balasahón. The columns of a newspaper.

_halimbáwà_, Instance, simile, comparison, example, illustration,
parable, exemplification; to use or explain by means of a simile,
etc. Maghalimbáwà ka sang ímo nga ginsúgid. Explain your statement
by an example. Halimbawái ang ímo nga ginhámbal. Make what you have
said clear by a simile. (cf. túlad, katúlad, súbung, daw, ángay,
anggídánggid).

_halimbawáan_, Model, pattern, type.

_halimpapáw_, Superficial; careless, negligent; a
hypocrite. (cf. alimpapáw, salimpapáw).

_halín_, To leave, depart, go away, take oneself off. Halín kamó. Go
away. Clear out. Pahalinón mo siá. Dismiss him. Discharge him or send
him away. Amó inâ gánì ang ginhalinán sang íla nga kasábà. That was the
origin of their law-suit. Diín ka maghalín? Where do you come from? Ang
mga namók amó ang ginahalinán sang madámò nga balatían. Many diseases
are due to mosquitoes. Kaína gid lang siá makahalín. He departed only
a short while ago. (cf. íway, lúmbus, lakát).

_hálin_, To change the place of, remove or move to another place,
shift. Halína ang ímo baláy sa umá. Remove your house to the
farm. Ginhálin níya ang lamésa. He shifted the table. Pagahalínon
ko ang ákon karabáw. I am going to take my buffalo to another
place. Ihálin akó sang ákon báka sa umá. Kindly put my cow in another
part of the field.

_hálin_, Cultivated land reclaimed from a river-bed or from a
hill-side by levelling, especially in the neighbourhood of a rill
or brooklet. Ginpatámnan níya sing kakáw ang hálin. He planted
cacao-trees on the land that was formerly a river-bed. (cf. doróg,
bálud--land near a river).

_halíngtang_, A step, stair, round, rung of a ladder. (cf. halíntang,
alintagá).

_halín-hálin_, Dim. and Freq. of hálin--to move, shift. Indì mo
paghalín-halínon ang aparadór. Don't keep moving the cupboard about
from place to place. Also: going from place to place, migratory,
nomadic, wandering, roving.

_halíntang_, See halíngtang--rung, step.

_halíp-ot_, Short; to shorten. (cf. líp-ot, malíp-ot).

_hálit_, Injury, harm, perdition, ruin, destruction; to damage,
injure, spoil, impair, harm, destroy, cause irreparable loss or
damage. Naghálit siá sang íya kabúhì--or--ginhalítan níya ang
íya kabúhì. He spoilt his life. Indì mo paghalítan ang ákon mga
tanúm. Don't damage my plants. (cf. dáut, tístis, panístis).

_hálmok_, To soften, mollify, make flexible, pliable, limber, or
supple. Ginhalmokán níya ang tabákò nga kigás. He softened the brittle,
dried-up tobacco-leaves. Ipahálmok mo sa tabákò iníng mga dáhon sang
lúmboy kag gawáygáway. Use these lumboy and gawaygaway-leaves to make
the tobacco soft (flexible).

_haló_, The iguana, a large lizard.

_hál-o_, Rice-pestle.


_hálob_, To soften or make flexible through heat. Hálba (halóba)
ang dáhon sang búyò. Make the buyo-leaf warm and soft. Hálbi akó
sing búyò, kay ibányos ko sa hubág. Make a buyo-leaf warm and soft
for me, because I am going to rub the swelling with it. Ihálob akó
ánay siníng dáhon sang ságing, kay iputús ko sa ákon alopíhon. Kindly
soften this banana-leaf, for I am going to use it to wrap round the
rice for rice-cakes (called alopí). (cf. láhob).

_halób_, Passed through heat, having been exposed to and softened by
heat. (cf. lahób).

_halóghog_, A running string, etc. See alóghog.

_haloghogán_, See aloghogán.

_haló-hálo_, Dim. of haló. Anything that somewhat resembles an iguana.

_halókhok_, Grunting; to grunt. Ang báboy nagahalókhok. The
swine grunts. Ginahalokhokán akó sang báboy. The pig grunted at
me. (cf. harókhok).

_halón_, Shadow. (cf. háron, hándong, lámbung, lándong).

_hálong_, To handle with care, treat tenderly, prize, appreciate,
cherish. Halóngi ang bátà. Treat the baby tenderly. Nabúong ang glóbo,
kay walâ níya paghalóngi. The lamp-globe broke, because he did not
handle it with care. (cf. ámlig, tátap, pakamahál, utitíd).

_halóp_, A stopple, stopper, plug; boss, stud. (cf. alóp, halúp).

_hálop_, To plug, stopper, stopple. (cf. álop).

_halóphop_, (B) To cook only a small amount of rice. See alóphop.

_halóthot_, To sew, stitch, mend, do needle-work, ply the needle,
make small stitches very near together by hand-sewing. Halothotá
lang ang hénero, kay walâ kitá sing mákina. Sew the cloth by hand,
because we have no sewing-machine. (cf. halúthut).

_hálug_, To throw, hurl, fling, launch, spear, lance,
pierce. (cf. hárog).

_halúg_, Loose, not tight, moving freely; to loosen, get loose. Ang
pakô sang íya kamiséta halúg. His shirt-sleeve is loose. Ang síngsing
mo halúg sa ákon túdlò. Your ring is too big for my finger. Naghalúg
ang háwak sang íya sárwal, kay nagníwang siá. The waist of his
trousers became too wide for him, because he had got lean. Pahalugá
gáwa ang paláy sa búhò. Make the bolt fit a little more loosely into
the hole. Ipahalúg ko sa sapatéro iníng mga sapátos, kay gutúk sa
ákon tiíl. I'll get the shoemaker to widen these boots, for they are
too tight for my feet. (cf. tugák, hugák).

_halugâ_, Loose, slack, not tied or fastened well, shaky, unsteady,
not tight; to be loose, etc. Ang íya paghigót sang karabáw halug-á. He
tied the buffalo loosely. Naghalugâ ang higót sang bakág. The fastening
of the basket came untied. Halugaá ang paghigót, índì mo paghúgton. Tie
loosely, not tightly. (cf. halúg, halugakâ, halungkakâ).

_halugakâ_, Loose, slack, etc. See halugâ.

_halugáw-an_, To fail, lose, have one's hopes dashed; to balk,
frustrate, prevent, baffle. (cf. lugáw-an).

_halúg-halúg_, Dim. and Freq. of halúg. Pahalúghalugón mo iníng
síngsing kay gutúk sa íya nga túdlò. Enlarge this ring a little,
for it is too tight for her finger.

_halúgut_, To pull--, draw--, tug--, haul--, down. Halugúta ang písì,
agúd magsákà ang hayáhay. Pull the rope down, so that the banner may
go up. Ihalúgut akó sináng kalát nga nagasáblay sa tambárà. Kindly
pull down for me that rope hanging from the scaffold. Halugútan mo
ang mutón sang kalát, dílì ang kawáyan, kay mataís ang kalát sa bokó
sang kawáyan. Draw the rope down over the pulley, not over the bamboo,
for the rope will be chafed by the bamboo-joint.

_halúk_, (H) Kiss, buss, osculation; to kiss, give a kiss. Halukí
(hádki, hágki) siá. Kiss him. Ginhalukán siá ni nánay níya. His mother
gave him a kiss. Pahaluká si tátay mo. Let your father kiss you. Indì
ka magpahalúk. Don't allow yourself to be kissed. Ipahalúk ang bátà
sa íya nga tíyà. Give the child to its aunt to be kissed. (cf. bisá,
bisíto, harók; hadô).

_halúmhum_, A slight cold or fever. Ginahalúmhum siá. He has a slight
fever. He suffers from a cold. (cf. lágnat, hilánat).


_halúmhum_, (B) To hatch, sit on eggs, produce young ones by
incubation, incubate. Iníng mungâ nagahalúmhum sing napúlò kag waló
ka ítlog. This hen is hatching eighteen eggs. Ipahalúmhum mo iníng
mga ítlog ko sa ímo mungâ. Get these eggs of mine hatched by your
hen. (Put these eggs of mine under your hen). (cf. lúmlum).

_halúng-halúng_, Very stingy; selfish, greedy. (cf. hangúlhangúl).

_halungkágay, halungkagáy_, To clink, chink, tingle, ring, tinkle,
jingle. Nagahalungkágay ang sensílyo sa íya bólsa. The small change
is jingling in his pocket. Pahalungkagayá (Pahalungkagáya) ang ímo
kwárta. Jingle your money. (cf. lungkágay).

_halungkakâ_, Loose, etc. See halúg, halugâ, halugakâ. Also:
Half-hearted, careless, insincere, not with right good will. Halungkakâ
gid lang ang pagágda níya sa ákon. He invited me only as a matter of
form (for mere appearance' sake, with no real heartiness). Halungkakâ
nga trabáho. Bungling performance, careless, botched, clumsy
work. (cf. pasamústra, alakápa, halimpapáw, salimpapáw, pakuláhaw).

_halungkátay_, To continue without a break or interruption; to draw out
or prolong a conversation, talk long, have a long chat. Nagahalungkátay
na ang íla sugilánon--or--ginapahalungkátay níla ang íla
sugilánon. They are having or enjoying a long chat. Halungkatáya
lang ang ínyo hambárò. Just keep on talking. Naghalunkátay ang íla
sugilánon. They had a long chat or conversation.

_halúnhun_, To swallow, gulp down, ingurgitate without
chewing. Halunhoná lang ang sutánghon. Simply swallow the
"sutánghon". (cf. tulún, síbà, sibád).

_halúp_, Stud, boss, gold-foil, decorations made of gold or silver,
gilding, silvering; precious stone set in a ring, etc. (cf. alóp,
halóp, támpok).

_hálup_, See hálop--to plug.

_hálus_, (H) Scarcely, hardly, barely, only just, with
difficulty. Hálus akó makaginháwa. I can scarcely breathe. Hálus
siá nakabáton sang sulát, dáyon siá naglakát. When he received the
letter, he went off at once. Hálus siá nakaabút sa baláy nabúgtò
ang íya ginháwa. He had barely reached home, when he expired. Hálus
magbágting ang linggánay dáyon kamó magbángon. As soon as the bell
rings, rise at once. Hálus námon madumdumán inâ. We can scarcely
remember it. We have almost forgotten it. (cf. hárus).

_halús_, (H) To feel empty, hungry, famished. See hálwos id.

_halusón_, (H) Scarcely, with difficulty, only just, only with great
effort. Halusón siá makalakát, makatokád, etc. He can walk, climb,
etc. only with difficulty. Ang masakít nga táo halusón makapúngkò. The
sick man can scarcely sit up. (hálus).

_halúthut_, To sew, stitch, do needle-work, ply the needle, mend
clothes. Indì siá makahibaló, bisán na lámang maghalúthut sing mga
báyò. She does not even know how to mend a torn jacket. (cf. halóthot
id.).

_hálwos_, (B) To have a sinking sensation due to hunger or exhaustion,
feel hungry, exhausted, famished. Nagahálwos ang solóksolók
ko. My stomach is empty. (I feel hungry). Nahalwosán akó. I am
famished. Nagahálwos ang ginháwa ko kon magdúmdum akó sang ákon
bátà dídto, kay básì kon anó ang matabô sa íya. It makes my flesh
creep to think of my child there, for something might happen to him
(her). (cf. halús; hílab, hírab).

_hálwot_, A medicinal plant.

_hámag_, To fall upon, attack, grapple with. Naghámag siá sa kay
Fuláno--or--ginhámag níya si Fuláno. He fell upon N.N. (cf. soróso,
aránka).

_hamák or hámak_, Of little value, thought little of, of slight
consideration, disregarded, ignored. Hamák nga táo. A man of little
consequence.

_hámak_, To slight, think little of, treat with disrespect, ignore,
disregard, despise, not to heed, pay no attention to, have no
consideration for. Ginahamákan níla ang mga sógò sang Diós. They
are not heeding God's commandments. Indì ka maghámak sang íya mga
láygay. Don't slight his admonitions. Don't despise his advice. Indì
mo pagpahamákan ang maáyo nga batásan sa ímo nga panimaláy. Don't
permit good conduct to be disregarded in your home. (cf. pahámak
which is more in use).

_hamál_, A handful; to eat with one's hand, using the hollow of the
hand to carry food to the mouth. Ihamál lang ang kán-on. Just eat
rice from the hollow of your hand. Hamalí siá sing isá ka hamál nga
kán-on. Put a handful of rice into his mouth. Hamalí ang bábà níya. Put
a handful to his mouth, i.e. Give him a slap on the mouth. Hatági akó
sing isá ka hamál. Give me a handful. (cf. dapál; bókod, bokód--to
eat with one's fingers).

_hamatâ_, Having or bearing many children, fecund, prolific, teeming,
of great fecundity. (bátà).

_hamáy_, To become or be thin, lean, emaciated, chiefly said of the
face or cheeks. Nagahamáy ang íya nga guyá. His face is becoming
thin. Naghamáy ang íya písngi sa lakás nga pagpadayáw kag sa mínos
nga pagkáon. Her cheeks have fallen in on account of too much vanity
and too little food. (cf. níwang, hágpis, hágwos).

_hamáy-hámay_, Dim. and Freq. of hamáy.

_hámbad_, A modern term for million. (cf. ramák).

_hambádan_, A millionaire. (cf. ramákan).

_hámbal_, Speech, say, talk, locution, parlance, utterance;
language, expression, oral communication, discourse; to say, speak,
talk, utter. Anó ang hámbal níya? What did he say? Naghámbal
siá nahanungúd sa pagpangúma. He spoke about farming. Indì ka
maghámbal sing súbung sinâ. Don't talk like that. Hambalán mo siá
sang áton nga ginkasugtánan. Talk over with him our agreement. Anó
ang ihámbal ko sa íya? What shall I say to him? Hambalá siá tungúd
sináng mga butáng, agúd mahibaloán mo ang íya lúyag. Speak to him
about those things, that you may know what he wants. Hambalón
mo siá sing maáyo gid. Speak to him in a very friendly way,
very--civilly,--politely,--courteously,--amiably,--affably,--genially,--gently.
(cf. púlong, silíng, koón, dágil, hambárò, súgid).

_hambalámbong_, Fine speaking, rhetoric, oratory,
eloquence. (cf. hámbal, ámbong).

_hambalánon_, Talk, chat, converse, conversation, interlocution,
collocution, confabulation, discourse, dialogue, parley,
palaver. (cf. halambalánon, sugilánon, hambárò).

_hambaléra,--o_, A great talker, prattler, gossip, chatterbox, boaster,
braggart. (cf. babáan, wakalán, buraán, palasúgid, diláan, hadakán).

_hambárò_, Talk, conversation, chat, gossip; to have a conversation,
etc. (cf. sugilánon, hambalánon).

_hámbil_, To attach to, cover with, envelop, clothe. (cf. tábon,
táklub, takóp).

_hámbog_, Chatterbox, prattler, braggart, boaster; to talk much, be
very loquacious, boast, brag, vaunt, etc. Dílì ka maghámbog. Don't talk
so much. (Don't brag). Ginhambogán akó níya sang íya pagkasampáton. He
boasted to me of his accomplishments. Indì mo siá paghambogán,
kay bátok sa íya ginháwa ang tanán nga hámbog. Don't boast to him,
for boasting is his pet aversion. Anó na man ang ihámbog níya sa
ámon? What next will he boast of to us?

_hámbuy_, To put--, place--, rest--, lay--, support--, one's arm
upon. Hámbuy or maghámbuy ka sa ákon abága. Put your arm on my
shoulder. Ihámbuy ang bútkon mo sa halambúyan sang síya. Rest your
arm on the arm of the chair. Hinambuyán níya ang lamésa. He laid his
arm on the table.

_hámgud_, To strip small flowers or leaves off the stalk by passing
them through the closed hand or fingers. Hamgurá (-udá) lang ang
balúnggay, kay ilúnud ko sa tinóla. Strip the balunggay-leaves,
for I am going to put them into the sauce (stew). Hamgurí akó sing
dáhon sang gawáygáway. Strip me some gawáygáway-leaves. Ihámgud akó
sing pilá ka búlak sang kadenadeamór. Please strip off for me some
flowers of the cadena de amor.

_hámham_, To take hold of, grasp, seize, grab, clutch, usurp,
annex, take possession of, encroach upon. Indì mo paghamhamón
ang íya sang ibán. Don't lay your hands upon things belonging to
others. Ginhamhamán níya ang talámnan ni Fuláno. He encroached on
N.N.'s field. Ginpaísol níya ang kodál kag hinamhamán níya sing duhá
ka bára ang ákon pamulákan. He moved the fence back and annexed two
yards of my garden. (cf. sabán).

_hamíl_, Any soft material used to sit or lie upon, as a cushion,
hassock, bolster and the like.


_hámil_, To use or provide a soft support, to cushion, to
pillow. Ginahámil níya ang ulúnan sa íya nga likód. He is using the
pillow as a support for his back. Hamíli siá sing hábul sa likód. Have
her back propped up by a blanket. Hamílan mo ang pulungkóan sing
almoháda. Place a cushion on the seat. Hamílon ko lang iníng
kógon. I'll use this cogon-grass as a soft support. Ginhámil níya
ang ákon báyò. He used my jacket as a bolster. May hamíl kamó sa
kátre? Have you anything to put on the bed as a mattress? Húo,
ihámil mo lang iníng hábul. Yes, just use this blanket as a
mattress. (cf. hampílò, ampílò).

_hamíl-ay_, To nurse, look after, attend to, take care of a child,
a sick person and the like. Ginahamíl-ay níya si nánay. She is
attending to mother. Hamil-ayá si tátay mo. Take care of your
father. Ihamíl-ay akó siníng mga bátà. Please take care of these
children for me. Maghamíl-ay ka sa masakít. Look after the sick
person. (cf. tátap, sagúd).

_hamílì_, Chosen, select; precious. (cf. pílì, pinílì; hamíli).

_hamíli, hamilí_, Precious, valuable, dear, costly, expensive,
high-priced. (cf. bilídhon, mahál, malahálon, bilí).

_hamitán_, Border, rim, edge (of cloth, etc.). (cf. binít, bígki).

_hámlan_, From hamúl. (cf. halámlan).

_hámlò_, To handle, finger, thumb, stain by touch. Indì mo paghamloón
ang gátas. Don't touch the milk. Ginhamloán sang bátà ang dugús. The
child put its finger in the honey. (cf. kámlot, kámlò, hámò).

_hámlok_, Mosquito. (cf. namók, lamók).

_hámno_, (B) To put away, put by, secrete, stow away, hide, conceal,
reserve, put out of sight. Hamnohá ang ákon líbro. Put my book away,
hide it. Hamnohí akó sang ákon líbro. Hide my book for me. Ihámno mo
akó sang ákon líbro. Kindly keep my book safe. May ginhámno kamó nga
súd-an nga nabilin? Have you put by any side-dishes that remained
over? (cf. tágò).

_hámò_, To soil, spoil, dirty, defile, tarnish, harm, contaminate
(by touch or contact with), make impure, etc. as the food on a plate
off which one has eaten. Indì mo paghamóon ang kán-on. Don't touch
the rice. Ginhámò níya ang kán-on sa ákon pínggan. He touched the
rice on my plate. Indì mo pagihámò ang ímo túdlò sa binahóg. Don't
put your finger in the food (mixed on the plate). Iníng dalága nahámò
na. This girl has lost her honour. (cf. hámlò).

_hamô_, Spoilt, impure, tainted, defiled, tarnished, contaminated by
touch, etc. Hamô nga pagkáon. Food made impure by having been touched
by somebody. Hamô nga babáe. A woman that lost her honour.

_hamô_, To kiss, particularly said of kissing among near relatives. Si
nánay naghamô sa ákon. Mother kissed me. Ginhamoán siá sang íya nga
tíyà. His aunt gave him a kiss. Pahamoá si tátay. Let father kiss
you. Ipahamô ang bátà sa íya nga tíyò. Hand the baby to uncle that
he may give it a kiss. (cf. halúk, bísa, bisíto).

_hám-og_, Damp, dank, wet, moist, humid; to be damp, etc. Naghám-og
ang íya ulús sa ulán. Her clothes became damp in the rain. (cf. hamúg).

_hamókon_, To fold or roll up, make up in a bundle or roll (clothes,
mats, etc.) Hamokóna ang ímo báyò, delárgo kag hábul. Roll up into
a bundle your jacket, trousers and blanket. Hamokóni akó sang ákon
patádyong. Fold up my skirt. Ihamókon mo akó ánay sang mga panápton nga
nagakalábit sa díngding. Fold and roll up for me, please, the clothes
hanging on the wall. (cf. balólon, bágtong, putús; baláhos, hápin).

_hamón_, (Sp. jamon) Ham.

_hamón-hámon_, (B) Cover, curtain, screen, blind. Butangán nínyo sing
hamónhámon ang gawáng, agúd índì kitáon ang mga nagasulugál. Screen
the window (door), so that the gamblers may not be seen. (cf. lipód,
kúmbung, biómbo, kortína).

_hamóok_, Deep--, profound--, dead--, heavy--, sleep; sound or fast
asleep, in a sound sleep, somnolent, lethargic. Hamóok gid ang ákon
pagkatulúg kagáb-i. Last night I slept very well. Nahamoókan sía
(sa katulúgon). He fell into a profound sleep. (cf. hamúok).

_hamóy_, To run one's hand down the face as after a swim or bath. Ang
bátà nga nagsálum naghamóy sang íya nawóng sang pagbútwà níya. The
boy that dived into the water ran his hand over his face on coming
to the surface. Ihamóy ang pólbos sa nawóng mo. Rub the powder over
your face with your hand. Hamoyí ang nawóng sang bátà sing túbig, kay
mahígkò. Wash the baby's face with water, for it is dirty. (cf. lám-os,
hilám-os, hunáw, hináw, húgas).

_hamóy-hámoy_, A very small fish. (cf. homóyhómoy).

_hámpak_, Beating, thrashing, whacking, etc.; to beat, thrash, whack,
drub, cane, strike, lash, flagellate, flog, whip, scourge, trounce,
birch. Hampaká siá. Beat him. Whip him. Hampakí siá sa likód. Give him
a flogging on his back. Hinámpak siá ni nánay níya. His mother gave
him a beating. Ginhámpak ang Aton Ginúo sing mabangís sang mga mapíntas
nga soldádo. The cruel soldiers scourged Our Lord severely. (cf. búnal,
lámpus, lámba, bálbal).

_hámpang_, Sport, play, frolic, recreation, game, gambling; to play,
sport, frolic, romp, gamble. Hámpang--or--maghámpang kamó. Play. Diín
kamí magahámpang? Where shall we play? Hampangí lang nínyo ang
sagwâ. Just play in the drawing room. Hampangá ang kuríng. Play with
the cat. Nagahámpang silá sang baráha. They are playing cards. They
are gambling. Pahampangá lang ang mga bátà sa plása. Let the boys
play on the public square. Daw hámpang gid lang iní sa ímo. This is
mere play for you. This is very easy for you. Ginhámpang lang níya
inâ. He just made sport of it. He made a joke of it. (cf. sipál).

_hampángan_, A toy, plaything, gew-gaw, gimcrack.

_hampáng-hámpang_, Dim. and Freq. of hámpang. Nagahampánghámpang silá
sang polítika. They are playing at politics.

_hámpas_, To strike or beat against; to attack. (cf. dámpal, hámpak).

_hampílò_, Saddle-cloth, saddle-pad. Hinampilóan níya ang kabáyo. He
saddled the horse. (cf. ampílò).

_hámpul_, A healing ointment, unguent, salve, plaster, poultice,
embrocation; to poultice, put on a plaster, salve, etc. Hampulí siá
sing mga dáhon sang patáni. Apply patani-leaves to him. Hinampulán
níya ang hubág sing aróma. He treated the boil with a plaster prepared
from the aroma-plant. Ihámpul sa íya iníng búyò. Apply to him these
buyo-leaves. (cf. támbal).

_hámrus_, (B) Strong, stalwart, sturdy, strapping, athletic, muscular,
brawny, sinewy, powerful, robust, well-built, well-knit, well
set-up. (cf. mapúrus, mabáskug, mabákud, isganán, kusganán, maísug).

_hámrus_, To pluck or tear off with some force, strip off leaves,
flowers, etc. by passing them swiftly through the closed hand,
wrench or drag off. Hamrusá ang dáhon sang balágon. Strip the leaves
off the vine. Hamrusí akó sináng mga búlak. Pluck for me those
flowers. Ginhámrus lang níya ang hilamón. He clutched the grass and
tore it away. (cf. hámgud).

_hámtak_, A kind of beans. (cf. hántak, balátong).

_hámtang_, To put, place. (cf. butáng, hamutáng).

_hámtang_, Firm, stable; level smooth; to be stable, level,
etc. Hámtang na ang íla baláy. Their house is strong now. Hámtang ang
salúg, plása, etc. The floor, public square, etc. is level. Hámtang
na ang íla pagpuyô dídto. Now they are living there for good,
permanently. Sa hámtang sang ----. Instead of ----. In place of ----.

_hámtong_, Full-grown, developed, strong, mature. Hámtong nga
táo, háyup, etc. A mature, full-grown man, beast, etc. Sa amó nga
pagpangabúdlay naghámtong ang íya láwas. In that laborious occupation
his body developed to maturity.

_hamúg_, Wet, damp, dank, moist. See hám-og.

_hamúl_, To desalt, diminish--, counteract--, lessen--, moderate--,
the salty taste of pickled meat or fish by adding gruel, porridge or
the like; any substance used for the purpose of desalting, as ground
corn, gruel, rice-porridge, etc. Hamulí (Hámli) ang inasinán nga kárne
sing maís. Add some corn to the salt meat to make it palatable. Kon
índì mo ánay paghamulán (paghámlan) iníng binóro, daw sa índì ka
makaít-it. Unless you first mix something mild with this salt fish,
you will scarcely be able to stand its sharp taste. Anó ang ihamúl
mo sa ginamús? What will you add to the pickled fish (to counteract
its briny taste)? (cf. halamúl, halámlan).

_hamulág_, To separate from, leave, relinquish, go away
from. (cf. bulág).


_hamulák_, Bearing flowers, blooming, flowering, full of flowers,
in flower, blossoming, in blossom. (cf. búlak, himulák, palabúlak).

_hamulálong_, To look at narrowly, inspect, view. (cf. mulálong).

_hamuláng_, Expert in cock-fighting; trained for--, accustomed to--,
the cock-pit. Manók nga hamuláng. A game-cock. (cf. búlang, buláng).

_hamul-áwon_, Molave, a hard-wood tree and its highly esteemed
timber. (himul-áwon id.).

_hamulít, hamúlit_, To besmear, besmirch, dirty, soil, sully,
bedaub. (cf. búlit).

_hamulús_, To utilize, take the opportunity, profit by. (himulús id).

_hamungáyà_, Fruitful, plentiful, fertile; happy, felicitous,
blessed. Hamungáyà nga túig, kaorasón, kahimtángan, etc. A happy
year, a blessed hour, a prosperous position or condition of life,
etc. Nahamungayáan silá karón sa íla pangabúhì. At present they are
living quite happily. (cf. kahamungayáan, mahamungayáon).

_hamúok_, Sweet, delicious, balmy, profound, sound, deep, (said of
sleep). Hamúok gid ang ákon katulúgon kagáb-i. Last night I slept
very well. Ibanátbánat mo ang ímo kaugatán, kon buót ka mahamuókan
sa ímo katulúgon. Exercise your body, if you wish to enjoy profound
or restful sleep. (cf. kahamúok, mahamúok, hamóok).

_hamúot_, Sweet, deep, profound, delightful (of sleep). See hamóok,
hamúok.

_hamúot_, To be pleased or gratified; pahamúot--to please,
gratify, delight, show affection or good will. Magpahamúot ka sa
ímo isigkatáo. Try to please your neighbour. Pinahamút-an níya si
Fuláno. He showed good will to--, tried or wished to please--,
N.N. Ginahamútan sang Mahál nga Diós ang mga pangamúyò sang mga
matárung. God is pleased with the prayers of the just. Nagakahamúot
silá sinâ. They like it, are pleased with it. Takús nímo igkahamúot
inâ. You should (ought to) be pleased with it. (cf. buút, hamút-ay).

_hamút_, Fragrance; perfume, odour, sweet smell, agreeable scent,
fine aroma; fragrant, odoriferous, scented, aromatical; to smell
sweet, be fragrant, odoriferous, redolent of, etc. Hamút nga habón,
ágwa, etc. Scented soap, fragrant perfume, etc. Walâ sing hamút iníng
pólbos. This powder is not scented. Naghamút na ang mga páhò. The
mangoes have now begun to give out their delicious odour. Pahamutá
ang baúl mo. Sprinkle some scent in your trunk. (cf. humút, ámion).

_hám-ut_, (H) To excite laughter, make fun, be or make hilarious,
entertain pleasurably. Nahám-ut kamí sang íya sugilánon. We
laughed heartily at what he said. We listened with pleasure to his
story. (cf. makahalám-ut, kalaham-után).

_hamutáng_, To put, place. (cf. butáng, hámtang).

_hamutáway_, Separated from the rest, isolated; to be segregated,
isolated, alone. Nagahamutáway ang íla baláy. Their house is
isolated,--stands alone,--has no near neighbours. (cf. sím-ong,
lígwin, putáputá).

_hamút-ay_, To agree, like--, please--, each other. Ang idô kag ang
kuríng walâ gid sing paghamút-ay,--índì gid maghamút-ay. Dogs and
cats don't like each other. (cf. hamúot, himút-ay).

_hámyang_, Exposed, in full sight or view, laid out; to be laid out,
be exposed to view. Hámyang na sa lamésa ang mga pagkáon. The eatables
have been placed on the table,--are spread on the table. Ipahámyang
mo ang pagkáon sa látok. Put the food on the table. Nagahámyang
siá dirâ sa salúg. He lies there on the floor in full view of
everybody. (cf. kúyang, butáng, áy-ay).

_hámyang_, To lie supine or face upward, lie on one's back, lie in
state (of corpses). Ang patáy nagahámyang sa lamésa sa balatonán. The
dead person is lying in state in the reception room. Ginpahámyang
níla ang patáy sa salúg. They laid the dead man face upward on the
floor. Ipahámyang nínyo ang bángkay sa lamésa. Put the corpse face
upward on the table. (cf. hayáng, kayâ, kayáng, kúyang).

_hamyángon_, To lie postrate. Nagahamyángon siá sa salúg nga patáy
na. He lies lifeless on the floor. (cf. hámyang).

_hanâ_, To get ready to strike, make as if to strike, threaten with
uplifted arm or weapon. Ginhanâ níya akó nga huyapán. He threatened
to slap me. Ginhanaán níya akó sang íya binángon. He made as if to
strike me with his bolo. Ihanâ sa íya ang ímo bastón. Threaten him
with your stick.

_hanâ_, To suspect, etc. See haón.

_hanabô_, To come to pass, occur, chance, happen, fall out, turn out,
take place, befall. Nahanabô nga ----. It happened that ----. Ang
nahanabô sa ibán saráng man mahanabô sa áton. What has befallen others
may also happen to us. Sang pagabút ko dídto nahanaboán akó sang íla
pagilináway. When I arrived there they happened to be fighting among
themselves. (cf. tabô).

_hánag_, Dawn, soft, dim light. See bánag.

_hanág-hánag_, Dim. and Freq. of hánag. See banág-bánag.

_hanágub_, Filling or covering all, spread everywhere, pervading,
prevailing, full; to fill or cover everything. Hanágub na
ang kagab-íhon. It's full night. Darkness covers the whole
land. (cf. tágub).

_hanâ-hanâ_, Dim. and Freq. of hanâ. Also: to make--, be--, ready to
(act, etc.).

_hanáhay_, Gentle, mild, soft, zephyr (of wind). (cf. mahínay, kanúnay,
dupóydúpoy); wide, spacious, open, clear of obstruction, large (of a
field, room, etc. cf. malápad, maálway, masángkad); to be mild, blow
softly; to be spacious, etc. Ang hángin hanáhay or nagahanáhay. A
gentle breeze is blowing. Hanáhay nga hulút. A large, spacious room.

_hanáhon_, Leafy, covered with--, full of--, leaves. (cf. dáhon).

_hanálì_, Sudden, unexpected. See hinálì.

_hanalî_, To act impulsively, etc. See hinalî.

_hanámbong_, Presentable, decorous, genteel, well-bred, well-behaved,
polished, refined, admissible in society, etc. (cf. ha-, támbong).

_hán-an_, From haón, hanâ--to suspect, etc.

_hanáo, hanáwo_, Populous, peopled, full of people, densely
populated. (cf. táo, táwo).

_hánap_, To seek, look or search for. Hanápa ang lápis ko. Look for
my pencil. Hanápi akó sang karabáw nga nadúlà. Find for me the lost
buffalo. Ihánap akó ánay sang ákon tulún-an. Kindly try to find my
book. (cf. sághap, ságap, lághap, etc.).

_hánas_, To drill, train, exercise, practise, rehearse, habituate,
become familiar with, familiarize, make used to, accustom, inure to,
break in to. Hanása ang mga bátà sa pagsulát. Practise the children
in writing. Ginhánas níya ang manók sa pagsámpok. He trained the cock
for fighting. Hanási akó sang ákon karabáw sa pagdáro. Do me a favour
and break in my buffalo to the plough. Kon mapísan ikáw maghánas sinâ
maábtik ka sa dílì lang madúgay. If you practise that diligently you
will soon become skilful at it. (cf. ánad, ságad, sáli, buyó, bánggad,
balándra, gálit).

_hanás_, Expert, trained, drilled, exercised, practised, well versed
in, habituated, inured to, familiarized with, accustomed to, clever at,
"a dab hand at." (cf. anád, batíd, sagád).

_hanás_, To be weary, exhausted, tired out, fatigued, done or
knocked up, prostrated, spent. Indì mo akó ánay paghambalán, kay
nagahanás ang ginháwa ko. Don't talk to me now for I am quite done
up. Nahanasán akó sang ákon ginháwa kahápon sing hápon sa lakás nga
pagtánum. Yesterday evening I was quite tired out with the long bout
of rice-planting. (cf. lúyà, kápoy, pául).

_hanás-hánas_, Dim. and Freq. of hánas. Kinahánglan nga gayúd nga
hanáshanáson mo gid ang pagsulát, kon may hándum ikáw sa pagsulúd
sa pagkamamantálà. It is indispensable for you to practise writing
constantly, if you wish to enter the profession of a news-reporter.

_hanas-hanasán_, Place for exercise, drill-hall, drilling-ground,
field for practice.

_hán-aw_, To root up and plant somewhere else, transplant, remove
and set in a different place, transfer to another soil. Han-awá ang
gútuk sang kamátis. Transplant the tomato-seedlings. Ihán-aw ang
mga gútuk sang repólyo. Root up and transfer to another soil the
cabbage-seedlings. (cf. húnul--to transplant seedlings together with
the seedling-pot).

_hanáwo_, Populous. See hanáo.

_hán-ay_, The amount of cloth to be woven at a time on a loom, a
loom, as much cloth as is prepared for weaving on the warping board,
length, weave.


_hanáyak_, Wide, spacious, etc. See hanáhay.

_hanáyap_, Hanáyap nga lugár, hulút, umá, etc. A large space, a
spacious room, an extensive farm, etc. (cf. hanáyak, hanáhay).

_hándà_, Ready, predisposed, willing, fain to, minded to, inclined to,
in the mood to, not loth to, nothing loth, prepared, in readiness,
fit for immediate use or service; to make or get ready, etc. Hándà
akó sa pagtúman sang kon anó ang igasógò mo. I am ready to do whatever
you may command. Ihándà ang mga báso kag pínggan sa panyága. Get the
glasses and plates ready for dinner. Handaí siá sing túbig, labadór
kag tuálya. Prepare for him water, a wash-basin and a towel. Ginhándà
níla ang tanán sa ígo kag napát-ud nga táknà. They had everything
ready at the proper and appointed hour. Hándà ka balá sa pagbúhat
sinâ? Are you willing to do that? Hándà siá sa tanán. He is ready or
prepared for everything. (cf. hímos, tigána, áman, patigáyon, lísto).

_hánda_, To drive, urge on, impel, stimulate. Handahá ang karabáw sang
bulunál. Urge on the buffalo with the whip. Ihánda sa mga kánding ang
ímo bastón. Use your stick to set the goats in motion. Ginhánda níya
ang mga báka. He drove the cattle onward. (cf. hála).

_handâ-hándà_, Dim. and Freq. of hándà. Ginahandáhándà na níla
ang tanán nga kilinahanglánon sa ádlaw nga inogpakasál sang íla nga
bátà. They are now preparing everything necessary for their daughter's
(son's) wedding day.

_hándal_, To offer for sale, sell (second hand), put up for sale, look
for a buyer, try to dispose of (jewelry, watches, pictures, furniture,
etc.). Ihándal mo ang ímo mga arítos sa ahénsya. Offer your ear-rings
to the pawnbroker. Ginhandalán níya akó sang íya réloh. He wanted me to
buy his watch. Kon malúyag ka gid maghándal sang ímo pulséras, ihándal
mo sa ígò kag matárung nga bilí. If you really wish to dispose of your
bracelets, sell them at a fair and honest price. (cf. tányag, hángdal).

_handál-hándal_, Dim. and Freq. of hándal. Nagahandálhándal síla
sing mga pahumút, mga estámpa kag nagakasarî-sárì nga punípúni
sa láwas. They are selling perfumes, pictures and various
cosmetics. (cf. hangdálhángdal id.).

_hánday_, To lie upon, etc. See bángday, tángday.

_hándò_, To consent, etc. See hángdò, tángdò.

_hándog_, Steep, sheer, scarped, precipitous, almost vertical, upright,
standing on end, abrupt; to be or make steep, etc. Hándog nga hágdan. A
steep ladder or stair. Hándog nga bató. A precipitous rock. Pahandogá
ang hágdan. Set up the ladder nearly upright. Ginában sang subâ ang
bánglid kag ang pángpang naghándog. The river has washed away the
incline and the bank has become sheer. (cf. tíndog, píl-as).

_hándok_, Inflated, bloated, distended, blown up, puffed up, flatulent,
full of wind; to be or become full of wind, etc. Hándok or nagahándok
ang íya búsung. His stomach is full of wind. (cf. hábok, búntud).

_hándong_, (H) Shadow, etc. See háron, lándong, lámbung.

_hándum_, Thought, desire, longing, expectation, looking forward to,
wish; to think much about, desire, long for, want to, look forward
to, cherish, be desirous of. Dakô ang íya hándum nga magtuón siá kag
magálam. He has a great desire to study and become learned. May hándum
ikáw nga magkúhà sing título? Have you in mind to get a title? Húo,
dúgay na nga ginhándum ko inâ. Yes, I have cherished that thought for
a long time. Ginahándum níya ang pagkádto sa Maníla. He wants to go
to Manila. Handumá ang kalolô sang ímo nánay. Cherish the memory of
your mother's kindness. (cf. dúmdum, painóíno, hunâ-húnà, himúlat,
tigáy-tígay).

_handumánan_, Remembrance, reminder, memento, memorial, souvenir,
keepsake. (cf. halandumánan).

_hándus_, To spear, spit, lance, stick, harpoon, bore or thrust
through, pierce or stab with a pointed weapon, perforate, put a spear
through, etc.; overhand; to overhand (in sewing). Handusá ang haló
sang matalíwis nga báhì. Pierce the iguana with the sharp-pointed
dibble. Hinandusán sang isá ka bángkaw ang kílid ni Hesús. The side
of Jesus was pierced by a lance. Ihándus ang ímo dága sa líog sang
talunón. Thrust your dagger into the wild pig's throat. Ginhándus
sang polís ang íya bángkaw sa báboy. The policeman put his lance
through the pig. (cf. dulút, lápus, lapús, bunô).


_hángà_, A dunce, idiot, fool, simpleton, half-wit, zany, buffoon,
gaby, noodle, looby, booby, nincompoop, ass. (cf. kólò, búngaw,
tampuháw, kalúndong, kalúng, kagúng, etc.).

_hangád_, To lift up, raise one's eyes to, look up to in
reverence. Maghangád ka sa Diós. Look up to God. Ihangád ang ímo
mga matá, tagipusúon, etc. Lift up your eyes, heart, etc. Tamà gid
ang paghangád sa íya sang íya mga ginasakúpan. His followers look
up to him with very great respect. His followers think too much of
him. (cf. báyaw, tánglà, tungkáaw, tukháyaw).

_hangág_, Stupid, dull. (cf. hángà, balingág, tipangág, tánghag,
tangadál, etc.).

_hangâ-hángà_, Dim. and Freq. of hángà. Also: To gape at, to gaze
or stare at with open mouth, be dumb-founded, greatly astonished,
lost in wonder, aghast. (cf. pamalúng).

_hangál_, To listen, overhear, eavesdrop, be within ear-shot. Indì
ka maghangál sang ámon sugilánon. Don't listen to our
conversation. Ginhangalán níya silá sa tágò. He secretly overheard
their talk. Hangalí ang íla halambalánon kon anó. Try to overhear
what they are talking about. (cf. tingád).

_hangál-hangál_, Dim. and Freq. of hangál. (cf. tingádtingád).

_hangáwà_, Fear, apprehension, misgiving, diffidence, timidity; to
be afraid, apprehensive, shy, timid, nervous, daunted, in dread, to
boggle at, flinch--, shrink--, from, blench, funk, falter, waver. Indì
ka magkahangáwà. Have no fear. Nagakahangáwà, akó magsákà (sa pagsákà)
sa matáas nga kampanáryo. I am afraid to ascend the high belfry. Ang
íla ginakahangáwà amó ang ----. What they are apprehensive of is
----. (cf. hádluk).

_hangawáy_, Martial, warlike; a warrior, fighter; gamester. (cf. áway).

_hangáw-hángaw_, To look about, observe, stroll or roam about
out of curiosity. Maghangáwhángaw ka dídto. Go there and see for
yourself. (cf. bantáybántay, tulúktúluk, tan-áwtán-aw, paníid, etc.).

_hángbas_, To cut grass, etc. See hágbas, id.

_hángdal_, To offer for sale, etc. See hándal id.

_hangdál-hángdal_, See handálhándal.

_hángdò_, To consent, assent, give--, yield--, nod--, assent,
acquiesce, concede, fall in with, agree, accede, comply with, approve,
grant, give one's consent. Hangdoá na lang ang íya ginapangáyò. Just
comply with his request. Hangdoí akó sang ákon ginakinahánglan sa
ímo. Grant what I need from you. Hinangdoán man níya ang íla nga
ginbúhat. Moreover he had given his consent to what they did. Indì
ka gid maghángdò sinâ. Don't acquiesce in it. Don't agree, or yield
your assent, to such a thing. (cf. tángdò, sugút, túgut).

_hánggà_, (B) Smallpox. May hánggà siá or ginahánggà siá. He has
smallpox. Hinánggà (ginhánggà) siá. He had--, contracted--, was
afflicted with--, smallpox. (cf. butí).

_hánggab_, To desire, wish for, crave, hanker after, yearn for, be
wishful of, covet, have a fancy for, set one's heart upon, be bent
upon. Indì mo paghanggabón ang walâ sing láwas. Don't wish for what
does not exist, for what cannot be had. Don't cry for the moon. Indì
ka maghánggab sa pagkádto (magkádto) sa Amérika, kay walâ ka sing
kwárta. Don't entertain the desire of going to America, as you have
no money. Si Pédro nagahánggab gid nga magdúmug sa kay Hosé. Peter is
anxious to wrestle with José. Ang íya ginahánggab amó gid lang ang
pagmánggad kag pangalípay. What he has set his heart upon is wealth
and pleasure. (cf. íbug, híngyo, hingamó, himúlat, hándum, lúyag).

_hanggaón_, (B) Pock-marked, pitted with smallpox. (cf. butihón).

_hánggud_, (B) Large, tall, big, huge, vast, sizable, ample, spacious,
capacious, voluminous, bulky, massive, massy, great; to be or become
large, etc. Naghánggud na ang tínday sang karabáw. The calf of the
buffalo has grown big. Hanggudá ang ákon báhin, ang búslot, etc. Give
me a large share, make a wide hole, etc. Pahanggudá ang báboy kag
ibalígyà mo kon hánggud na. Let the pig get big and sell it when it
is full-grown. Ipahánggud ko sa ímo iníng tínday. I'll give you this
calf to rear. Hánggud nga baláy, táo, bató, etc. A large house, man,
stone, etc. (cf. dakô, mabahól, matáas, malápad, hanáhay).

_hánggup_, To soak in water, to steep, mix with water (and salt), put
in soak. Hanggupá ang kamátis. Put the tomatoes in water. Hanggupí akó
sing kán-on. Mix me some cooked rice with water. Malúyag ka magkáon
sing hinánggup nga rábanos? Do yon like to eat radishes steeped in
water? (cf. húlum, húrum, lúgum, lúnud, lakót).

_hánghang_, Foothold, nick, notch, step cut in a tree, particularly in
a coconut palm to facilitate climbing; to cut such steps. Maghánghang
ka sang lubí. Cut steps in the coconut palm. Ginhanghangán níla ang
lubí sing duhá ka púlò ka hánghang. They cut twenty notches in the
coconut palm.

_hangílid_, Wide, having a broad side; sidewise, lateral,
sideways. (cf. kílid).

_hangilóng_, Having a large nose, long-nosed, nosey. (cf. ilóng).

_hángin_, Wind, air, draught, breeze, squall, puff, gust (of wind);
atmosphere, climate; to be windy, etc. May hángin or nagahángin. The
wind is blowing. It is windy. Ginhangínan kamí sing mabáskug
sang pagbáklay námon sang búkid. We encountered a strong wind,
when we crossed the mountain. Pahangíni ang humáy. Winnow the
rice. Magpaliwálíwa ka sa laín nga hángin. Spend your holiday in
a different climate,--in different surroundings. (cf. unús, dulús,
bágyo, buháwi, mádlus, dupóydúpoy).

_hangínan, hanginán_, Well ventilated, airy, breezy, windy, exposed
to the wind. (cf. hángin, hangínon).

_hanginéra_, A lying, bragging boastful woman. (cf. hángin, and the
Sp. suffix -era, hanginón).

_hanginéro_, A windbag, boaster, braggart, noisy pretender, one telling
invented stories, liar. (cf. hadakán, agrót, búgrit, butigón, wakalán,
hámbog, hanginéra).

_hangínon_, Windy, breezy, pertaining to the wind. (cf. hángin).

_hanginón_, A windbag, etc. See hanginéro, hanginéra. Also: Proud,
haughty. (cf. bugalón).

_hanginúm_, A drunkard, booser, tippler; to drink much, tipple,
boose. (cf. inúm, palaínum, hubúg, balúng, lingín).

_háng-it_, To nibble, gnaw, bite off piece by piece. Iní nga bátà sa
gihápon may ginaháng-it nga kalan-ónon. This child has always something
to nibble at (cakes, pastry, biscuits, etc.). (cf. kítkit, páng-os).

_hángkat_, To challenge, defy, provoke. (See ákyat, ángkat).

_hangó_, To smell, sniff, scent, nose a smell or odour. Maghangó ka
sang kahamút siníng búlak. Smell the fragrance of this flower. Hangohí
ang ágwa kon maáyo. Take a sniff at the perfume to see whether it
is pleasant. Ginhangohán níya ang botílya kon bíno sa mísa ukón
bíno tínto. He smelled the bottle to find out whether it contained
Mass-wine or red table-wine. Ang idô nagahangó sang ági sang talunón
kon maggódgod sinâ. The dog scents the track of the wild boar when he
is in search of it. (cf. sínghot, panínghot, panimáhò, dapóg, panapóg).

_hángos_, To wheeze, puff, gasp for breath, pant, breathe heavily
or with difficulty. Kon magdalágan ka sing súbung siní magahángos
ka sa dílì madúgay. If you run like this you will soon be out of
breath. Ginpahángos siá ni Fuláno nga naglagás sa íya. N.N. in his
pursuit made him gasp for breath. Nagahángos siá--or--nagahángos ang
íya ginháwa. He is out of breath--or--he is panting. (cf. hápò).

_hangúl_, Close-fisted, miserly, penurious, parsimonious, near, close,
venal, niggardly, sordid, mercenary; to be close-fisted, etc. Indì
ka maghangúl. Don't be stingy or niggardly. Nahangulán akó sa íya. I
got the impression that he was miserly. (cf. ímot, dingót).

_hangúl-hangúl_, Dim. and Freq. of hangúl. Hangúlhangúl nga táo. One
who is rather stingy, close-fisted, (cf. maímot).

_hangúp_, To catch the meaning of, comprehend, understand, fathom,
grasp, take, make out, guess rightly, see through. Ang makahangúp
humangúp. Let him who can understand it. Hángpa (hangupá) ang íya
sinâ nga kahulúgan. Try to catch the meaning of that. Ginhangúp ko
gid ang íya nga hinámbal. I understood very well what he meant to
say. Maghangpánay kamó. Try to understand each other. (cf. hántup,
sáyod, balintúnod, áto, hibaló, túngkad).

_hanguyús_, To be in a state of fear, perturbation, trepidation,
terror, agitation, to be all of a tremor, be shocked or greatly
surprised, to shiver, tremble, shake, make one's hair stand on
end. Nahanguyús siá sang pagkabatî níya siní. He was shocked when he
heard this. Nahanguyusán siá sang balítà nga napatáy sa hinálì tátay
níya. He was taken aback by the news that his father had suddenly
died. Pinanghanguyusán siá sang bágyo. The hurricane made him greatly
afraid. (cf. hádluk, kúgmat, lísang, kúrug, kuyús, kúlbà, dírham).

_hángyò_, To desire, crave, long for, hanker after, wish,
etc. (cf. hánggab, híngyò, hingamó, lúyag, himúlat).

_hánhan_, To set, settle down, subside, become adjusted, applied
especially to food. Naghánhan or nahánhan na ang íya kináon. The
food he took has settled now. Pahanhaná ang pinanyága mo. Let your
dinner settle first. Túman na ang pagpahánhan ta, búsà maglakát na
kitá. We have now had sufficient rest after the meal, therefore let
us go on. Pumahánhan silá sing diótay nga tión kag pumadáyon sang íla
pagdáro. They rested a short while after the meal and then continued
ploughing.

_haní_, (B) To whisper, say or speak with bated breath, in muffled
tones, hiss through clenched teeth, breathe to, murmur, mutter. Ihaní
mo lang sa ákon ang ímo kinahánglan. Just tell me what you want in
a whisper. Hanihí or hányi akó sang ímo kinahánglan. Whisper to me
your need. (cf. hutík).

_haníb_, To stack, pile. Hanibá ang mga káhoy. Pile (stack) the
wood. (cf. aníb, haníp).

_haníg_, To cover or line the bottom of a kettle or pan with leaves or
the like to prevent the food from sticking. Ihaníg sa kólon iníng dáhon
sang ságing. Line the kettle with this banana-leaf. Ihaníg akó ánay
sang kólon, kay matígang akó. Kindly line the rice-pot with leaves,
for I am going to boil rice. Hanigí ang ánglit sing lukáy. Put some
coconut leaves into the small cooking-pot. (cf. baníg).

_haní-háni_, Dim. and Freq. of haní. Nagahaníháni gid silá, walâ sing
duhádúha nga may sekréto silá. They are speaking very low, surely
there is some secret between them. Indì mo pagpurusón ang hámbal mo,
kóndì ihaníháni mo lang sa ákon ang nahanabô. Don't speak in a loud
voice, but just tell me quietly what happened. (cf. hutíkhútik).

_haníp_, To stack, pile, etc. See haníb, aníb.

_hánip_, To arrange, put in order, regulate. Hanípa ang
panápton. Arrange the clothes neatly. (húsay, kaláging).

_hánlud_, To strike inward, affect the interior parts, attack the
inside, said of diseases, etc. Nahánlud ang katúl sang bátà, kay
ginháplas níla sang lána. The child's eczema struck inward, because
they rubbed it with coconut-oil. (cf. ha--, sulúd).

_hánlud_, To be wide, extensive, broad, spacious, open (of a
countryside, etc.). (cf. hanáyak, hanáhay, etc.).

_hánlug_, Slippery, etc. See dánlug.

_hánluk_, See hánlug.

_hánluk_, Mosquito. (cf. hámlok, namók, lamók).

_hánod_, To float, etc. See ánod.

_hánog_, To bruise, contuse, cause a weal, bruise, contusion. Indì
mo pagdagdagón ang páhò, kay mahánog. Don't drop down the mango,
for it will be bruised. Indì mo paghanógon ang átis. Don't bruise
the custard-apple. Ginhúlug níya ang páhò kag ginhánog (nahánog,
nagkahánog). He threw the mango down and bruised it (and it was or
got bruised). (cf. lánog).

_hanóg_, Bruised, injured, harmed, contused, suffused with blood;
bruise, weal, contusion; spoilt, defiled, rotten. Hanóg nga dalága. A
girl that has been corrupted, deprived of her virginity. (cf. hánog;
hamô).

_hanogón_, To be a--, excite--, pity. Amó inâ ang makahanogón. That's
a pity. (cf. kanógon).

_hanók-hanók_, Soft, yielding easily, not strong; to give way easily
to pressure, be soft or yielding, as wet soil, a shaky floor, the
soft bones of a baby, etc. Nagahanókhanók ang salúg, kay gabúk na ang
ibán nga mga soléras. The floor is shaky, for some of the floor-beams
are rotten. Mahádluk akó magtikáng sa pángpang, kay hanókhanók. I am
afraid to step on the river bank, for it easily gives way. (cf. hómok,
lúm-ok, yúm-ok).

_hanóklog_, Pity, commiseration, condolence, sympathy, tenderness,
mildness, compassion, clemency; to pity, commiserate with, condole
with, take pity on, be tender, mild, compassionate. Nagakahanóklog
akó sa íya. I pity him. Ginakahanóklog ko ang íya malisúd nga
kahimtángan. I am touched at his sad condition. (cf. hinóklog, áwà,
lóoy, ngír-o).

_hanópoy_, White, whitish (especially of cadios-peas), Iníng mga
kadyós madámò sing hanópoy. These cadios-peas contain many white ones.

_hánot_, To strike, whip, cane, thrash, flog, beat, trounce,
etc. Hípus kamó, kay kon dílì parehóhon ko kamó nga tanán sang
hánot. Be quiet, or I will punish you all equally. Hanóta siá. Give him
a whipping. Hanóti siá sa likód. Flog him on the back. Ihánot mo sa íya
iníng sinélas. Beat him with these slippers. (cf. búnal, hámpak, etc.).

_hanót-hánot_, Dim. and Freq. of hánot. Indì ka magsáli hanóthánot
sa mga bátà tungúd sang diótay gid lámang nga sayúp. Don't constantly
beat the children for mere trifles, (for the slightest faults).

_hántak_, A kind of beans. (cf. hámtak, balátong).

_hántal_, To stack, pile up, make a pile of (wood, etc.). Hantalá ang
káhoy. Stack the wood. Hantalí akó siníng gatóng. Make for me a pile of
this firewood. Ihántal ang káhoy sa idálum sang baláy. Stack the wood
under the house. Ihántal akó ánay siníng mga halígi sa bodéga. Please
pile up these posts in the store-room. (cf. kamáda).

_hánti, hántì_, Why, well, surely then, in consequence. Hánti, kay
nahímò mo inâ, antusá na man ang sílot. Well, as you did that, now bear
the punishment. Hánti, kay sohólan ikáw, magpangabúdlay ka na. Surely
you should work now that you are being paid for it. (cf. sánglit).

_hántup_, An idea, a thought, concept, conception; to understand,
comprehend, know, conceive, fathom, make out. Indì siá makahántup sang
hámbal nga ininglés. He cannot understand English. Nahantupán ko ang
íla nga katuyoán. I could make out what their intention was. Ginhántup
níya galî ang áton kasugtánan, kay naningádtingád siá sa tágò sang
áton sugilánon. He actually knew of our agreement, for he secretly
listened to our conversation. Ang amó nga hántup nagpalibúg sang íya
úlo. That thought worried him. (cf. hangúp, hibaló, sáyod, etc.).

_hanúdlò_, Large-fingered, having long or large fingers. (cf. túdlò).

_hanúgut_, To permit, allow, consent to, authorize, approve;
permission, consent, etc. Kon walâ sing hanúgut (pahanúgut) sang mga
punoán ----. Without permission, approval or authorization of the
superiors ----. (cf. túgut, pahanúgut).

_hanúl_, Ground-swell, undulation of the ocean; ripple, small wave
or billow; wavy, rippled, ripply; to ripple, be slightly ruffled;
to cluster, move in waves, in a bunch or group. Hanúl (nagahanúl)
ang dágat. The sea is swelling. Nagahanúl gid lámang ang mga lusâ
sa ólo siníng bátà. There are literally masses of nits on the head
of this child. Hanúl siá sing bohók (Nagahanúl ang íya bohók). Her
hair is wavy or ripply. (cf. balúd; púnsok).

_hanúl-an_, Bony, etc. (cf. hinúl-an, túl-an).

_hanúlhánul_, Dim. and Freq. of hanúl. Nagahanúlhánul ang íya
bohók. Her hair is wavy.

_hanúmdum_, To bear in mind, remember, think frequently of. Maghanúmdum
ka siní. Bear this in mind. Remember this. (cf. dúmdum).

_hanumúg_, A wrestler; to wrestle (professionally). (cf. dúmug).

_hanumdúman_, Keepsake, remembrance, etc. See handumánan, halandumánan.

_hanungúd_, To refer to, belong to, be relevant, appertain to, bear
upon, touch, affect, have to do with, be one's business. Inâ nga mga
butáng nahanungúd sa mga punoán, sa pagkamanugdumála, sa simbáhan,
etc. Those things belong to the office of an administrator, are the
business of the authorities, are part and parcel of the Church,
etc. Iníng báhin mahanungúd sa kay Fuláno. This share belongs to
N.N. Sa nahanungúd sinâ walâ akó sing lábut. As regards that, I have
no interest in it--or--nothing to do with it. Indì mo pagipahanungúd
sa ibán ang ímo kasaypánan. Don't put on others the blame for your
own faults. Ang mga mapainubúson nagapahanungúd sang tanán nga
mga kaayóhan sa mahál nga Diós, ápang ang mga bugalón sa íla nga
kaugalíngon. The humble refer all good things to God, but the proud
to themselves. (cf. tungúd).

_hán-us_, A stroke, cut, lash; to throw, push, poke, knock,
thrust; strike, beat. Ihán-us iní sa báid. Throw this into the
corner. Ginhán-us níya siá sa díngding. He thrust him against the
wall. (cf. banál, lámba, lámpus, habúy, pilák; bálbal, bákol, hánot).

_hanús_, (B) Thin, slender, tenuous; to be or make thin, tenuous,
slender, to whittle down, pare down. Naghanús ang kawáyan sa
pagágus. The bamboo became slender through trimming. Bal-agí
ang salsálon túbtub nga maghanús. File the iron till it becomes
thin. Hanusá iníng bastón. Make this stick slender. Pahanusí akó
sing liníyas nga kawáyan. Get for me some thin pieces of split
bamboo. Ipahanús ko sa ímo iníng paláy, kay gutúk sa búhò. I'll get
you to pare down this wooden peg, for it is too thick to fit the
hole. (cf. gamáy).

_hanúsbò_, Pity, commiseration, sorrow, grief, sympathy, condolence;
to take--, have--, pity on, commiserate, condole with, be sorry
for. Nagakahanúsbò akó sinâ (Ginakahanúsbò ko inâ). I am sorry for
it. Ginakahanusboán níla sing dakô ang makalolóoy nga kahimtángan ni
Fuláno. They are full of sympathy with the sad condition of N.N. They
are very sorry for N.N.'s sad plight. Dílì mo igkahanúsbò inâ. Don't
grieve over it. Don't be sorry for it. (cf. hinóklog, hanóklog, áwà,
lóoy, subô).

_háom_, To shut, close (a door, window, etc.). Haóma ang ganháan. Close
the door. Ginháom mo sing maáyo ang bintánà? Have you closed the
window well? (cf. háop, ángkop, dápat, será).

_haón_, (B) To suspect, lay the blame on, impute to, tax with,
attribute or charge to, inculpate, incriminate, twit. Indì ka maghaón
sing maláin sa íya. Don't suspect him of evil-doing. Ginahán-an
(ginahaonán) siá nga siá amó ang nagkáwat. He is suspected of having
stolen it. Indì mo paghán-an sing salâ ang ímo isigkatáo kon walâ
mo masayóri sing matúod. Don't impute a fault to your neighbour,
unless you are sure about it. Indì mo pagihaón sa íya ang kwárta mo
nga nadúlà. Don't cast suspicion on him with regard to your money that
was lost. (cf. bangúd, pabangúd, pahanungúd, hanâ, mókmok, sumálà).

_háon_, A vat-full or cauldron-full of sugar; the last stage of
sugar-milling; to stir, mix, move about with shovels, etc. the
nearly finished product of sugar-milling. Haóna ang kalámay. Stir
the sugar (in the vat, cauldron or tub). Haóni akó sing isá ka háon
nga kalámay. Get ready for me one vat-full of sugar.

_háop_, To shut, close well (a door, window, etc.). Haópa ang
ganháan. Shut the door. (cf. háom, dápat, takúd, será).

_haóp_, Closed, shut. (cf. háop).

_hapâ_, To prostrate oneself, fall or lie down--flat,--prone,--face
downward,--on one's stomach; to prostrate, lay low, fell. Nagahapâ
siá. He is lying down flat, prone or prostrate. Pahapaá (paháp-a)
siá. Lay him down face downward. Hapaí (háp-i) ang bángkò. Lie down
prostrate on the bench. Hináp-an níya siá. He prostrated himself
(humbled himself) before him. (cf. yaúb, dágpà, dúsmò, háplak,
hágmak, sukámod).

_hapâ-hápà, hapâ-hapâ_, Dim. and Freq. of hapâ. Also: to be very
submissive, humble oneself, solicit help with great deference or
the like.

_háp-an_, From hapâ--to prostrate oneself.

_hapáw_, Superficial, on the surface; passing, insincere; to skim, take
off the surface. Hapawá ang kán-on sa kólon. Take out of the kettle the
top layer of rice. Hapawón mo ang hígkò sa túbig; or: hapawán mo ang
túbig sang hígkò. Take the scum off the surface of the water. Ihapáw
ang kutsára sa gátas sa pagkúhà sang latáb. Dip the spoon a little
into the milk to take off the cream. Hapáw gid lang ang ímo pagdáro;
padútla gid ang arádo. You are ploughing only the surface; press
the plough down deep. Hapáw man lang ang íya kaálam. His learning is
merely superficial (not deep or thorough). (cf. salimpapáw, pakuláhaw).

_hapáw-hápaw_, Dim. and Freq. of hapáw.

_hápay_, To bend low, incline, bow down, flatten. Ang humáy ginahápay
sang hángin. The rice is being bent by the wind. Hapáya ang tígbaw,
agúd maghapús ang áton paglígad. Bend down the tígbaw-reeds, that we
may pass easily. Nahapáyan ang ákon talámnan sang humáy sa mamádlus nga
hángin. The rice on my field is beaten down on account of the strong
wind. Pahapáya ang bohók mo. Flatten down your hair. (cf. hiláy).

_hapáy_, Bent low, inclined, flattened to the ground. (cf. hápay).

_hapáy-hápay_, Dim. and Freq. of hápay. Nagahapáy-hápay ang hángin
sang maís. The wind--is swaying the corn,--is making the corn bow down.


_hápdì_, A sensation of great pain, a smart, an acute, sharp or
biting pain; to smart, cause a sharp or acute pain (by the stroke
of a whip, etc.). Nagahápdì iníng pilás ko. This wound of mine is
smarting. Ginahapdián siá sang kagát sang idô. He is in great pain
from the dog's bite. Indì mo pagpahapdión ang íya pilás kon tambalán
mo. Avoid causing his wound to smart, when you apply remedies. Kon
haplikán ka sang látigo magahápdì ang lábhag. When you receive a
flick of a whip the weal smarts. (cf. sakít).

_hápdus_, To chafe, fret, hurt, make or be sore (of hands, eyes,
etc.). Naghápdus ang ákon tiíl sa lakás nga paglakát. My feet are
sore on account of so much walking. Nahapdusán ang ákon tiíl, kay
gutúk ang sapátos ko. My feet have become sore, because my boots are
tight. Ang pagbayó nagpahápdus sang íya kamót. Pounding rice chafed
his hands. Pinahápdus sang púling ang ákon matá. The mote made my
eye sore. (cf. hápdì).

_hapíl-hápil_, Lean, thin, gaunt, slender, spare,
emaciated. (cf. lapíl-lápil, níwang, nipís).

_hapín_, Wrapping, covering, cover; to wrap, cover, envelop. Hapiní
sing papél ang gisî sang ímo pányo, kay súdlan ko sing asín. Cover
the torn part of your handkerchief with paper, for I am going to
fill it with salt. Ihapín iníng papél sa ímo tulún-an. Wrap your
book up in this paper. Make a cover or jacket for your book with this
paper. Ginhapinán níla sing maáyo ang mga médyas nga íla pinadalá sa
ákon sa koríyo. They wrapped the socks up well which they sent me
by mail. Ihapín akó ánay siníng mga panápton. Please wrap up these
clothes for me. (cf. baláhos, baráhos).

_hápit_, To drop in, visit, call upon; to strike, graze, touch. Hápit
ka ánay dirí sa ámon? Won't you come up for a moment? Ginhapítan
nínyo si Párì Lukás dídto sa Ilóngílong?--Walâ kamí makahápit sa
íya, kay nagdalî kamí sa pagpaúlì. Did you call on Father Lucas in
Iloilo?--No, we could not call on him, for we were in a hurry to get
home. Ang íya baláy hinápit sang líntì kag nasúnug. His house was
struck by lightning and burnt to the ground. Ang isá ka trák humápit
sang íya nga síko nga natángday sa talámbwan sa túman kabáskug nga
túbtub ang mga túl-an sang íya abága nagkalutá gid. A passing truck
grazed his elbow, which was resting on the window, with such force
that his shoulder was dislocated. (cf. sákà, dúaw; salapáy).

_háplak_, To fall or drop flat on the ground, lie on one's stomach,
lie prone. Nagháplak ang tagôtò sa salúg sang pagkahúlug níya halín
sa kisamí. The lizard dropped flat on the floor when it fell from the
ceiling. Sang nagakatulúg akó nahaplakán akó sing tokô. When I was
asleep a gecko dropped flat on me. Ang bátà nagaháplak sa salúg. The
baby is lying on its stomach on the floor. Pahaplaká lang ang bátà
sa salúg. Just lay the baby flat on the floor. (cf. hapâ, dúsmò, etc.).

_háplas_, To dab, smear, put on, overspread with something unctuous
or adhesive, salve, rub in an ointment or the like. Haplasí siá sing
lánggaw. Rub him with vinegar. Iháplas sa íya iníng lána. Rub this
coconut-oil on him. May inogháplas kamó sa síkmat? Have you any
ointment for back-ache? (Metaphorically: Hinaplasán níya siá sing
mga hámbal nga matám-is. He "rubbed him down" with soft words. He
"softsoaped" him). (cf. pálhit, hapúlas; apóhap, unís, odót, etc.).

_háplay_, To lean upon, rest against, repose upon (the lap or breast
of a mother, etc.). (cf. dáplay).

_háplik_, A kind of Filipino folk-dance.

_háplik_, To give a smart blow with anything supple, flick or
flip a whip or the like; a flick, cut, stroke (of a rod, whip,
etc.). Iháplik ang ímo látigo sa likód sang kabáyo. Give the horse a
flick of your whip on the back. Ngáa man nga nagháplik ka sa íya sang
ímo kamágo?--Tungúd kay nahaplikán man akó níya sing lúnang. Why did
you hit him with the string of your top?--Because he threw mud at
me. (cf. háplit, táplik).

_háplit_, See háplik.

_háplos_, To dab, smear, etc. See háplas, hapúlas.

_hápnig_, To pile one thing above another in regular order, stack
(leaves, sheets, boards, etc.). Hapnigá ang mga dáhon sang búyò,
tabákò, etc. Arrange the buyo--, tobacco-leaves etc. neatly in a
pile. Hapnigí akó sináng mga papél. Put those papers together in a pile
for me. Ihápnig akó ánay sináng mga rebísta nga nagadulúm-ok. Please
pile up neatly those reviews lying about in disorder. Ihápnig nínyo
ang mga tápì sa idálum sang baláy. Stack the boards underneath the
house. (cf. hántal, kamáda, aníb).

_hápò_, Shortness of breath; to cause to pant, puff, gasp for
breath. Ginahápò akó--or--ginahápò ang ginháwa ko. I am out of
breath. Ginpahápò níya akó sa paglakát. He made me pant for breath
walking. Kon magtokád ka sa matáas nga búkid hapóon ka gid. If you
ascend a high mountain you will surely pant for breath. Ang paghákwat
sang bató nagpahápò (naghápò) sa ákon. Lifting the stone made me
pant. (cf. hímpok, púnghà, pungâ).

_háp-og_, Brittle, crumbly, fragile, friable; to be or become
brittle, etc. Ang humáy nga mabasâ kon tumpihón magaháp-og. Wet rice,
if collected into a heap (stack), will get brittle. Sang túig nga
tinalíkdan háp-og gid ang ímo humáy; índì mo pagpahap-ogón sa karón
nga túig. Last year your rice was very brittle; don't let it become
brittle this year. (cf. tapók, matapúk).

_hapóhap_, To stroke, fondle, let the hand glide softly over (the skin
or the like). Hapohápa siá. Stroke him. Hapohápi siá sa bútkon. Stroke
him on the arm. Maálam siá maghapóhap sa mga táo. He knows how to
please the people. (cf. apóhap; kálot, dálò).

_hapô-hápò or hapô-hapô_, Dim. and Freq. of hápò--short of breath.

_hápon_, Afternoon, after dinner, evening, nightfall, eventide, decline
or close of day; to be or turn evening, etc. Karón sa hápon. This
afternoon or evening. Pahúway lang kamó ánay, ápang kon maghápon na
dayónon nínyo ang pagdáro. Take a rest now, but when it gets towards
evening continue your ploughing. (N.B. Hápon includes all the time
between noon and sunset or the ringing of the Angelus-bell; after
the Angelus has been rung "gáb-i" starts). (cf. kahápon--yesterday).

_hapón_, To roost, perch, rest for the night. Ang mga manók nagahapón
kon hápon. The chickens come home to roost in the evening. Tan-awá
ang píspis nga nagahapón sa pilewpilewán sang kawáyan. Look at the
bird perching on the extreme tip of the bamboo. Pahaponá ang mga
manók sa halaponán. Get the fowls to roost in the chicken-house.

_hapón_, (Sp. Japon) Japan; Japanese.

_hapón_, A kind of thread or string much used by anglers as lines for
their fishing-rods. This kind of string seems to have come originally
from Japan; hence the name.

_haponánon_, Japanese.

_haponés_, (Sp. japones) Japanese.

_hapóy-hápoy_, To lean upon, rest for support; leaning upon,
resting. (cf. sándig).

_hapóy-hapóyon_, Supporting oneself by leaning or resting on something,
relying on.

_hapúlas_, To anoint, rub in, dab, etc. See háplas. Also: to stroke,
rub gently; ingratiate oneself with. (cf. hapóhap, apóhap).

_hapús_, To be easy, facile, manageable, require but slight
effort. Papáa ánay ang lánsang, agúd mahapús ang paggábut. Strike the
nail first with the hammer, that it may be easy to draw out. Naghapús
na ang pagbútong sang kángga, kay binutangán sing síbo. It is now
quite easy to pull the cart, for it has been greased. Ginahapusán
akó siní. This is quite easy for me--or--This seems to me to be
easy. Ang pagbinuligáy nagapahapús sang pangabúhì. Mutual help makes
life easy. (cf. hulás).

_hápyot_, To be famished, weak, hungry, have an empty
stomach. Nagahápyot ang ákon solóksolók. I am famished--or--My
stomach is empty. Nahapyotán siá. He became exhausted from want of
food. (cf. sápyot, hálwos, hílab, hírab).

_hárà_, Queen. (cf. réina; hárì--king).

_haráhad_, A thrust, lunge, to lunge, make a thrust or pass at, let
drive at, strike at, threaten with, use physical force. Nagharáhad
siá sa ákon sang íya bastón. He struck at me with his stick. Indì
mo akó pagharahádan (--áran) (--ádon) sang binángon. Don't lunge at
me with your bolo. Iharáhad sa íya ang tagád mo. Strike at him with
your dibble (iron-pointed). (cf. hándus, barumbáda).

_hará-hará_, Crackling (of a brightly burning fire, etc.); to
crackle; to be elated with joy, excited with passion. Ang kaláyo
nagaharáhará. The fire is crackling. Indì mo pagpaharaharahón ang
kaláyo. Don't make the fire crackle. Nagaharáhará siá--sa kalípay,--sa
kaákig. He--is elated with joy,--excited with anger).


_harákhak_, To guffaw, to laugh loudly. (cf. halákhak).

_harána_, (Sp. jarana) Serenade; to serenade.

_hárang_, (B) Sharp, hot, biting, pungent, peppery, acrid, acerb,
burning the tongue; to be acrid, pungent, acerb, etc. (of taste). Akó
sing ákon sa gihápon ginaharángan sang katúmbal, ápang ang ibán nga
naánad na sa pagkáon sinâ walâ pagaharángi. I myself always feel the
burning taste of chili, but others that are accustomed to eat it do
not find it hot. (cf. káhang, káhan).

_harángà_, (B) To snuffle, to speak with the nostrils stuffed-up or
clogged. Nagaharángà gid lang siá. He speaks with stuffed-up nostrils,
or: as if his nostrils were obstructed. Indì ka magharángà, kóndì
isíkma ánay ang síp-on sa pányo mo kag maghámbal ka sing maáthag. Don't
snuffle, but wipe your nose first with your handkerchief and speak
distinctly. (cf. pungá).

_haranísta_, Serenader. Hinaranáhan siá sang mga haranísta. The
serenaders gave her a serenade--or--serenaded her. (harána).

_harán-on_, Royal, regal, majestic, imperial, august; superb, exalted,
lofty, excellent. (cf. hárà, hárì, hariánon).

_harápon_, (B) Having a film or cataract on the eye. (cf. kulápon).

_harapón_, (B) See halapón, the pl. form of hapón--to perch, roost.

_hararókon_, (B) The eyelid, the rim of the eye, the skin surrounding
the eye and including the eyelids. Nagpulá ang íya hararókon
sa lakás nga hibî. Her eyes have become red through excessive
weeping. (cf. ilalakúb, ilalangúb).

_háras, hár-as_, A kind of hardwood tree and its timber, called by many
"hárì sang mga káhoy" on account of its great strength and resistance.

_háras_, A kind of grass with sharp-edged leaves. (hálas id.).

_hár-as_, (B) Miscarriage, embryo, immature foetus (fetus);
abortive, miscarried; to miscarry, have or cause a miscarriage,
to commit abortion. Nahar-ásan (Nahar-asán) ang ilóy. The mother
suffered a miscarriage. Ang pagkahágmak sang babáe amó ang
naghár-as sang bátà. The fact that the woman fell flat on the
ground caused abortion. Nahár-as ang bátà. The child was born
prematurely. (cf. háwhaw--fully developed, mature).

_harás-harás_, Naughty, restless, rude, impolite, full of lively animal
spirits, unmanageable; to be naughty, etc. (cf. darándarán, etc.).

_haráw_, Whoa! an expression used to stop draught-animals, particularly
buffaloes.

_harawaháw_, Having a thin, weak, feeble voice; to be thin, etc. (of
voice). Harawaháw ang íya tíngug. His voice is weak. Nagharawaháw
ang íya tíngug gíkan sa balatían. His voice has become feeble through
illness. (cf. paragáw).

_haráy-háray_, To loaf, roam, stroll about idly. (cf. landólándo,
ladóyládoy, lagáwlágaw, tiyógtiyóg, etc.).

_hardín_, (Sp. jardín) Garden. (cf. pamulákan).

_hardinéro_, (Sp. jardinero) Gardener. (cf. mananánum).

_hárga_, A menial servant contracted for by the year at low wages,
often only a few bushels of rice. (cf. hinúptan, sologoón, batâbátà,
alagád, mamumugón).

_hárì_, King, potentate, monarch, liege lord, suzerain, sovereign,
ruler, royalty; to be a king, to rule, reign, hold sway, govern,
domineer. Sín-o ang nagahárì sa ínyo? Who is your King? Who rules
over you? Ginharían silá sádto ni N.N., ápang karón ginaharían
silá sang íya anák. Formerly they were governed by King N.N., but
their present King is N.N.'s son. Paharía siá sa karnabál. Make
him King of the carnival. Haríi kamí sa piésta. Be our King for the
Feast-day. (cf. ginharían--kingdom; hárà--queen).

_hariánon_, Royal, kingly, sovereign, ruling, monarchic, supreme,
fitting, or pertaining to, a king; imperialistic, imperious,
domineering, masterful.

_harî-hárì_, A petty King, chief, chieftain, headman; a kind of
entertainment presided over by a chosen King. Nagahámpang silá sang
"harî-hárì". They are playing the "King game". Si Fuláno amó ang
harîhárì siníng minurô. N.N. is the ruler of this village,--is
the most influential man in this village. Sín-o ang ginpílì
nínyo nga harîhárì? Whom did you choose as your King for the
entertainment? (cf. pangólo).


_harípo_, (B) To gather, collect, amass, bring--, get--, put--, draw--,
scrape--, lump--, together; to accumulate. Ginharípo níya ang tanán nga
mga patád nga sinulúd sa íya pálhuk. He collected (gathered) all the
stakes and put them in his pocket. Haripóha ang mga tulún-an. Gather
the books together. Iharípo akó sang ákon humáy sa umá. Please gather
together my rice in the field. (cf. hirípo, karipón, típon).

_haroán_, A kind of mud-fish found in rice-fields. (cf. haloán).

_hárog_, To thrust or push with a pointed instrument, spear, stick,
pierce, stab (from below), thrust upwards. Haróga siá sang bagát. Make
a lunge at him (from below) with the (slender) pole. Harógi ang haló
sa solóksolók nga árà sa káhoy. Pierce the belly of the iguana there
on the tree. Ihárog sa íya ang ímo bángkaw. Thrust your lance into him
(from underneath). (cf. dúgdug, hándus, haráhad, túslok).

_haróhal_, Joker, jester. See aróhal.

_harô-hárò, haró-háro_, To fondle, play with, caress, pet. (cf. dálò,
aróáro, hámpang).

_haró-haró_, To speak or act very quickly and hence recklessly,
carelessly, thoughtlessly. (cf. garógaró).

_harók_, (B) See halúk--to kiss, etc.

_harók_, (B) Bruised, contused, swollen, having suffered a blow. Harók
ang íya nga ágtang. His forehead is bruised and swollen. (cf. hanóg,
torakón).

_hárok_, (B) To bruise, contuse, injure by beating, etc. Sín-o ang
naghárok sang ímo matá? Who gave you that black eye? Hinárok or
ginhárok níya ang ákon abága. He bruised my shoulder. Sang pagkulúb
sang áwto ang tátlo ka sumalákay nagkalahárok. When the automobile
turned turtle the three passengers received bruises. (cf. hánog).

_harókhok_, See halókhok--to grunt.

_háron_, (B) Shadow, shade. (cf. hándong, lándong).

_hárothot_, To sew, patch, mend. (cf. halóthot, halúthut).

_haróthot_, To guzzle, quaff, to drink in long and copious draughts,
gulp down. Haróthotá lang iníng tubâ nga sa báso. Swallow this glass
of toddy at one draught. (cf. táyhong).

_haróy_, Oh! Alas! etc. See aragóy, aróy.

_haróy-haróy_, A very common shrub with small rose-coloured flowers
arranged in clusters.

_hurúm-an_, (B) To-morrow, next day. (cf. buás, rúm-an, rumán).

_hárus_, Hardly, with difficulty, scarcely. The phrase "kon hárus pa"
means: Times (conditions, circumstances, etc.) are very hard, trying,
difficult, driving one almost to despair, or the like. (cf. hálus).

_hásà_, Much in demand, well resorted to; to be much in demand, sell
well. Hásà (naghásà) ang pamaligyáon sa tiénda ni Fuláno. The goods
for sale at N.N.'s store are much in demand. (cf. áka, bákal, ágaw).

_hasâ-hásà_, A kind of fish; a kind of shrub.

_hásang_, The gills of a fish.

_hasendéro_, Farmer, planter. (cf. asendéro).

_hasiénda_, Farm. (cf. asiénda).

_háslò_, Useless, good-for-nothing, unserviceable, unreliable, tricky,
cheating, cunning; to trick, fool, cozen, defraud, beguile. Háslò
nga táo. A useless man, a trickster, a good-for-nothing, a
wastrel. (cf. hásò, agóng, lág-it).

_hásò_, To trick, cheat, beguile, etc. Dílì mo siá paghasóon. Don't
cheat (or trick) him. Don't play a trick on him. (cf. háslò).

_hasóhas_, To pump in air. (cf. asóhas).

_hasô-hásò_, Dim. and Freq. of hásò.

_hasó-háso_, See asóhas, hasóhas.

_haso-hasohán_, Bellows, air-pump. See asohasán.

_haso-hasohánan_, Smithy, anvil, forge. See asohasánan.

_hasók_, The small tuft or bundle of usually three or four seedlings
set in the same hole in rice-planting.

_hások_, To plant the "hasók," set the rice-seedlings in the
soil. Ihások ang sábud sa talámnan. Plant the rice-seedlings in
the field.


_hásong_, (B) To gasp, pant, blow, puff, to labour for breath, to be
out of breath, exhausted. Anó ang ginahásong mo? Why are you out of
breath? (cf. hápò, hángos, hímpok, pungâ).

_háspe_, (Sp. jaspe) Jasper; colour of jasper.

_hásta_, Until, etc. See ásta, túbtub.

_hatáas_, High, etc. See táas, hitáas, matág-as.

_hatabô_, An event, happening, incident; to happen, come to pass,
chance, fall out. Nabatabô nga ----. It chanced that ----. It came
to pass that ----. Nahatabuán akó dirí sang pagmasakít sang íya nga
ilóy. I happened to be here, when his mother fell sick. (cf. tabô,
hitabô, hanabô).

_hátag_, (H) A gift, present, donation, boon, presentation; to give,
make a gift of, present with, confer upon, bestow, assign, grant,
award. Ihátag mo inâ sa ákon. Give that to me. Hatági iníng makilímos
sing limá ka dakô. Give this beggar five centavos. Ginhatágan
níya kamí sing tagisá ka páhò. He presented us with one mango
each. Madámò nga mga kaayóhan ang saráng mahátag sa bánwa sang amó
nga pagbulút-an. Such a law could confer many benefits upon the
commonwealth. Indì akó makahátag sinâ sa ímo, kay dílì ákon inâ. I
cannot give you that, because it does not belong to me. Hatágan mo
akó sang ákon ginpangáyò. Grant me my request. (cf. taó, túgrò, tágà,
bugáy, dúlut, regálo).

_hátal_, To be very talkative, be a chatterbox. (cf. hádak, búrà,
hámbog, ngálngal, etc.).

_hatalán_, A chatterbox. See hadakán, buraán, etc.

_hatáy-hátay_, A bog, quagmire, morass, marsh, swamp, fen, quicksand,
(dangerously soft soil where one may sink and lose one's life).

_hát-hat_, To gin cotton, card wool or flax, comb out the seeds of
cotton. Hat-hatá ang búlak sang búlak kag papakón. Gin the cotton and
beat it out. Hathatí akó sing búlak sang búlak--or--maghát-hat ka sa
ákon sing búlak sang búlak. Gin for me some cotton. Iháthat akó ánay
siníng búlak sang búlak. Please gin this cotton for me. (cf. kigí).

_hatî_ Well, consequently, etc. See hánti id.

_hátok_, To prick, hurt, sting, punch holes in, wound on the
surface with any sharp or pointed instrument. Indì mo paghatókon ang
látok. Don't punch or cut holes in the table. (cf. dúsak, dús-il,
bákris, búhò, kúrit, tóktok).

_hatók-hatók_, Dim. and Freq. of hátok. Hatókhatoká ang búyò kag
itámbal mo sa hubág. Bruise the búyò-leaf and put it on the boil.

_hátol_, (B) To take or bring with. Diín mo hatólon ang bátà? Where
are you taking the baby? Anó ang ginahátol mo? What are you bringing
with you? Ginhatólan níya akó sang ákon sapátos. He brought me my
boots. (cf. dalá, dádol, hatúd).

_hatól-hátol_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of hátol. (cf. daládála).

_hát-om_, To divine, guess, surmise, assume, presume,
suppose. Ginahát-om ko nga magaulán karón sa hápon. I think it will
rain this afternoon. (cf. máy-om, sát-um, pakót, hangúp, lágpat).

_hát-on_, Tongue-tied, having an impediment in one's speech, unable
to speak clearly; to speak indistinctly, etc. Nagahát-on siá kon
maghámbal. He has an impediment in his speech. (cf. pihít, áng-ang).

_hatúd_, To take there, convey, carry, transfer to. Ihatúd mo
inâ dídto. Take that there. Carry that over there. Hátdi (hatudí)
siá siníng mga ságing. Hand these bananas to him. Ginhatúd mo na
dídto sa kay Fuláno ang mga sapátos nga íya gintúgon?--Walâ pa akó
makahatúd sinâ, kay masákò ang trabáho ko karón, ápang pagaihatúd
ko gid inâ dídto sa buás sa ága. Have you taken the boots to N.N.,
as ordered by him?--No, I could not take them there as yet, for I
am very busy at present, but I will certainly deliver them there
to-morrow morning. (cf. dalá, hátol).

_hatuddulús_, Telegram. (A modern term; cf. hatúd, dulús).

_hatúd-kawát_, Radiogram, message transmitted by radio. (A modern term;
cf. hatúd, káwat).

_haút-haút_, Short, lacking, insufficient, not covering all the needs,
etc. See hawóthawót. (cf. kabús, kulábus, kúlang, higúshigús).

_haw_, (B) An interrogative or exclamatory particle added to the end
of a sentence in the meaning of: Why, wherefore, for what reason,
well, how is that, explain yourself, or the like. Walâ ka magígham,
haw? Why did you not cough (to make your presence known, etc.)? Walâ
ka magasulát, haw? Why are you not writing? Explain yourself. Walâ
mo pagtumána ang ginsógò ko sa ímo, haw? What is the reason that you
did not carry out my order? (cf. ngáa, tungúd sa anó).

_háwà_, To make room or way, open a passage, clear the course,
give way, leave an open space, let pass. Háwà kamó, kay magaági ang
trak. Make room, for the truck will pass. Hawáan nínyo ang alágyan
sa tungâ sang simbáhan. Leave the passage free in the middle of the
Church. Hawái akó sang mga táo, kay magalubás akó. Get the people
out of the way, for I am going to pass.

_hawâ_, (B) Dirt, filth, uncleanness, foul admixture (in food, drink,
etc.). May hawâ iníng túbì sa báso; índì mo pagímnon. There is some
dirt in this glass of water; don't drink it. (cf. hígkò, bulíng,
ra-íng).

_háwad, háw-ad_, To take--out of,--away from, liberate,
extricate. (cf. háwas, luás, báwì).

_háwag_, A great flow of blood (in connection with childbirth);
puerperal hemorrhage. Also verb. Nahawágan siá kag napatáy. She
died of puerperal hemorrhage. Ginahawágan siá. She is suffering from
puerperal hemorrhage.

_háw-ag_, Wide, roomy, spacious, extended, extensive, ample; to be
wide, etc. (cf. lápad, hanáhay, álway).

_hawá-hawá_, To get exhausted, feel empty (of stomach). Nagahawáhawá
ang ginháwa ko, kay ginagútum akó. I am getting quite exhausted,
for I am hungry.

_háwak_, The waist, waistline; to grasp by the waist. Hawáka (hawáki)
siá. Grasp him by the waist.

_hawák_, Purlin, lath, roof-spar, rib, stringer.

_háwan_, To clear, clean (of obstructions). Hawáni ang idálum sang
baláy, kay madámò ang mga rámò. Clean up underneath the house, for
there is much rubbish there. Nahawánan na ang pátyo sang hilamón. The
cemetery is now free of grass, (i.e. the grass has been cut down or
pulled out by the roots). Iháwan iníng binángon sa plása. Use this
bolo to clean the public square with.

_hawán-háwan_, Dim. and Freq. of háwan. Hawánhawáni iníng dútà sang
mga gámhon. Clean this place a little of its weeds.

_háwas, háw-as_, To take out or off, deliver from, extract, remove,
extricate, set free. Hawasá ang tanán nga mga galamitón sa balatonán
kag lampasóhan mo sing maáyo ang salúg. Remove all furniture from the
reception room and mop the floor well. Sín-o ang nagháwas sang mga
líbro sa látok? Who took the books off the table? Ila siá ginháwas
sa kalisúd. They delivered him from difficulties. Hawasí (iháwas) akó
sang ákon maléta nga árà sa hulút, kag dálhon mo dirí. Kindly get for
me my suitcase there in the room, and bring it here. (cf. kúhà, luás).

_hawát_, To get back one's appetite, have a renewed zest for food,
relish or take proper food again. Ang masakít nga táo nagahawát na
sa pagkáon. The sick man has recovered his zest for food. (cf. dawát).

_hawát-hawát_, Dim. and Freq. of hawát. To eat again a little,
etc. Also: To be nervous, get afraid, tremble. Nagahawáthawát ang ákon
ginháwa sa pagtúluk sinâ nga bátà nga nagapatibí sa hágdan. It makes
me tremble to see that child in danger of falling from the ladder.

_háway_, To be exposed to view, set forth, displayed in public, set
out. Nagaháway na ang mga pagkáon sa lamésa. The food is set out on
the table. Pahawáya ang isá ka botílya nga bíno. Bring out a bottle
of wine. Pahawáyi akó sing isá ka láta nga dólse. Show me a tin of
sweets. (cf. dágay).

_hawáy_, Exposed, open, visible, in full view, set out. (cf. háway).

_háwhaw_, Formed complete, properly developed, not premature. Sa
limá kamí nga magulútud tátlo ang háwhaw duhá ang hár-as. Of our
five brothers and sisters three were born properly developed and two
prematurely. (cf. hár-as--to miscarry).

_háwid_, To retain, keep possession of, withhold, restrain, keep
back. Hawídi (--íri) iní. Retain this. Ginhawídan níya ang duhá ka
mángmang. He kept back the two pesos. Iháwid mo akó sinâ. Kindly
retain that for me. Indì akó makaháwid sa íya. I cannot restrain him.

_hawíd_, Band, bond, fetter, shackles, string, anything that retains
or holds back. (cf. gawíd, higót, tabíd).

_hawít_, To hook, catch or fasten with a hook, hang on to, depend
from. (cf. kawít, káwit, ángot, sáng-at).

_háwla_, (Sp. jaula) A cage, bird-cage. (cf. kurúng).

_hawóng_, Shadow, shade; overshadowed, in the shade, shaded; to
overshadow, keep in the shade. Nahawongán sang páhò iníng mga tanúm
kag nagarikotóy. These plants were overshadowed by the mango-tree
and were stunted in their growth. Yárà siá dirâ sa hawóng. He is over
there in the shadow (shade). (cf. hulúng, hándong, lándong, háron).

_hawót-hawót_, Too little, not enough, short, insufficient, lacking,
wanting. Hawóthawót iníng mga tápì sa salúg, iníng hénero sa isá ka
térno, etc. These planks are not sufficient to cover the floor, this
cloth is not enough for a suit, etc. (cf. kúlang, kabús, kulábus,
higúshigús).

_hay_, (B) For, because. See kay id.

_háyà_, To weep, cry, grieve. Nagaháyà siá. She is weeping. (cf. hibî,
tángis).

_háyà_, To lay out a corpse. Iháyà ang minatáy. Lay out the
corpse. Ang patáy naháyà na sa kátre. The corpse is now laid out on
the bed. (cf. hámyang).

_hayâ_, Laid out, dressed and exposed to view in a becoming posture,
said of corpses.

_háyab_, The first grass-shoots appearing on dry soil after a rainfall.

_háy-ad_, To lay out a corpse, etc. See háyà, hámyang.

_hayág_, Open, clear, manifest, obvious, evident, revealed, in public
view; without secrecy or concealment. Hayág iní sa ákon. This is
clear to me. (cf. dayág).

_háyag_, To be or become manifest, etc. Nagaháyag na ang ádlaw, kay
walâ na sing gál-um. The sun is clearly visible now, as there are
no longer any clouds. Ipaháyag mo inâ sa íya. Show that to him. Make
that clear to him. Ginpahayágan níya akó sang íya nga katarúngan. He
showed me his reason, (made his argument clear to me). Pinahayágan
na akó sang kamatuóran siní. The truth of this is now made clear to
me. (cf. hayág).

_hayághag_, Interstice, etc. See hághag.

_hayáhay_, Flag, banner, standard, colours, ensign, pennon,
pennant. (cf. bandéra.)

_hayáng_, Facing upwards, lying on one's back; to face upwards, lie on
one's back. Nagahayáng siá sa salúg. He is lying (face upwards) on the
floor. Naghayáng siá sa bánkò. He lay on the bench face upwards--or--He
lay on his back on the bench. Paháynga ang bátà. Turn the baby with
its face upward--or--Let the baby lie on its back. (cf. kayâ, kayáng).

_hayánghag_, To gape, to raise one's head and open one's mouth in
surprise or the like, look up in astonishment. (cf. hayáng, tukháyaw,
pamalúng).

_hayát_, Soft, pliable, elastic, supple, not stiff, able to be
extended, ductile, flexible, extensible, extendible; to stretch, pull,
make soft or pliable. Hayatá ang kalát, médyas, sapátos, etc. Stretch
the rope, socks, boots, etc. (cf. únyat).

_hayát_, Stale, old (of bread, etc.).

_hayát-hayát_, Dim. and Freq. of hayát. Somewhat supple, flexible,
extendible, etc. Hayathayatí akó siníng mga sapátos, kay gutúk sa
ákon. Stretch these boots a little for me for they are too tight
for me.

_hayáw_, To make as if to strike, to lift up one's arm, a weapon,
stick or the like (as if to strike). Ihayáw ang ímo kamót. Lift up
your hand. Hayawí (Hayawá) siá sang ímo bastón. Threaten him with your
stick--or--Brandish your stick (before) at him. Indì mo paghayawán
(paghayawón) sang ímo kamót ang ímo ginikánan. Don't raise your hand
against your parents. Ginhayáw níya sa ákon ang íya binángon. He
raised his bolo at me. (cf. bayáw, tukháyaw).

_háyhay_, To sigh, mourn, utter a plaint, wail, fret, sob. (cf. bákhò).

_háyhay_, To lay or lie down straight, horizontally. Indì mo
paghayhayón ang ímo pamatáng, kóndì bangíli sing ulúnan ang úlo
mo. Don't lie down quite straight, but place a pillow under your head.


_háylo_, To attract, take one's fancy, please, draw towards,
allure, induce. Naháylo akó siníng duág. I am pleased with this
colour--or--I like this colour. Ginaháylo akó siníng mga bulák. I
am attracted by these flowers. Pahaylohá siá. Draw him over, (win
him by persuasion). Ipaháylo mo sa íya iníng karabáw, agúd nga íya
báklon. Convince him of the good qualities of this buffalo, that
he may buy it. Ang bátà ginpaháylo níla sang tinápay, agud nga índì
magupúd sa íya ilóy. They gave the baby some bread to induce it not
to accompany its mother.

_hayô_, Familiar name, pet-name, term of endearment; to use a
pet-name, etc. (among relatives and friends). Ginahayô sa íya ang
Ipíng sa lugár sang Felípe. He is familiarly called Ipíng instead of
Philip. Ginahayoán siá sing Imóng--or--nga Imóng. His pet-name is Imóng
(Maximo). Amboy amó ang hayô ni Páblo (sang ngálan nga Pablo, sang
"Páblo"). Amboy is the familiar name for Paul. (cf. bánsag--nick-name).

_háy-og_, Moderately sloping, not too steep, slightly inclined,
declivous; to slope moderately, make a slope. Háy-og nga dálan,
pángpang, bakólod, etc. A moderately sloping road, river-bank,
hill, etc. Hay-ogá ang bánglid nga píl-as. Make the slope less
steep. Ginháy-og níla ang pángpang nga hándog. They made the steep
bank slope down gently. (cf. bánhay).

_háyon_, To swing the arms in walking. Ang kalabánan sang mga táo
nagaháyon kon nagalakát. Most men swing their arms when walking. Iháyon
ang mga bútkon mo. Swing your arms to and fro. (cf. hágyon).

_hayón-háyon_, Dim. and Freq. of háyon. (cf. hagyónhágyon).

_háyop_, A domestic animal (chiefly buffaloes, cattle and horses);
live-stock.

_hayúb_, A small open hut or tent. (cf. payág).

_hayúb-háyub_, Dim. of hayúb. Any kind of tent or shelter without
walls. (cf. payágpáyag).

_henerál_, (Sp. general) General, common; general (of an army).

_hénero, heneró_, (Sp. genero) Cloth, stuff, textiles. (cf. hinabúl).

_hépe_, (Sp. jefe) Chief, head, leader, superior, commanding
officer. Hépe sang polisía. Chief of Police. Siá amó ang hépe sang
báhin sang katínlò. He is Chief of the Bureau of Health. (cf. pangúlo).

_hérba_, (Sp. hierba) Grass, herb; an aromatic plant. (cf. hilamón).

_herbabáka, herbabaká_, A kind of grass with round, botton-like seeds.

_herbabuéna_, (Sp. hierbabuena) Mint, peppermint: a medicinal plant.

_hermosa viéja_, (Sp.) A kind of plant.

_Hesukrísto_, (Sp. Jesucristo) Jesus Christ.

_Hesús_, (Sp. Jesus) Jesus.

_hi-_, A prefix identical in meaning with ha-, e.g. higúgma, hagúgma.

_hi_, An exclamation of disgust, anger, or the like. Hi, kagamó sináng
mga bátà! Oh, how troublesome those children are! (cf. hía).

_hía_, An exclamation expressive of disgust or surprise; also used
to draw attention. (cf. hi, hoy, huy, halá).

_hiabút_, To come to, arrive at (by chance, accidentally). Naghiabút
siá sa isá ka masubô nga kahimtángan. He came to a sorry plight. Walâ
pa maghiabút ang sugilánon níla nahanungúd sináng mga butáng. Their
conversation has not yet touched on those subjects. Si Pédro kag si
António buút gid makigáway, ápang túbtub karón walâ silá gihápon
maghiabutáy. Peter and Anthony are anxious for a fight, but up
till now they have not met. Básì pa lang nga mahiabután mo ang ímo
ginahándum. Let us hope that you may be able to reach the goal of
your desires. (cf. abút, hiábut).

_hiábut_, To reach, overtake, come up, come together, catch up
with. Nagahiábut (nagahiabutáy) ang íla mga páhò. They have a
continuous supply of (ripe) mangoes, (cf. ábut).

_hiági_, To pass by accidentally, come upon, go by (by
chance). (cf. ági).

_hiágum_, To obtain, etc. See águm, haágum).

_hiás_, Decoration, embellishment, adornment, finery, trinket, jewel,
jewelry, jewelery; to adorn, decorate, embellish, array, beautify,
clothe with more than ordinary elegance. Sín-o ang naghiás sang
altár nga mayór? Who decorated the High-Altar? Sín-o ang magahiás
sang laráwan ni María Santísima? Who will decorate the Statute of the
Blessed Virgin? Nahiasán siá sing buláwan kag madámò nga mga bató nga
maídlak. She was adorned with gold and many glittering stones. Ihiás
mo sa íya iníng kadéna páti medálya nga buláwan. Put this chain and
gold medal on her as an adornment. Ginhiasán níla ang nóbya sing madámò
nga mga aláhas. They decked out the bride with many jewels. (cf. puní).

_híbag_, Dissent, discord, disagreement, quarrelling, altercation,
fighting, falling out; to dissent, disagree, quarrel, altercate,
fight, fall out. Nagahíbag silá. They have a disagreement. Sín-o ang
ginhíbag mo kahápon sing hápon, kay nabatián ko ang mapúrus mo nga
pamuyáyaw? Whom did you quarrel with last evening, for I heard your
loud abusive language? (cf. súay, síbag, áway, banggiánay, úpas).

_hibaló_, (H) To know, be aware of, understand, comprehend,
be cognizant of, be acquainted with. Makahibaló ikáw siní? Do you
know or understand this? Ginahibaloán (ginahibál-an) ko nga ----. I
know that ----. Nahibaloán (nahibál-an) ko nga ----. I knew that
----. (cf. sáyod, áto, hántup, hangúp, entiénde, balintúnod, álam).

_hibaloánan_, (H) Wise, learned, clever, erudite, full of knowledge,
lettered, well-instructed, well-informed, pundit. (cf. hibaló;
manginalámon).

_hibá-ot_, To be friendly or sympathetic, treat well, like each
other, be on good terms. Nagahibá-ot gid iníng duhá ka bátà. These
two children like each other very much. (cf. hírup, ábyan, bá-ot).

_híbas_, Excoriation, bruise, abrasion; to excoriate, chafe, fret, rub
open, bruise, abrade. May híbas ang íya dalúnggan kag ilóng gíkan sa
anteóhos. His ears and nose are chafed by his spectacles. Nahibásan
ang hítà níya sa lakás nga paglakát, kay matámbok siá. His thighs
got chafed on account of too much walking, for he is fat. (cf. taís,
pák-ad).

_hibát_, Oblique, crooked, out of alignment, unsymmetrical,
awry, askew, aslant, out of line, not parallel; to be out of
alignment, etc. Indì mo pagpahibatón ang terál. Don't put up the loom
crooked. Naghibát ang mga halígi siníng baláy. The posts of this house
are not in line, are out of alignment. (cf. balingíg, talingíg, etc.).

_hibî_, To cry, weep, sob, pule, whimper, blubber. Ang bátà
nagahibí. The baby is crying. Indì ka maghibî. Don't weep. Bisán
mamatáy akó walâ man sing magahibî sa ákon. Though I should die
no one will shed tears over me. Pagahibián ko gid ikáw kon mamatáy
ka. I shall certainly weep for you, when you die. Ang amó nga balítà
nagpahibî sa íya. That news made her cry. (cf. tángis, gáab, háyà).

_híbò, híbo_, To oil, anoint, salve, plaster, rub in a liquid, cover
with oil, fat, lard, etc. Hibóa--or--hibói siá sing lána. Rub him with
coconut-oil. Ihíbò sa íya síkmat iníng baselína. Use this vaseline
for his back-ache. (cf. háplas, hapúlas, pálhit).

_híbok_, To move, stir, wriggle, writhe, squirm, budge, flutter,
palpitate, quiver, show life by moving. Nagahíbok ang úlud sa
dútà. The worm is wriggling on the ground. Pahibóka iníng mán-og,
kay tan-awón ta kon napatáy na ukón walâ pa. Stir this snake that we
may see whether it is dead or not. (cf. húlag, íbok, etc.).

_hibók-hibók, hibók-híbok_, Dim. and Freq. of híbok. May mga pitíkpítik
nga nagahibókhibók sa siníng túbig. There are wriggling mosquito larvae
in this water. Also: to pulsate, throb, palpitate, (cf. hulághúlag;
bayóbáyo, kibô-kíbò).

_hibubún-ot_, To sob, sigh convulsively. Ginhibubun-otán akó
níya--or--Naghibubún-ot siá sa ákon atubángan. He sobbed in my
presence. Ginahibubun-otán níya ang kamatáyon sang íya nga ilóy. With
sobs and sighs she mourns the death of her mother. (cf. bákhò, tángis,
hibî, subô).

_hidáet_, Peace, calm, tranquillity, concord, harmony; to be at
peace, live tranquilly, be on friendly terms with. Ginahidaítan na
silá sang íla mga kaíping. They are now living at peace with their
neighbours. Nagahidaitáy silá. They are living in harmony. "Himáyà
sa Diós sa kahitás-an kag paghidáit sa mga táo nga maáyo sing
kabubút-on". "Glory to God in the highest and peace to men of good
will". (cf. dáit, linóng, húsay, táwhay).


_hídal_, To blunt, dull, take off the edge. Indì mo paghidálon ang
ákon binángon. Don't blunt the edge of my bolo. (cf. hábul, hádal).

_hidál_. Blunt, dull, obtund, obtuse, not cutting well. (cf. mahábul).

_hidapdápan_, July. (cf. Húlyo).

_hídhid_, To rub, anoint, salve, oil with. Hidhidí (--irí) siá sing
baselína. Rub him with vaseline. Ihídhid iníng lána sa íya nga úlo. Rub
his head with this coconut-oil. (cf. háplas, bádlis, híbò, etc.).

_hídlaw_, To like to see, recognize. Ang bátà maálam na maghídlaw. The
baby now begins to recognize people and is glad to see acquaintances.

_hídlaw_, Desire, longing, yearning after, home--sickness, nostalgia;
to wish to see absent friends, home, etc., long, yearn after, have
at heart, feel home-sick. Ginakahidlawán siá sang íya nga ilóy. His
mother longs for him. Nagakahídlaw siá sa pagtán-aw sang dútà nga íya
nataóhan. He wishes to see the place of his birth. He is home-sick
for his native land. (cf. mahídlaw, kahídlaw; himúlat, lúyag).

_hidúmdum_, To remember, think of, recollect. (cf. dúmdum,
hilinumdúman).

_hidyók, hídyok_, A kind of palm resembling the coconut palm in its
fronds, but quite different as to its fruit.

_higá_, Whoa! An expression used in stopping or halting a horse or
other animal. (cf. ga).

_higád_, (H) Side, edge, rim, border, corner, verge, margin, outskirts,
place away from the center. Sa higád sang dálan. At the side of
the road. Nagapanghigád silá sa dálan. Nagalakát silá sa higád sang
dálan. They are walking at the side of the road. Sa bisán diín nga
higád----. Anywhere----. In any out-of-the-way place. (cf. binít,
báid, hilít, soók, toók, doók, pamúsud, bígki, bíbì).

_higál_, Lust, lewdness, unchastity, uncleanness, impurity, immodesty,
indecency, impudicity, carnality, salacity, lechery, lasciviency,
lasciviousness, obscenity, lubricity; to be or become lewd,
lecherous, unchaste, impure, lustful, immodest, indecent, unclean,
carnal, salacious, lascivious, obscene. Indì ka magpahigál. Don't be
lewd. (cf. úlag, bígà, bíghal, bígsang).

_higála_, (B) Social intercourse, companionship, companion, chum,
friend, pal; to have social relations, be friends, come together in
social life, take a walk, stroll. Higála ko siá. He is my chum. Sa
íla nga paghigála--. In their social intercourse--. (cf. higára;
sinalayó, hírup, atíd, ibáíba, ímaw).

_higára_, (B) See higála--social relations, etc. (cf. garágára).

_hígdà_, (H) To lie down, lay oneself down, go to bed, stay in bed,
take one's bed, keep one's bed, go to sleep, pass the night. Maghígdà
ka. Lie down. Naghígdà silá dídto. They slept there (passed the
night there). Pahigdaá ang bátà sa kátre. Lay the baby down on the
bed--or--Let the baby sleep on the bed. Ihígdà ang kasakít sang ímo
úlo. Lie down to ease (take away) your head-ache. Higdaí lang ang
ákon kátre. Just lie down on my bed. (cf. batáng, hínggà).

_higdáan_, (H) Bed, couch, sleeping accommodation; that is suitable
for lying down upon. (cf. hígdà).

_higdaánan_, (H) See higdáan id. Also: Sleeping room, bedroom,
dormitory. (cf. tulugán, tululugán).

_hígin_, To cleave, split, rend, tear, sunder, break asunder (cloth,
etc.); open a way through a crowd, make a passage. Naghígin ang ákon
dáan nga báyò, kay ginpapák sing lakás sang labandéra. My old jacket
was torn, because the washerwoman beat it too hard. Higína ang mga
táo sa dálan, kay maági ang trak. Part the people on the road for
the truck will pass. Naghígin ang mga táo sa dálan sang paglubás sang
prosisyón. The people on the road cleared the way when the procession
passed. (cf. háwà).

_hígkò_, Dirt, muck, filth, defilement, taint, uncleanness, dung,
excrement, impurity, obscenity; to dirty, defile, soil, sully. Dì mo
paghigkoán ang salúg. Don't dirty the floor. Nagakahígkò akó sinâ. I
loathe or abhor that. I consider it dirty. Ginapakahígkò ko inâ. I
consider that filthy, (repulsive, nauseating). Ginakahigkoán ko inâ. I
have a horror or loathing of such things. (cf. láw-ay, bulíng, músing,
dágtà, táp-ing).

_hígmaw_, Captivation, charm, relish of new things or experiences;
to please, charm, captivate (of novelties, etc.). Nagbugalón siá,
kay nahígmaw sang íya mánggad. He became proud, for he tasted the
pleasure of newly found riches. Nagakahígmaw siá sang pagkáon sing
páhò. He enjoys eating mangoes. (cf. muháwmúhaw).

_higmáw_, Charmed, captivated by new things or experiences, pleased
with the novelty of. (cf. hígmaw).

_hígong_, A dull sound, hum, boom, rumble, reverberation, echo;
to hum, etc. (cf. hágung, hagúnghung).

_higóng-hígong_, Dim. and Freq. of hígong.

_hígop_, To sip, sup, suck up (with the lips). Higópa lang ang
sabáw. Just sip the sauce. Higópi lang ang sabáw. Have a sip at the
sauce. (cf. sópsop, súyup, yúpyup).

_higót_, Band, bond, string, cord, rope, tape, any binding material;
to bind, tie, secure, fasten with a string, etc. Ihigót ang kabáyo
sa búgsok. Hitch the horse to the stake. Hígti (higotí) ang kabáyo
sing kalát. Tie the horse with a rope. Ihigót mo iníng písì sa ákon
pinutús. Use this string to bind up my parcel. (cf. gáid, bángot,
bangót, gápus, góos).

_higúgma_, To love, have affection for, be in love with, hold
dear, be enamoured of, cherish. Maghigúgma ka sa Diós labí sa
ngatanán. Love God above all things. Higugmaá ang ímo ginikánan. Love
your parents. Ginahigúgma siá sing dakô sang íya ilóy. His mother
holds him very dear. Ang mánghud amó ang nahigugmaán gid sang íya
amáy. The youngest son is very much loved by his father. Ihigúgma
lang sa íya iníng mga ságing. Give him these bananas as a token of
affection. (cf. hagúgma id.).

_higúshigús_, Too little, too small, short, lacking, not enough,
below the standard, less than is needed or required; to be too little,
grow less, etc. (cf. kabús, kulábus, kúlang).

_hîhî_, To laugh, titter, giggle, snicker. (cf. kádlaw, yúhum, lámhò,
talángkaw, harákhak, arík-ik).

_híkam_, To grope, feel one's way, as a blind man or as in the
dark. Hikáma kon diín ang gangháan. Grope about and find where the door
is. Ang mga táo kon gáb-i nga madulúm nagahíkam (nagapanghíkam). Men
on a dark night grope and feel their way. Naghíkam akó sa pagsákà
sa hágdan. I groped my way up the stairs. (cf. hílam, híram, kápkap,
pangápkap).

_híkap_, To touch, feel, grasp, palpate, fumble, handle, finger,
bring one's hand in contact with. Hikápa siá. Touch him. Hikápi siá
sa úlo. Touch him on the head. Ginhíkap níya ang ákon bútkon. He
touched my arm. (cf. kapút, úyat).

_híkaw_, Envy, spite, grudge, ill-will, malice, malevolence, gall,
venom, spleen, rancour, virulence; to envy, spite, grudge, covet, harm
out of spite, bear malice. Indì ka maghíkaw sang íya sang ibán. Don't
covet things belonging to others. Indì ka magpanghíkaw. Don't be
envious. Ginahikáwan akó níya. He envies me. Indì mo siá paghikáwan
sang íya mga tanúm. Don't damage his plants out of spite. Hinikáwan siá
sang babáylan. The wizard harmed him out of malice. (cf. hísà, tístis).

_híkay_, To find fault with, disdain, hold in contempt, scout, flout,
contemn, despise, scorn, slight, belittle, make light of, criticize,
scoff at, sneer at, disparage, vilify; vilification, disparagement,
act of undervaluing or depreciating, scorn, contempt, contumely. Indì
ka maghíkay sang mga binuhátan sang ibán. Don't disparage the doings
of others. Ginhikáyan siá níla sang íya pangánta. They found fault
with her singing. Ihíkay mo sa íya ang íya nga kadayáw. Chide her
for her vanity. Ginhíkay níya sa ákon ang madámò nga masápnot nga
halambalánon. He poured bitter scorn upon me (abused me) with many
harsh words. (cf. múlay, támay).

_hikílo_, A kind of fish.

_hikítà_, To see, notice (by chance, accidentally). (cf. kítà).

_híkog_, To hang oneself, commit suicide, (by hanging, shooting,
etc.). Naghíkog (nanghíkog) si Hudás. Judas hanged himself. Sa karón
nga mga túig nagadúgang ang hinikogáy. At present suicide is on
the increase.

_híkot_, To prepare, get ready, make arrangements, take previous
measures to secure a certain result, bring about. Anó ang ímo nga
ginahíkot? What arrangements are you making? Hikóta ang panyága, baíle,
píknik, etc. Get dinner ready, make arrangements for the dance, the
picnic, etc. Hikóti akó sing ísdà. Get some fish ready for me. Ihíkot
akó sang ákon maléta. Please prepare my suitcase. Sín-o ang naghíkot
siníng mga puní? Who arranged these decorations? (cf. híwat, hímos).

_hílab_, (H) To have an empty stomach, feel a sinking sensation in the
stomach on account of hunger, fear, excitement or shock. Nagahílab
ang ginháwa ko; or: ginahilában akó sa lakás nga kagútum. I am weak
from hunger, (my stomach feels quite empty, I am exhausted). Magkáon
kamó ánay sing maáyo, agúd índì kamó mahilában sa dálan. Eat well that
you may not become exhausted on the way. (cf. hírab id.; hawáhawá).

_hilábong_, Dense, shady, thick (of foliage). (cf. dábong, rábong).

_hilabtéra_, Meddlesome, interfering, intruding,
officious. (cf. hilabút, entradílya).

_hilabút_, To meddle, interfere, participate, take part in, put
one's nose in. Indì ka maghilabút sináng mga butáng. Don't take
part in such things. Don't meddle in those matters. Pahilábta siá sa
siníng panublión nga dútà. Let him have a share in this hereditary
land. Ang Mahál nga Bírhen walâ paghilábti sang salâ nga panublión. The
Blessed Virgin had no part in original sin. (cf. lábut; pasilabút,
pakit-arakáng).

_hilabútay_, To be at ease, tranquil, etc. See arabútay, libútay.

_hílad_, Slope, incline, hill. (cf. bánglid, bánhay; bakólod).

_hilágis_, To trim, cut off thorns, small branches, etc. Hilágsi
(hilagísi) ang kawáyan. Strip the branches and thorns off the bamboo,
trim the bamboo. Ihilágis iníng binángon sa kamúnsil, sibúkaw,
dalógdog, etc. Use this bolo to trim the camunsel, sebucao, dalogdog,
etc. (cf. águs).

_hilágus_, See hilágis.

_hílak_, To cherish, miss or regret the loss of, be sorry to part with,
hold dear, set great store by. Walâ siá magkahílak sang íya nga pílak
sa amó nga mga butáng. He did not regret spending money for such
things. Ginakahilákan níya ang íya bág-o nga baláy. He takes great
care of his new home. Pagkahilákan mo ang ímo bág-o nga térno. Treat
your new suit of clothes with care. (cf. hálung, ngílin).

_hilák-hílak_, Dim. and Freq. of hílak. Nagakahilákhílak siá sang
íya kwárta súbung sang isá ka maímot. He guards his money like a miser.

_hilakô_, Bad, desultory, no good. (cf. halakô).

_hílam_, (H) To grope, etc. See híkam.

_hilamón_, Grass, weeds, herbage, shrub; to weed, pull out. Hilamoná
iníng mga tanúm, kay walâ sing pulús. Pull up these plants, for they
are of no use.

_hilamonán_, Overgrown with grass, grass-land; fit for growing grass.

_hilamonón_, Grassy, full of grass.

_hilánat_, Cold, catarrh, slight fever; to cause a cold, etc. May
hilánat siá--or--ginahilántan (ginahilanátan) siá. He has a cold. Kon
magkáon ka sing mga butáng nga bátok sa solóksolók mo pagahilánton
(--hilanáton) ka gid. If you eat things injurious to your stomach
you will surely suffer from catarrh.

_hílap_, To slice, cut in slices. (cf. láplap).

_hilapít_, (H) To approach, to near, come near, draw near; have sexual
intercourse with. Nagahilapít na ang tagaláni. The rice-harvest
season is now drawing near. Hilapití siá. Approach him. Pahilapitá
siá sa ákon. Make him approach me. Order (permit) him to come near
me. (cf. lapít, palapít).

_hilás_, To have or cause a tingling, tickling, creepy feeling;
to annoy, bother, vex. Nagahilás ang íya láwas. He has a creepy
feeling. Ang bátà índì makatulúg, kay ginahilás. The child cannot
sleep, because its skin tickles. Ginahilás akó sináng mga hámbal. Such
talk annoys me.

_hilasán_, Nervous, excited, vexed, sleepless. (cf. hilás).

_hiláw_, Raw, uncooked, crude (of fruit, meat, etc.); green (of
colour); to be raw, etc. Hiláw nga ísdà, kárne, etc. Raw fish,
meat, etc. Nahilawán akó sang ímo linútò. What you cooked is too
raw for me. Ang hiláw nga duág sang mga dáhon--. The green of the
leaves--. Hiláw nga pagkádlaw. A mirthless laugh. (cf. lús-aw,
pakuláhaw).

_hiláwas_. Right of matrimony; fornication; to fornicate, use the
right of matrimony, have sexual intercourse. Naghiláwas siá. He
committed fornication. (cf. láwas).

_hiláy_, Out of the perpendicular or vertical line, leaning, inclined,
bent, lopsided, slanting; to lean; incline, slant. Tadlungá ang
hiláy nga halígi. Straighten the leaning post. Iníng káhoy nagahiláy
pa bagátnan. This tree inclines towards the south. Ginhiláy sang
hángin ang ámon baláy. The wind caused our house to lean. Ginahiláy
sang hángin ang mga kawáyan. The bamboo is being bent by the
wind. (cf. hápay, hapáy, tikô).

_hilayô_, (H) To be or go far away, travel far. Nagpahilayô siá
sa ákon. He went far away from me. Indì ka magpahilayô. Don't go
far. Ipahilayô mo sa ímo mga bátà ang maláut nga mga balasahón. Remove
far from your children bad reading matter. Ipahilayô mo siá sa
ímo baláy. Send him far away from your home. Nagahilayóay ang íla
bánwa. Their home-towns are far away one from the other. (cf. layô).

_hílhil_, Drop-lipped. Hílhil nga táo. A man with a hanging
under-lip. Naghílhil siá. He became drop-lipped (cf. hálhal).

_hiliábut_, (H) To reach, catch up with. See hiábut.

_hilibían_, (H) Things to be wept over, fit or deserving to have
tears shed over. (cf. hibî).

_hilibíon_, (H) Weeping, act of crying. Walâ pa gihápon matápus ang
íya hilibíon. Her weeping is not over yet.

_hílig_, To pour out a liquid (from a bottle, etc.). Hilíga ang túbig
sa bayóng. Pour the water out of the "bayóng". Hilígi akó sing isá
ka báso nga bíno. Pour out a glass of wine for me. Ginhilígan níya
ang ákon kópa sing bíno. He poured wine into my glass.

_hiligáynon_, The dialect of Iloilo; to speak that
dialect. Nagahiligáynon na siá, kay naghígdà kagáb-i sa Móhon. He
speaks the dialect of Iloilo now for last night he slept in
Mohon. (This sarcastic remark is often applied to people from the
interior who, after but a short stay in Iloilo, pretend to speak
"Hiligáynon").

_hiligugmáon_, (H) Lovable, amiable, to be loved, much appreciated
or cherished, worthy of one's affections. (cf. gúgma).

_hilikayán_, (H) Fit to be scorned or disparaged, reproachable,
censurable, blamable, reprehensible, contemptible, faulty,
blameworthy. (cf. híkay).

_hilikayón_, (H) Disparaging language, finding fault with,
depreciating, criticizing adversely, etc. (cf. híkay).

_hilikotón_, (H) Things to be prepared or arranged, preparations,
arrangements, measures to be taken. (cf. híkot).

_hililigán_, (H) Any vessel into which a liquid is to be
poured. (cf. hílig).

_hililóong_, (H) The plural form of hilóong--to be together; to
pull together.

_hilimosán_, (H) Place where preparations are going on, arrangements
are made or the like. (cf. hímos).

_hilimosón_, (H) Preparations, arrangements to be made, things to
be got ready or prepared for a certain purpose. (cf. híkot, hímos;
hilikotón).

_hilímot_, (H) To forget. (cf. límot, lipát).

_hilímson_, (H) See hilimosón id.

_hilinakayán_, (H) Rent, payment for rent or hire. (cf. hinákay).

_hilingabút_, (H) Something expected or ready for a future occasion,
especially applied to new clothes for a feast, etc. May hilingabút ikáw
sa páskwa? Have you a new suit ready for the feast-day? (cf. abút).

_hilingagawón_, (H) See hingagawón, agáw-agawón. (cf. ágaw).

_hilingapusón_, (H) Anything near completion, that is to be finished
or completed. (cf. ápus, tápus).

_hilinguhaón_, (H) Efforts, endeavour, desire, aspiration; worthy an
effort, desirable, worthy to be striven for. (cf. kúhà, tingúhà).

_hilinguyángon_, (H) Expenses, outlay, money to be spent or paid
out. (cf. uyáng, galastóhon, baláyran, balayád).

_hilinúlwan_, (H) The slough or cast skin of a snake. (cf. hilunó).

_hilinumdúman_, (H) Memorandum; souvenir. (cf. hidúmdum; handumánan).

_hiliphípan_, (H) Amenable to bribes; one who is easily bribed or
suborned. (cf. híphip).

_hilirihî_, (H) Plural form of hirihî--to titter, giggle;
guffaw. Naghilirihî silá sang kádlaw. They laughed
heartily. (cf. hîhî).


_hilít_, Side, border, rim, corner, edge, outer limit, out-skirts,
out-of-the-way place. (cf. binít, higád, báid, doók).

_hilít-hilít_, Dim. of hilít. Also: Common, mean, ordinary, not
prominent, inconspicuous, unknown. Táo nga hilít-hilít. An unknown,
common, ordinary man. One of low origin. (cf. girígirí, witíwití).

_hilitóhog_, (H) To agree or pull well together, etc. See hitóhog.

_hilitóon_, (H) To fit or agree well. Nagahilitóon gid ang íla
pagginawî. Their dispositions agree well together. Maghilitóon kamó
sang ínyo nga batásan. Try to make your manners agreeable to each
other. Maghilitoonáy kamó. Pull well together. Make an effort to
be agreeable to one another. (cf. tóon; hilitóhog, hiliúsa, hisáhò,
hiliúgyon, etc.).

_hilitúpul_, To agree, pull well together. (cf. hilitóhog).

_hiliúgyon_, (H) To unite, cooperate, pull together. (cf. úgyon;
binuligáy, hilitóhog, etc.).

_hilíung_, (H) To be united, to agree or pull well
together. (cf. hilóong, hisáhò, hilitóhog).

_hiliúsa_, (H) Work together, be one, unite, cooperate, agree well
together. (cf. usá, isá).

_hiliwatón_, (H) Preparations, things to be made ready. (cf. híwat;
hilimosón, hilikotón).

_híl-o_, Mutual help, cooperation; to help each other, cooperate,
first finishing together the work of one and then that of the other
party. Hil-ohí akó sa pagpatíndog sang ákon baláy. Help me to build
my house (and I will help you later on). Nagahil-ohánay silá sa
pagtánum. They help each other in planting their rice. (cf. binuligáy,
etc.).

_hilô_, Poison, venom, dope, drug, bane, virus; to poison, envenom,
contaminate. Ginhiloán níla, konó, ang áwang. It is said that
they contaminated or poisoned the well. Ihilô iníng asúpre sa mga
ilagâ. Poison the rats with this sulphur. (cf. dálit).

_hílo_, (Sp. hilo) Thread, silk, twist, twine, filament; to twist,
make into thread. Hilóha iníng sâsâ. Twist these buri-palm fibres into
ropes. Hilóhi akó siníng lánot, kay himóon ko nga písì. Twist into
thread for me these hemp-fibres, for I'll make a cord of them. Ihílo
akó ánay siníng bánhot. Please make thread for me out of these fibres
of the banhot-bark. (cf. lúbid, lúbag).

_híl-ob_, To complete, finish, terminate, bring to a close, get
through, make an end of, have done with (of planting, tilling,
etc.). Makahíl-ob balá kamó sang ínyo tánum karón sa hápon? Shall
you be able to finish your rice-planting this afternoon? Ginhíl-ob
níla kaína ang íla talámnan. A short while ago they finished planting
their fields. Mangabúdlay kamó sing mapísan, agúd mahíl-ob ang ákon
talámnan sa karón nga ádlaw. Work hard, so that planting may come to
an end on my field to-day. Híl-ob na ang tánum. Rice-planting is now
finished and done with. (cf. tápus, hingápus).

_hílod_, To move, stir, wriggle, fidget. Ang masakít nga bátà
nagahílod sa kátre. The sick child is tossing in the bed. Ihílod ang
ímo láwas. Stir yourself. Pahimúyong kamó, índì kamó magságad sang
hílod. Be quiet, don't fidget. (cf. híwod, híwos, íwos).

_hilód-hílod_, Dim. and Freq. of hílod. Ang atatálo nagahilódhílod
sa dáhon sang káhoy. The caterpillar is wriggling on the
leaf. (cf. hiwód-híwod).

_hilód-hílod_, To rub the skin, clean oneself well (as after
bathing). Manghilódhílod ka ánay kag ugáling magtákas. Rub yourself
clean before you leave the water--or--First clean yourself well and
then come out of the water.

_hílok_, To bend, curve, incline, deflect, flex, arch, bow. Hálba
ang ímo husáy, agúd mahapús nga hilókon. Heat your comb, that it
may be easy to bend. Abáw, índì gid mahílok ang láwas níya, kay
lakás kabáskug. Why, one cannot bend his body, for he is too strong
(or too stiff). Hilóki akó siníng hilimoón ko nga tuangtuangán. Bend
for me this piece of bamboo which I am going to make into a carrier's
pole. (cf. tikô).

_hilók_, Bent, curved. (cf. hílok).

_hilók-hílok_, Dim. and Freq. of hílok. Hilókhilóka ang tuangtuangán
túbtub nga magbángkong. Bend the carrier's pole again and again till
it becomes properly curved. Ginhilókhílok níya ang bastón nga tikô
túbtub nga magtádlung. He bent back the crooked stick till at last
it remained straight.


_hilónghilóng_, A snooze, nap, doze, short sleep; to snooze, nap,
take a nap, doze, sleep a little. (cf. pahilónghilóng).

_hilóong_, To be together, meet, gather; to like, like each other,
agree well; to travel together. (cf. típon; sahô, hisáhò, hírup,
upúd, hitóhog).

_hilós_, To scald, burn (with a hot liquid, steam); to corrode (with
a strong acid, or the like). (cf. líswa).

_hilós_, A kind of úbe with a long and straight root. It is much
liked on account of its agreeable taste.

_hílot_, Massage, kneading, rubbing; to massage, knead, rub. Hilóta
ang ákon líog. Massage my neck. Ginhílot níya ang bátà. He massaged
the child.

_hílum, hilúm_, To guess, surmise, suppose, conjecture, presume,
assume, dare say, believe. Ginahílum ko nga ----. I guess that
----. (cf. máy-om, pakót).

_hilúm_, Manifest, clear, obvious, perceptible, discernible, apparent,
visible, open; to observe, notice, advert to, be aware of, perceive,
be clear or manifest. Nakahilúm ikáw sang íya nga kaákig, mga gího,
etc.? Did you notice his anger, his movements, etc.? Ginhílman
(ginhilumán) ko ang íya nga nawóng nga nagníwang. I observed that his
face had become thin. (cf. kítà, tán-aw, túluk, panílag, sát-um, etc.).

_hilúmhum_, To brood, sit, hatch (of a hen). Ang mungâ nagahilúmhum
sang íya mga ítlog sa pugadán--or--ginahilumhumán sang mungâ ang
íya mga ítlog sa pugadán. The hen is hatching her eggs in the
nest. (cf. lúmlum).

_hilúngos_, A kind of very strong tobacco that is seldom smoked,
but often chewed with betelnut. (Hilúñgos is a town in Leyte, where
that tobacco mostly comes from; hence the name).

_hilúngug_, Cohabitation, common household; to live
together, cohabit, dwell together, live as husband and
wife. Nagahilúngug--or--nagahilungugáy na silá. They are living
together. Ginhilungúgan níya si Fulána sa sulúd sang duhá ka túig. He
cohabited with N.N. for two years. Indì mo pagipahilúngug ang ímo bátà
sa kay Fuláno. Don't permit your daughter to live with N.N. (cf. upúd,
tingúb).

_hilunó_, To cast the skin, slough, shed (of snakes, some kinds of
crabs, etc.). Ang mga mán-og nagahilunó sa tágsa ka túig. Snakes
cast their skins every year. Ginhilunohán (ginhilúnwan) sing madámò
nga mga mán-og ang idálum sang salúg sang simbáhan. Many snakes cast
their skins underneath the floor of the church.

_hílwak_, To tire, exhaust, weaken through hunger, fatigue, etc.; to
shrink, become thin or lean. Nagahílwak ang tiyán ko--or--ginahilwakán
akó. I am exhausted (am getting weak or tired out). Mamáhaw ka sing
maáyo, agúd índì maghílwak ang solóksolók mo, kon magtokád kitá sa
búkid. Take a good breakfast, lest you should become exhausted when we
ascend the mountain. Naghílwak ang íya láwas, kay nagmasakít siá. He
has become lean, for he has been sick. (cf. hílab, kúpus, lúpyak).

_hilwák-hílwak_, Dim. and Freq. of hílwak. Mapahúay akó ánay, kay
nagahilwákhílwak na ang ákon solóksolók. I am going to take a rest,
for I am rather exhausted (my stomach is empty).

_hílway_, Well-ordered, well-arranged, well-regulated, untrammelled,
free to act (of one's mind, thoughts, government, etc.). Ang
pagpadágay ni Sr. Hílway kag ni Bukágkag. Conversation between a man
of a well-regulated mind and one with disordered ideas. Hílway nga
pangolohán. A free, independent government.

_hilyóan_, Straight, upright. (cf. hílo; matanús).

_hímà_, To get chafed, a little red or inflamed. Nagahímà ang hítà
sang bátà kay matámbok. The baby's groins are chafed; it is so
fat. Haplasí ang bátà sing baselína, agud índì paghimáan. Rub some
vaseline on the baby's skin, lest it should become chafed. (N.B. hímà
is particularly applied to getting chafed between the thighs or in
the groins). (cf. híbas, taís, etc.).

_himabúyan_, The month of May. (cf. Máyo).

_himákas, himakás_, To endeavour, make efforts, do one's best,
strive. (cf. bákas).

_himalá_, (H) To get or become dry, exsiccated, sear, withered, have
all moisture withdrawn. Nagahimalá (naghimalá) ang kawáyan, humáy,
búyò, etc. The bamboo, rice, buyo-leaves, etc. are slowly drying up
(have become dry). (cf. malá, láyà, layâ, layóng).


_himálad_, To practise palmistry, tell a person's fortune by the lines
and marks of the palm. Maálam siá, konó, maghimálad. He is, they say,
an expert in palmistry. Ginhimaláran siá sang manughimálad sang íya
nga kapaláran. The palmister told his fortune from the lines of his
palm. Himalári (--ádi) siá kon anó ang íya swérte. Tell his fortune
from the lines of his palm. (cf. pálad, kapaláran, pasimpalád).

_himalás_, To run aground, strand; meet with failure or
misfortune. (cf. balás--sand).

_himaláut_, To curse, accurse, imprecate, damn, anathematize,
confound, wish or invoke some evil upon. Ginahimaláut sang mga yáwà
ang mga matárung. The devils curse the just. Indì ka maghimaláut sa
kay bisán sín-o, bisán sa ímo mga kaáway. Do not curse anybody, not
even your enemies. Indì mo paghimalaútan (--úton) ang ímo bátà. Don't
curse--or--invoke evil on your child. (cf. panghimaláut, láut).

_himálay_, To start building a house, lay the foundation of something,
begin, commence. (cf. bálay).

_himaláy_, To take formal possession of a new house, celebrate a
house-warming. (cf. baláy, bálay).

_himalî, himálì_, To form scabs, heal, become sound, be cured (of
wounds, ulcers, burns, etc.). Nagahimalî na ang ákon pilás. My wound
is now healing. Ginahimalián na siá sang íya nga katúl. His "katúl"
is being cured,--is getting well. (cf. pálì, palî).

_himaló_, To break out afresh, open again, become worse (of wounds,
boils, etc.). Nagahimaló ang íya nga katúl, kay kinálot níya. His
"katúl" is getting worse, because he has been scratching it. Naghimaló
ang íya nga pilás sa tiíl, kay nasúntok sang isá ka baníklan. The
wound on his foot broke out afresh, for it received a sharp knock
from a piece of wood. (cf. dalusó).

_himalóng_, To die out, be nearly extinguished (of a fire, a candle,
etc.; cf. pálong).

_himálus, himalús_, To give or return "tit for tat", "an eye for an
eye, a tooth for a tooth", to avenge, take vengeance, retaliate,
requite, revenge; retaliation, vengeance, revenge, paying back
"in one's own coin". Indì mo paghimalúsan ang nagtístis sang ímo
mga tanúm. Don't retaliate on the one who spitefully harmed your
plants. Indì ka maghimálus sang maláin nga ginhímò sa ímo sang ibán. Do
not take revenge for the evil done you by others. "Akon ang paghimalús,
púlong sang Ginóo". "Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord". (cf. bálus,
timalús).

_himán_, Often, frequent, general, usual, customary; to do customarily,
usually, frequently, generally, as a rule, (cf. masamí, masúnsun).

_himán-híman, or himánhimán_, Dim. and Freq. of himán. Himánhimán áton
mapanilágan----. Quite frequently we may observe----. (cf. imánimán).

_himánsag_, To praise, extol, laud, honour, glorify, eulogize, acclaim,
commend, make known, spread one's fame, speak well of. Himansagí
siá sang maáyo níya nga binuhátan. Give him praise for his good
deeds. Himansagá siá. Extol him. (Spread his fame). (cf. bánsag,
bántug).

_himánwa_, Management of public affairs; to govern, rule
a commonwealth, administer a township, state, etc., take part in
politics or the administration of public affairs. (cf. bánwa, pamánwa).

_himásang_, A very busy time, the busy season of any undertaking; to be
the busy season of (sugar-milling, rice-planting, etc.). Nagahimásang
na gid karón ang tánum, áni, gáling, etc. This is now the busiest time
of rice-planting, harvesting, sugar-milling, etc. (cf. sákò, dúlup).

_himatâ_, Blood relationship, family members, lineal descendants
and ascendants; to be related by blood, come of the same stock,
etc. (cf. bátà).

_himatárung_, To justify oneself, declare oneself
innocent. (cf. tárung, matárung).

_himatáyan_, The place where someone has died. Magdúaw kitá sang
himatáyan. Let us visit the house of the dead. (cf. patáy, napátyan).

_himatayón_, The waning moon, the last quarter of the
moon. (cf. patáy).

_himát-on_, (B) To know where to look for or lay one's hand on a
thing, take from a known place. Himat-oní lang ang mga ságing dirâ sa
aparadór. Just take the bananas there in the cupboard. Makahimát-on
ka balá sang tinápay dirâ sa bakág sa ákon kwárto? Can you find the
bread there in the basket in my room? Gintágò ko ang mamón sa baúl,
ápang hinimat-onán gid sang mga bátà. I had the cake hidden in the
trunk, but still the children knew where to find it. (cf. matá).

_himatúod_, To believe to be true, be convinced of, swallow, take in,
be assured of, assent to, give credence to. Nagahimatúod siá sang
ginsúgid ni Fuláno. He believes what has been told by N.N. Indì ka
maghimatúod sang mga sugilánon sináng mga hámbug. Don't believe the
stories of those braggarts. Ginahimatúod níya ang ginakonó nga mga
tumáo sa bóbog. He is convinced of the rumour that there are ghosts
in the bobog-tree. (cf. túod, pamatúod).

_himawî_, To reclaim, redeem, save, recover, win back; to avenge,
take revenge. (báwì).

_himáyà_, Honour, glory, bliss, happiness; to be in bliss, enjoy glory,
felicity or happiness. Ang maáyo nga mga bátà amó ang himáyà sang mga
ginikánan. Good children are the glory of their parents. Nagahimáyà
silá karón kay nakadaúg sa kasábà. They are quite happy now, for they
have won the lawsuit. Maghimáyà ka. Be happy (blessed).--or--Enjoy
bliss or felicity. (cf. kalípay).

_hímbis_, Scale (of a fish, etc.); to scale, strip or clear of scales,
scrape off the scales; to see, have a look at, examine. Nagahímbis
siá sang ísdà. He is scraping off the scales of the fish. Himbisí ang
ísdà. Scale the fish. Ihímbis akó ánay siníng bángrus. Kindly scale
this bangrus-fish for me. Ginahimbisán (ginapanghimbisán) sang mga
ginikánan ang táo nga buút mangasáwa sa íla bátà. The parents are
scrutinizing the man that wants to marry their daughter.

_hímbon_, To assemble, gather, collect, foregather, come together. Ang
mga pamatán-on kon gáb-i gánì nga masánag ang búlan nagahímbon sa
kinurúsan sang dálan. The young people on moonlight nights come
together at the cross-roads. Himboná silá sa baláy. Gather them
together in the house. Himboní akó sing duhá ka púlò ka manganganí,
kay ipaáni ko sa íla ang ákon alányon. Gather for me twenty
rice-harvesters, for I will get them to reap my rice crop. (cf. típon,
dúguk, hinubónhúbon, ímpon, talampúyuk).

_hímil_, To feel, touch, pass one's hand or finger over, fumble,
finger, handle. Himíli siá sa úlo kon anó ang kaínit níya. Feel his
head, how hot it is. Himíla ang hénero kon maáyo. Feel the cloth
to see whether it is good. Indì ka maghímil sa ákon. Don't touch
me. Ginhímil sang manugbúlung ang íya nga púlso. The doctor felt his
pulse. Hinimílan siá sang manughílot sa ágtang. The masseur massaged
his forehead. (cf. híkap, tándog).

_hímò_, To make, do, act, perform an act, deed or work, execute,
accomplish. Indì mahímò inâ. That is impossible--or--that cannot be
done. Ginhímò níya iní. He did (made) this. Walâ mo paghimóa ang ákon
nga sinógò. You have not executed my order. Ginhimóan akó níya sing
maláin. He injured me--or--did me some wrong--or--harmed me. Pagahimóon
ko gid ang ímo nga túgon, bisán mabúdlay ang trabáho. I will surely
carry out your order, even if the work is tiresome. Makahímò ikáw
sinâ? Can you do that? (cf. búhat).

_hímos_, To get ready, prepare, see to, look after, make arrangements
for, get in shape. Himósa ang panyága, ang kasangkápan, ang mga
tulún-an, etc. Get dinner ready, see to the equipment or tools,
look after the books, etc. Himósi akó sing panihápon. Prepare supper
for me. Ihímos akó sang ákon hulút. Put my room in order. (cf. híko,
híwat).

_himosagâ_, Plentiful, in full bloom or swing, flourishing, in the
pink of condition; to thrive, flourish, prosper, run well, be in
full bloom or swing, make progress, be prosperous. Nagahimosagâ ang
íya edád. He is in his prime. Nagahimosagâ ang íya nga komérsyo,
pangabúhì, palangitán-an, etc. His business is running well, his
life is prosperous, he earns much, etc. Nagahimosagâ na liwán
ang pangolerá. Cholera is again on the increase--or--causing
great havoc. Naghimosagâ ang íya nga kapaláran. His condition was
prosperous--or--Fate smiled on him. (cf. hamungáyà, dagáyà, bugánà,
abúnda, etc.).

_hímpit_, Perfect, complete, faultless, exact, precise; to
perfect, bring to perfection, etc. Naghímpit ang íya pagginawî sa
koléhyo. His manners have become perfect at college. Himpitón mo
ang ímo pagsulát. Make your writing perfect--or--Try to write a very
good hand. Ihimpit mo akó sang ákon sulát sa Sényor Obíspo. Please
see that my letter to the Bishop is perfect. Nagapahímpit siá karón
sang íya nga pagtoón. He is now adding the finishing stroke to his
studies. Nahimpitán akó siní. This seems perfect to me. (cf. lántip,
búg-os, sampáton).

_hímpok_, To pant for breath, gasp, breathe hard (as one tired
out). Sang pagtokád níya sa búkid nagdúlug kag naghímpok siá sing
makadámò. When ascending the mountain he often stopped and gasped
for breath. (cf. hápò).

_himpók-hímpok_, Dim. and Freq. of hímpok. Nagahimpókhímpok siá
sa kabulúsgon. He is short of breath on account of having eaten so
much--or--he is panting on account of having an overloaded stomach.

_himúd-os_, To exert oneself, make great efforts. (cf. panikasúg,
paningúhà, pamurúg-ot, himúg-os, himumúg-ot, hiwág-os).

_himugasâ_, See himosagâ.

_himúgo_, Ground roast corn. Ang maís nga sinánlag kon mabókbok
ginatawág nga himúgo. Corn that has been roasted and then ground is
called "himúgo".

_himúg-os_, To exert oneself. See himúd-os.

_himúg-ot_, See himúd-os, múg-ot, pamurús, pamuérsa.

_himúgtò_, To break, snap; to breathe one's last, break (of the thread
of life). Tambongí akó sa ákon paghimúgtò. Assist me when I breathe
my last. (cf. búgtò).

_himúgtoy_, To exert force, make great efforts. See himúd-os, etc.

_himulág_, To separate from, etc. See hamulág, bulág.

_himulák_, Bearing flowers, in flower, in bloom, full of flowers,
flowering, blossoming, blooming. (cf. búlak, hamulák).

_himúlat_, (H) To wish or strive to obtain, seek to attain,
contend for, try hard to, endeavour, make efforts to gain an
object. Nagahimúlat siá sa pagtoón túbtub nga magálam gid. He is
striving to study till he becomes very learned. Ginhimulátan níya
sing dakô ang pagkádto sa Amérika. He made great efforts to go
to America. Himuláti ang pagkúhà sináng búnga sa sináng matáas
nga sangá sang páhò. Try to get hold of that fruit on that high
branch of the mango-tree. Ihimúlat akó sa pagkúhà sináng púgad
sang píspis sa balisbísan sang atóp. Please get me that bird's nest
from the eaves of the roof. Maghimúlat ka sa pagsunúd sa gihápon sa
dálan sang katarúngan. Do your best to walk always on the road of
righteousness. (cf. tingúhà, paninguhâ, himúg-ot, himúd-os, etc.).

_himul-áwon_, Molave. (cf. hamuláwon).

_himúlbul_, To pluck, clean of feathers (chickens, etc.). Maghimúlbul
ka sang píspis nga íla ginpusíl. Pluck the bird they shot. Himulbulí
ang manók. Pluck the chicken. Ihimúlbul mo akó ánay siníng pábo. Please
clean this turkey of its feathers. (cf. búlbul).

_himúlso_, To feel the pulse. Himulsohí siá. Feel his
pulse. (cf. púlso).

_himúlung_, To speak, say, utter, etc. See púlong.

_himulúngon_, (H) Words, speech, say; to speak, say, express
in words. Naghimulúngon siá sa íya nga kaugalíngon sing
súbung----. He spoke to himself as follows----. He soliloquized as
follows----. (cf. púlong, hámbal, sugilánon).

_himulús_, To be of use, serviceable, usable, remunerative, gainful,
advantageous; to avail oneself of, take advantage of, make use
of. Ang mga mahákug nagahimulús sang mga kalisúd sang ibán, agúd
silá makamánggad. Selfish men take advantage of the difficulties of
others in order to enrich themselves. Iníng mga manók índì mahimúslan
(mahimulusán), kay may balatían. These chickens are of no use, for they
are diseased. Walâ man níya paghimúsli ang pílak nga íya nabáton, kay
nadúlà gid lang sa íya baúl. The money he received availed him nothing,
for it just disappeared from his box. Pagahimúslan ko gid iníng dáan
nga mga káhoy. I shall certainly make good use yet of this old lumber,
(it will bring me yet some advantage or profit). Ginahimúslan níya
sing dakô iníng mga tanúm sa búkid. He derives much profit from these
plants on the mountain. (cf. pulús).

_himumúg-ot_, To make great efforts. (cf. himúd-os, múg-ot, etc.).

_himumúgtò_, See himúgtò--to expire. Nagahimumúgtò na ang íya
ginháwa. He is--expiring,--is in his last agony.

_himúnaw_, To have a choking fit. See alimúnaw.


_himungá_, Fruit-bearing, laden with fruit. Káhoy nga himungá. A
fruit tree. (cf. búnga).

_himúngot_, To pull, pluck, tear out (hairs growing on the chin,
etc.). (cf. búngot, himúlbul).

_himunô_, To fill, replenish, make full. Ang amó nga tabô naghimunô
sang solókban sang íya nga kalisúd. That event filled up the measure
of his troubles. (cf. punô).

_himúnong_, To be quiet, noiseless, silent. See himúyong, pahimúyong,
pahimúnong.

_himúot_, To please, etc. See hamúot.

_himurús_, To apply force, use strength, make efforts, work hard,
be active. (cf. purús).

_himútad_, To look at narrowly, scrutinize, inspect carefully, examine
thoroughly by ocular inspection. Himutádi (--ári) sing maáyo ang mga
tigbató, kon ikáw ang nagabása. Look well at the letters, if you are
the reader (or when you read). Maghimútad ka sang sulát. Examine the
letter carefully. Ihimútad mo akó ánay sang pilás sang karabáw, kay
básì may úlud sa sulúd. Please inspect carefully the buffalo's wound,
for maybe there are worms inside. Ginhimutádan níya sing madúgay
ang laráwan sang íya nga ilóy. He looked attentively for a long time
at the picture of his mother. Nakasayóp ka sa pagtokár, kay walâ mo
paghimutádi ang mga nóta. You made a mistake in playing, because you
did not look carefully at the notes. (cf. mulálong, tán-aw, túluk).

_himutáng_, To put, place, etc. (cf. butáng, hámtang, hamutáng,
kahimtángan).

_himút-ay_, To like each other, etc. See hamút-ay.

_himutíg_, To belie, give the lie to, deny the truth of, gainsay,
contradict another's statement, contravene, negative, impugn, traverse,
rebut. Nagahimutíg siá sang ginsúmbung sa íya. He denies what he was
accused of. Ginhimutigán níya ang sinúgid ni Fuláno. He contradicted
the story told by N.N. (cf. butíg).

_himúyong_, Quiet, noiseless, soundless, silent, still, stilly,
hushed; to keep quiet--or--still, make no stir or noise, keep calm,
remain quiet. Himúyong (pahimúyong) kamó. Hush! Keep quiet. Don't make
a noise. Naglinóng na ang plása, kay nagahimúyong ang mga bátà. The
public square is quiet now, for the boys have stopped making a
noise. (cf. himúnung id.).

_hínà_, To be scarce, difficult to encounter or obtain, scanty, scant,
scarcely obtainable, hard to get; rare, scarce. Hínà--or--nagahínà
karón ang kwárta. Money is scarce at present--or--There is a dearth
of cash at present. Sang túig nga tinalíkdan naghínà ang ísdà. Fish
were difficult to come by last year. Nahináan na kitá sing mga páhò
siníng pilá ka túig nga naglilígad. During these last few years we
had difficulty in getting mangoes, (they were so scarce). (cf. íwat).

_hináblus_, Nephew, niece.

_hinábò_, To chance, happen, come to pass, meet, befall. (cf. tábò;
tabô, hitabô).

_hinabón_, To cover, shield, protect. Ang amó nga pahítò íla ginhinabón
sa dakô níla nga salâ. Such means they made use of to cover their
guilt. (cf. tábon).

_hinabúl_, Woven materials, cloth, texture, fabric, textile
fabric. (cf. hénero, tehído).

_hinagúnoy_, Hum, humming, chirping, singing; to hum, chirp, etc. See
hagúnoy. Ang hinagúnoy sang mga píspis. The humming (singing) of
birds. (cf. huní).

_hinái_, To clean intestines of their contents. Nagahinái siá sang
kasúdlan sang báboy. He is cleaning the pig's intestines. Hinaíhan
mo iníng kasúdlan, kay itigána ko sa panyága. Clean these entrails
(guts), for I am going to prepare them for dinner. (cf. tái).

_hinakâ_, (H) To approach, come near, to near, be almost or
nearly. Sang pagsulúd námon sa bánwa nagahinakâ sa ikapúlò ka
táknà. When we arrived in town it was nearly ten o'clock. (cf. sákà;
hinangát).

_hinákay_, Lease, rent, fare, charges, travelling ticket,
transportation fees, payment for hire, etc.; to hire, lease, pay for
rent or the like. Pilá ang hinákay? What is the fare? Hinakáyi ang
kabáyo ko kon malúyag ka. Hire my horse if you like. Ang balséro
nagapahinákay sing tagpisítas sa káda táo. The ferry man charges
twenty centavos for each person. Ginpahinákay akó níya sing támà,
tungúd sinâ walâ man akó magsakáy sa íya nga áwto. He charged me
an exorbitant fare, therefore I did not hire his automobile. Ang
hinákay sa pagpakádto kag pagpakarí índì magkúlang sa duhá ka púlò
ka pésos. The ticket for the journey to and fro--or--there and back,
will not cost less than twenty pesos. (cf. sakáy).

_hinakí_, (H) A hair-wash, hair-lotion, prepared from vegetable
or mineral substances and used to clean the hair and scalp; to
apply such hair-wash, clean the hair or scalp. Kuháa ang hinakí,
kay manghinakí akó. Fetch the hair-wash, for I am going to clean my
scalp. Ginhinakihán siá sang íya ilóy. His mother cleaned his scalp
with hair-wash. (cf. dakí).

_hinakít_, To feel pain, uneasiness or mortification at the sight of
another's well-being or success, envy, spite, begrudge, be sore on
account of, harbour a grudge or ill-will, be pained at. Nagahinakít
siá sa ákon. He envies me. Ginahinakitán áko níya, kay maáyo ang
ákon pinatubás kag makúl-aw ang íya. He harbours ill-will against me,
because I had a good harvest and he a poor one. Indì ka maghinakít sang
mga kaayóhan sang ibán. Don't envy the good things of others--or--Don't
be vexed at the sight of the prosperity of others. (cf. sakít;
hingabút).

_hinalabúab_, Offspring, etc. See inalabúab. (cf. kabikáhan).

_hinalagá_, (H) To reach the age of girlhood, be or become a
maiden. Naghinalagá ang ákon bátà kag mapatáy. My daughter reached
the age of maiden-hood and died. (cf. dalága).

_hinalagán_, Unexpectedly, suddenly, etc. See hinálì, hingalág.

_hinalágkò_, To grow up, grow tall, grow into manhood. (cf. dakô,
dalágkò).

_hinalángday_, To decline, set, go down (of sun, moon, stars).

_hinalî_, To act rashly, impulsively; to happen suddenly,
unexpectedly. Nahinalián siá sang balatían kag napatáy. He suddenly
fell ill and died. (cf. dalî, hinálì).

_hinálì_, Sudden, unexpected, instant, abrupt, hasty, all at once,
thoughtless, unpremeditated, on the spur of the moment, without
reflection, temerarious; to do something under a sudden impulse,
act thoughtlessly, rashly. Sa hinálì gid lámang natúmba siá kag
napatáy. All at once he dropped down dead. Indì ka maghinálì
maghámbal. Don't talk under the impulse of the moment (without
reflection). Patawára akó, kay nakahinálì akó maghámbal sang díli
nagakaígò. Pardon me, for under the impulse of the moment I have spoken
improperly. Sa hinálì ákon siá nakítà sa tungâ sang mga táo. Suddenly
I saw him in the midst of the people. (cf. dalî).

_hinalígi_, (H) Made into posts or columns, after the manner of posts,
etc.; column (of a news-paper).

_hinaló_, Pertaining to or like an iguana; to act like an
iguana. Nagahinaló siá. He acts like an iguana, (acts as if
he were deaf). May batásan siá nga hinaló. He behaves like an
iguana. (cf. haló--iguana).

_hinalúp_, To set, go down (of sun, moon, etc.). Naghinalúp na
ang ádlaw. The sun has set. Nahinálpan kamí sang ádlaw sang ámon
paglakát. The sun went down whilst we were on our way. (cf. sálup,
túnud).

_hinalúp_, Having set or gone down (of sun, moon). Hinalúp na ang
búlan. The moon has set. (cf. sálup, tunúd).

_hinálup_, Plugged; embossed, studded. (cf. hálop, hálup).

_hinámà_, To exceed reasonable limits, do to excess. Nahinám-an silá
sang básol. They were scolded more than they deserved. (cf. támà).

_hinámbad_, Millions, by the millions. (cf. hámbad, rinamák).

_hinambalán_, An oral agreement, understanding or promise, unwritten,
by word of mouth. Walâ siá sing hinambalán. He does not keep his
word--or--his oral promises or agreements are unreliable. Salalígan
ang táo nga may hinambalán. Trustworthy is the man, who is as good as
his word. Also: Perf. passive of hámbal. Hinambalán ko siá. I spoke
to him (about it).

_hinámbit_, To mention, refer to, name, allude to, bring forward, give
out, relate. Indì ka maghinámbit sang amó nga mga butáng. Don't mention
such things. Nahinambitán níya akó sang íya báka nga binalígyà. He
mentioned to me that his cow was sold. (cf. sámbit).


_hinám-is_, To take pleasure in, delight in, gloat over; drink
something sweet. Mahinám-is kitá sing isá ka báso nga tubâ. Let us
drink a glass of sweet toddy. Ginahinam-isán ko ang nahanabô. I am
delighted at the way things have turned out. (cf. tám-is, panám-is).

_hinámpas_, Struck; attacked. (cf. hámpas).

_hinámput_, To draw near, approach, come towards, move in the direction
of the speaker. Nagahinámput na siá. He is drawing near. Ginhinampután
akó níya. He approached me, came towards me. (cf. dámput, sámput,
abút, palapít).

_hinanákit_, Pain, grief, sorrow, trouble. Walâ na siá sing
hinanákit. He has no longer any grief or pain. (cf. sákit, sakít).

_hinanarám_, (B) To like, be attached or addicted to, have a
craving for. Nagahinanarám siá sang sáut. She likes dancing very
much. (cf. dimát, yánggaw, lúyag, wíli).

_hinánday, hinángday_, To lie upon or across, to lean
upon. (cf. tángday, bángday, hinalángday).

_hinangát_, To reach, come to, amount to. Nagahinangát na sa limá ka
líbo ka mángmang ang íya nga ginhinguyáng. He has already spent five
thousand pesos. (cf. dángat).

_hinánggup_, Soaked in salt and water. Nakakáon akó sing hinánggup
nga kamóti, kán-on, etc. I ate some tomatoes, rice, etc. soaked in
salt and water. (cf. hánggup).

_hinangíban_, Arms, weapon. See hinganíban.

_hinangílid_, Trimmings, shavings, a part taken from the side of a
thing. (cf. kílid, hangílid).

_hinángput_, To arrive, reach, come to. (cf. sángput, sámput, abút).

_hinápal_, To slap, strike; to revile, rail at, curse and swear,
use strong language. (cf. dapál).

_hinarákhak_, Loud laughter, merriment; to guffaw, laugh
heartily. (cf. harákhak, talángkaw, arík-ik).

_hinaramáy_, A kind of tree whose bark is used for medicinal purposes.

_hinaráya_, The language of mountaineers or of people living in
districts away from the coast-line; pertaining to that language;
pertaining to the customs and manners of mountaineers; to speak
that language. Nagakalaínláin ang hinaráya kag ang hiligáynon. The
language of the mountains and that of Iloilo are different. Maálam
ka balá maghinaráya? Do you know how to speak the dialect of
the mountains? Naghinaráya siá sa ákon--or--ginhinarayáhan akó
níya. He spoke to me in the mountain-dialect. Dirí siníng lugár
hinaráya ang hámbal. Here in this place the mountain-dialect is
spoken. (cf. hiniráya id.; layá, ilayá, binukídnon).

_hinásà_, Much in demand, selling well, having a ready sale, much
called for, to sell well, sell off quickly, etc. Hinásà (nagahinásà)
ang bákal sa tiénda ni Fuláno. The goods for sale in N.N.'s shop are
much in demand. (cf. hásà, bákal, áka).

_hinát_, Stretched, smoothed out, open. See hínat.

_hínat_, To stretch out, smooth, hold tightly to, open, (a book, cloth,
paper, etc.), unfold, straighten out. Hináta ang hénero. Stretch out
the cloth, smooth it out. Hináti akó sang ákon báyò nga yokô. Smooth
out my creased jacket. Daláyon lang siá nagahínat sang baráha sa
adláw-ádlaw nga tanán. He opens the cards every day, (i.e. he is
always playing at cards). Palabása gid siá; dáyon lang níya ginahínat
ang líbro. He is an omnivorous reader; he always keeps a book open
before him. (cf. hítad).

_hináw_, (H) To wash the hands. Nakahináw ka sang ímo kamót? Have
you washed your hands? Maghináw ka ánay sang ímo kamót kon magkáon
ka. Wash your hands before you eat. Hinawí ang íya kamót. Wash his
hands. Pahinawá siá sang íya kamót. Let him wash his hands. Ihináw
iníng túbig sa ímo kamót. Wash your hands in this water. (cf. hunáw,
libánaw, ribánaw, panghináw).

_hinawâhawâ_, Small or trifling matters, little things, easy work. Walâ
gid siá sing mga mahágò nga pangabúdlay, kóndì mga hinawâhawâ gid
lámang. He has no heavy work, but only easy jobs. (cf. mahúay).

_hínay_, Slow, leisurely, gentle; to do slowly, leisurely, tenderly,
gently, etc. Hínay! Slowly! Be careful! Hínay ka! Go slow! Be
careful! Hináya lang ang ímo paglakát. Walk slowly. Ginhínay níla
ang trabáho. They worked slowly. Ang kabáyo nagahínay na, kay
nabúdlay. The horse goes slowly now, for it is tired. Hináya ang
paghákwat sang masakít. Lift the sick man tenderly, gently, slowly,
carefully. (cf. búndul, pákok, etc.).

_hináy-hínay_, Dim. and Freq. of hínay. Hináyhínay lang kamó. Go
slow. Be on your guard. Take care. Gently. Take your time.

_hinayón_, (B) Pause, rest, interruption, stop, interval, intermission,
cessation, breathing spell. Walâ sing hinayón ang íya nga pagkánta,
pangabúdlay, paglágaw, etc. He is constantly singing, working, walking
to and fro, etc. He sings, etc. without a pause. (cf. langán, puút).

_hinébra_, (Sp. ginebra) Gin; also (loosely) brandy, cognac, whiskey,
any strong alcoholic liquor.

_hinéte_, (Sp. jinete) Rider, horseman; jockey. (cf. mangangabayó).

_hingában_, To finish (weaving, etc.). Nakahingában ka na sang
ákon delargóhon? Have you finished the cloth for my trousers? Pilá
ka térno ang ímo ginhingában? How many suits of clothes have you
finished weaving? Mahingabánan mo balá akó sang ákon térno sa sulúd
siníng pituádlaw? Can you finish (weaving) my suit of clothes this
week? Indì akó makahingában sang ímo háblon sa sulúd sang isá ka
búlan. I cannot get your cloth off the loom within a month. (cf. ában).

_hingabón_, To conceal, hide, keep away from notoriety, etc. See
hinabón id. (cf. gabún).

_hingabút_, To draw or come near, be about to arrive, to persecute,
pursue, molest, harass, perplex, annoy, distress, be after; strive,
seek to obtain. Ang mga matárung ginahingabút sing masamí sang mga
maláut. The just are often persecuted by the wicked. Ginbutangbutángan
níla siá sing salâ sa paghingabút sa íya. They slandered him in order
to harass him. Indì ka maghingabút sa íya. Don't persecute him. Ang
idô nagahingabút sang kánding. The dog is after the goat. (cf. abút).

_hingábut_, To arrive in time, appear at the right moment, reach at
the proper time. Walâ siá makahingábut sa mísa. He did not arrive in
time to hear Mass. (cf. ábut).

_hingádlan_, From hingálan.

_hingágaw_, To reach the goal, terminate, complete, finish, get ready,
dispatch. Saráng ka makahingágaw dirí sa las dóse? Can you be here
at twelve o'clock? Hingagáwon mo ang ákon talahíon sa buás. Finish
(or dispatch) my sewing to-morrow. Ginhingágaw níya ang baláy sa walâ
magulán. He reached home before it rained. Hingagáwa ang koríyo. Try
to reach the mail (i.e. be there when the mail comes in). Makahingágaw
ka balá siní túbtub karón sa hápon? Do you think you can finish it
this evening? (cf. ágaw; tápus, hingápus).

_hingagawón_, See agáwagawón, hilingagawón id.

_hingák-hingák_, Out of breath, breathless, panting, gasping for
breath. (cf. hápò, hímpok, púnghà, pungâ).

_hingalában_, To get--, take--, covet--, more than others, desire a
larger share, be very selfish, outdo others, take the greater part
of. Nagahingalában siá sa pagkúhà sang humáy. He is taking more than
his share of rice. Indì ka maghingalában sang sugilánon. Don't take
upon yourself the largest share of the conversation. Hingalabáni
siá sang súgid. Try to surpass him in talking. Ginhingalabánan níya
ang íya mga útud sang mánggad nga binílin sang íla mga ginikánan. He
overreached his brothers in getting the largest share of the property
left by their parents. (cf. labán; pangunyádì, panginyáwat).

_hingálag_, (H) To mind, pay attention to, notice, observe. Sa walâ
lámang mahingalági napúkan siá kag napatáy. Suddenly he collapsed
and died. (cf. kálag, hingalág).

_hingalág_, (H) Unnoticed, unobserved, suddenly, without much ado,
unexpectedly; repeatedly, at short intervals, again and again, but
always in surprise. (cf. hinálì; dugáydugáy).

_hingálan_, (H) To name, give a name, call by name. Dì mo paghingalánan
(--ngádlan) ang ngálan sang Diós kon walâ sing kabangdánan. Don't
pronounce the name of God without reason. Ginahingádlan (--ngalánan)
siá kay Huán--or--nga Huán--or--nga si Huán. He is called John. His
name is John. Sín-o ang ipahingálan mo sa ímo bátà? What name will you
give your child? How will you have your child named? (ngálan, ngáran).


_hingaláyo_, To burn brightly or fiercely, blaze, be in a blaze,
be ablaze, take--, catch--, be on--, fire, be in--, be enveloped
in--, flames. Nagahingaláyo na ang baláy. The house is enveloped in
flames. (cf. kaláyo).

_hingalít_, To be quick, do at once, anticipate, do with despatch,
hurry, take the first opportunity. (cf. kalít).

_hingalúp_, To set, go down. (cf. hinalúp, sálup).

_hingamó_, To covet, desire, crave, long for, want very much, be
engrossed by; strive, make efforts. Indì ka maghingamó sang íya sang
ibán. Don't covet what belongs to another. Indì mo paghingamohón
ang íya nga báhin. Don't hanker after his share. Ginhingamó níya
iníng mga páhò. He longed for these mangoes. Nagahingamó na lang siá
sang sáut nga walâ na magadúmdum sang íya mga kaupdánan. He is so
absorbed in (engrossed in) dancing that he no longer even thinks of
his companions. (cf. íbug, hánggab).

_hingán_, Of some use, rather useful or important, satisfactory; to
be of some use or importance, be rather well off. Walâ man hingán ang
ákon pagkádto dídto, kay walâ ko siá maabúti. My going there was of
no use, for I did not see him (find him at home). Walâ gid hingán ang
pagdalî ko, kay naulanán man akó. My hurry was of no avail, for I was
caught in the rain all the same. Sádto ánay ímol gid siá, ápang karón
naghingán na ang íya pagkabutáng. He used to be very poor, but now he
is rather well off, (has quite a little property). (cf. águd, pulús).

_hingán-hingán_, Dim. and Freq. of hingán. Hingánhingán ang íla
pangabúhì. They are living pretty comfortably, (are rather well to do,
are neither poor nor very rich).

_hinganíban_, Arms, weapon.

_hinganúgon_, To regret, etc. See hinúgon.

_hingápsan, hingápson_, The end, etc. See hingapusán, hingapusón.

_hingáp-us_, To commit suicide (by hanging). Naghingáp-us siá. He
committed suicide--or--He hanged himself. (cf. híkog).

_hingápus, hingapús_, To end, finish, complete, terminate,
conclude. Makahingápus ka sang kodál túbtub maghápon? Can you
finish the fence by this evening? Hingapúsa ang ímo sulát, diskúrso,
etc. Finish your letter, discourse, etc. Hingapúsi na akó sang ákon
mga sapátos, kay dúgay na man ang paghulát ko. Please finish the boots
for me, because I have been waiting for them a long time. Ihingápus
akó ánay sang atóp sang baláy. Please finish first the roof of the
house for me. (cf. tápus; hingágaw).

_hingapusán_, The end, termination, completion, last touch,
finish. (cf. tápus, katapúsan).

_hingapusón_, See hilingapusón id.

_hingawáy_, Fighter, warrior, soldier. (cf. áway, hangawáy).

_hingáyaw_, To supply what is wanting, fill up deficiencies, pay
remaining debts, make up for what is short. Sán-o ka makahingáyaw
sang ímo nga útang? When shall you be able to pay the remainder of
your debt? Ginhingayáwan na akó níya sang tátlo ka písos nga nabilín
pa sang íya útang. He has now paid me the three pesos he still owed
me. Hingayáwi siá sang napúlò ka nahót nga kawáyan. Let him have the
ten pieces of bamboo still due to him. (cf. áyaw).

_hínggà_, (B) To pass the night, lie down to sleep. (cf. hígdà).

_hingikî_, To clean the teeth of tartar; to use a
tooth-pick. (cf. kíkì, palanghingikî, tingá, palanghiningá).

_hingílid_, To dress or trim the side of a thing. (cf. kílid).

_hingílin_, To cherish, be attached to, be loath to part with, regret
the loss of, guard or keep carefully. Ginahingilínan--or--ginahingínlan
gid níya ang bág-o níya nga réloh. He likes his new watch very
much. Dílì mo paghingínlan ang paghinguyáng sing pílak sa áton pándut,
agúd magsádya. Don't spare expense for our feast-day, that it may
be a pleasant affair. Ginhingínlan níya sing dakô ang síngsing nga
nadúlà. She very much regrets the loss of the ring. (cf. ngílin,
hílak, kangílin).

_hingô_, Sniff; to sniff, snuffle. Súngha ang síp-on mo, índì
mo pagihingô. Wipe your nose, don't sniff. Indì ka maghingô, kay
maláw-ay. Don't sniff, because it is a dirty habit.

_hingód-hingód_, Snout, proboscis, trunk (of pigs, elephants, etc.).


_hingóko, hingokó_, To manicure, trim and clean the
finger-nails. (cf. kokó).

_hingóto_, To look for lice, try to catch lice (with one's
fingers). Nagahingotohánay (hingotoánay, hingot-ánay, hingot-wánay)
silá. They are searching each other for lice. Hingotóhi, (hingotói,
hingót-i, hingótwi) siá. Search his hair for lice. (cf. kóto, kúto,
kotól).

_híngubás_, To dry up, evaporate (of water). Nagahingubás na ang
túbig sang línaw. The water in the lake is getting less, (lower,
is evaporating). (cf. hubás).

_hingúdto_, To be in the zenith. Nagahingúdto na ang ádlaw. It is
midday. The sun is in the zenith. (cf. ódto).

_hingúhà, hinguhâ_, To try earnestly, make great efforts, seek
to obtain. (cf. kúhà, tingúhà, paningúhà, panikasúg, pamurúg-ot,
himúd-os, etc.).

_hingúko_, See hingóko.

_hingúlì_, To buy a piece of meat or fish. Maghingúlì ka sing kárne
nga bále salapî. Buy a piece of meat for fifty centavos--or--buy
fifty centavos worth of meat. Hingulían mo akó sing ísdà dídto sa
baybáyon. Buy me some fish there on the beach. (cf. úlì, ulî).

_hingulúsgan_, (H) To be in full bloom or strength, developing
well. Nagahingulúsgan ang íya pagsúpang. He is in his best growing
years, is developing well into manhood. (cf. kusúg).

_hingumán_, Put an end to, get ready, complete, finish. Ginahingumán
na níya ang íya baláy. He is now finishing the building of his
house. (cf. humán; hingápus, hinggágaw).

_hingúndang_, (H) The end of a meal, termination of a bath, or the
like; dessert, fruits, sweetmeats, etc. served after a meal; to finish
a meal, be about to rise from a table, be about to leave the bath-room,
or the like. (cf. úndang, tungá, hinungá).

_hingunúd_, To sink, set, go down, disappear below the horizon (of
sun, moon, etc.). Nagahingunúd na ang ádlaw. The sun is setting. Akó
tigúlang na, kon sa ádlaw, nagahingunúd na. I am old now, like the sun,
soon to disappear below the horizon. (cf. túnud, hinunúd).

_hingúrut, hingurút_, To finish, spend all, make an end of,
complete. (cf. úrut).

_hingurután_, Worn out, spent, used up, useless. (cf. hingúrut).

_hingutás_, To cut off, finish, end, terminate, complete. Nagahingutás
ang íya kabúhì. His life is coming to an end, (is ebbing
away). Ginahingutás na níya ang ákon háblon. She is now finishing
the weaving of my cloth. Hingutasí akó sa madalî nga saráng mahímò
sing tátlo ka bára sang ákon delargóhon, kay may kinahánglan akó nga
dakô. Finish for me quickly (as quickly as possible) the weaving
of three yards of cloth for my trousers, for I am much in need of
it. (cf. utás; hingágaw, hingápus, hingumán).

_hingútbong_, To cut off, lop the top off (bamboos, trees,
sugar-cane, etc.). Hingutbongí ang kawáyan. Cut off the tip of the
bamboo. Ihingútbong iníng binángon sa ághò. Cut off the top of the
agho with this bolo. Ihingútbong mo akó sináng mga tubó. Please lop
off the tops of those sugar-canes. (cf. ótbong, útbong).

_hingúyang, hinguyáng_, To spend, lay out, expend, waste; expense,
expenditure, waste. (cf. uyáng).

_híngyo, híngyò_, To think, plan, intend, deliberate; wish,
desire. Nagahíngyo siá nga mapamanílà. He is thinking of going to
Manila. He wishes to go to Manila. (cf. hándum, dúmdum, hunâhúnà,
túyò).

_hinikugáy_, Suicide, self-destruction, the committing of suicide
(on a large scale). (cf. híkog, hingáp-us).

_hinimóan_, Deeds, works, doings, actions, achievement. (cf. hímò).

_híning_, (H) Shine, lustre, brightness, polish, brilliancy; to shine,
be bright, be brilliant, be polished. Nagahíning na ang salúg, kay
halampasóhan. The floor is bright now, for it has been polished. Kon
hínsan mo sing maáyo ang lamésa magahíning. If you rub the table well
it will shine. Pahinínga sing maáyo ang ákon mga sapátos. Polish
my boots well. Pahiníngi akó sang ákon mga sapátos. Polish my
boots. Nagahíning na ang lamésa nga ímo ginpahídan (-íran). The table
which you wiped looks as if it were polished. Ipahíning iníng séra
sa salúg. Use this wax to polish the floor. (cf. sílì, silíng, hínis).

_hiniráya_, The dialect of the mountains, etc. See hinaráya id.


_hínis_, Sandy soil, not very productive ground. (cf. lungasóg--moist
ground).

_hínis_, To rub, polish, clean, scrape (with sand-paper, sand,
etc.). Maghínis ka sang mga báso, pínggan, etc.--or--Hínsi (hinísi) ang
mga báso, pínggan, etc. Polish (clean) the glasses, plates, etc. Ihínis
iníng binókbok nga tísa sa mga toktokón nga mga tenedór. Rub the rusty
forks with this brick-dust. Ihínis akó ánay sang mga galamitón sa
digamohán. Please clean the kitchen-utensils for me (with sand, etc.).

_hiníwà_, A slice, cut, piece, cutlet; to cut up, slice, cut in
pieces. (cf. híwà).

_hiniwâ-híwà_, Cut up, dissected, cut in pieces.

_hínlas_, To clear away rust from iron by heating and hammering, purify
metals by fire. Ang manugsálsal nagahínlas sang salsálon. The smith is
cleaning the iron (by making it red-hot and then hammering it on the
anvil). Hinlasí iníng salsálon nga toktokón. Purify this rusty iron.

_hínlaw_, (B) To feel unsettled in a new place, feel the effects of
having been transferred or transplanted to new soil. Nahínlaw akó. I
do not feel at home yet--or--I am not yet accustomed to the place. Indì
ka magkádto sa malayô, kay básì mahínlaw ka. Don't go far away, for you
may have difficulty in becoming accustomed to new surroundings--or--you
may feel home-sick. Indì mo paghalínon dídto ang mga kamátis, kay
básì mahínlaw. Don't remove the tomato plants from there, for they
may not take kindly to another soil. (cf. hídlaw, pamág-o, mág-o).

_hínlò_, Polish, shine; to polish, shine, brighten,
burnish. (cf. púlug).

_hínlò_, Smoothness, evenness, levelness; to be smooth, even, level,
plain. (cf. tápan, saláma, hámtang, tínlò).

_hinóklog_, Mercy, compassion, sympathy, ruth (poetical); to be
merciful, compassionate, have compassion, have mercy, be sympathetic,
to sympathize with. Nagahinóklog siá sa ákon. He is compassionate
towards me. Ginhinoklogán níya ang masakít nga bátà. He had pity on
the sick child. Hinoklogí ang mga nalísdan. Take pity on those in
distress. (cf. áwà, lóoy, hanóklog).

_hinonóo_, On the contrary, but, but rather, however. Buút siá magdaúg
sa ákon sa dúmug, hinonóo gánì siá amó ang nabúntol. He wished to
defeat me in wrestling, but after all it was he who was thrown. "Dî mo
kamí ipapagdaúg sa panuláy, hinonóo pamawíon mo kamí sa kaláut". "Lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil", (cf. tapát, agád).

_hínta, híntà_, Now then! Come on! Let us see. Hínta, ísol ka
dídto. Now then, get back there. Hínta, pasúlnga akó. Now then, show it
to me, let me see it. Hínta, ipabása mo sa ákon ang sulát. Well, let me
read the letter. Hínta, ábi, tan-awón ko kon matúod in-á. Well! Fancy
that! I want to see whether that is true. Hínta, dína (diín na)
ang tulún-an nga ginsilíng mo? Now then, where is the book you
mentioned? (cf. hánti, hatî).

_hinúbig_, To draw or fetch water. (cf. túbig).

_hinubón-húbon_, To gather, collect, come together, flock together,
meet as people in public places, on roads, etc., or as birds on trees,
etc. Sa adláwádlaw nga tanán may mga táo nga nagahinubónhúbon sa
baláy-bánwa, etc. Every day there are people gathering in crowds in
the municipal building, etc. (cf. hubónhúbon).

_hinudíng-húding_, A whisper; to whisper. (cf. haníháni, hudínghúding,
hurínghúring id.; konókóno, sugídsúgid).

_hinúgang_, To add to; addition; additional; particle (of
grammar). (cf. dúgang).

_hinúgay_, Stop! Enough now! Don't! No more! It's long enough
now that----. Hinúgay sang hámbal. Stop your talk now. Enough of
words. Hinúgay na sang káon. Don't eat any more or any longer. Hinúgay
na sang inóm. Stop drinking. You have drunk quite enough now. Hinúgay
sang lágaw dirí sa sulúd sang balatonán. You have walked to and
fro long enough now in the reception room--or--don't walk about any
longer. (cf. dúgay).

_hinúgon_, To regret, be sorry for, lament the loss of. Nagahinúgon
siá sang kán-on nga naúsik sa salúg. He is sorry for the boiled rice
that got spilled on the floor. Pahinugóni ang ímo kinabudlayán. Have
some consideration for your hard earnings (i.e. don't waste your
earnings). (cf. kanógon, hinganúgon).


_hinugúng_, To grow violent, fierce, serious (of war, fighting,
disease, etc.). (cf. sugúng).

_hinúgyaw_, To be hilarious, loudly cheerful, shout with joy, be
mirthful, be in high glee. Nagahinúgyaw ang mga táo sa bulangán. The
people in the cock-pit are shouting with excitement. Ginahinugyawán
níla ang dúmug. They are following the wrestling-match with loud
yells. (cf. húgyaw, but hinúgyaw is more in use).

_hinúl-an_, Bony, full of bones, strong of bone; to ossify, harden,
become as hard as bone, to take out bones, to bone. Hinul-anán mo ánay
ang kárne kag ugáling toktokón. First take out the bones and then chop
up the meat. First bone the meat and then chop it up. (cf. túl-an;
hanúl-an).

_hinúlas_, Artificially dried, especially applied to rice dried in the
kitchen, or the like, during the rainy season. May hinúlas kamó? Have
you got any artificially dried rice (in contradistinction to sun-dried
rice). (cf. húlas).

_hinúlò_, Rest, quiet, free time, relaxation. Walâ siá sing hinúlò
sang panahî, kay mamándut siá. She is busy sewing all the time,
for she wants to assist at the Feast. (cf. ipótan, huraráy, pahúay,
inalapalápan; túlò).

_hinulón-húlon_, To gather, etc. See hinubón-húbon.

_hinúlsul_, To rue, repent of, be contrite, be penitent, be sorry for,
to feel--compunction,--remorse, to regret. Maghinúlsul ka sang ímo mga
salâ--or--Hinulsulán mo ang ímo mga salâ. Be sorry for--or--repent of
your sins. Pahinulsulá siá ánay sang íya mga salâ. Let him first make
an act of contrition for his sins. Kon walâ sing paghinúlsul, walâ man
sing patáwad. Without contrition there is no forgiveness. (cf. ngúsul,
núlsul; sákit, subô).

_hinulungkagíng_, Noise, etc. See hulungkagíng.

_hinúmaw_, Remains of food adhering to the inside of a cooking
utensil and softened by water. Also verb. Hinumáwa (humáwa) ang
dokót sang kólon. Soak with water and loosen the scrapings of the
kettle. (cf. húmaw).

_hinún-an_, To express one's view, state, say, speak, give out an
idea or thought. (cf. hinun-ánon).

_hinun-ánon_, Thought, sentence, idea, view, remark; to exchange
views on a subject, speak about, talk over, think upon, dwell upon,
ponder. Nagahinun-ánon silá nahanungúd sa bág-o nga ley. They are
exchanging views on the new law. Naghinun-ánon siá nga----. He was
thinking that----. Naghinun-ánon silá sang íla karabáw nga nadúlà. They
were conferring together about the lost buffalo. (cf. hunâhúnà,
dúmdum, paíno-íno; hámbal, sugilánon, hambárò, hambalánon, pamúlong).

_hinunáw_, To melt, be digested, dissolved. Nagahinunáw pa ang ákon
kináon; índì pa akó magpalígos. The meal I have taken is not digested
yet; I will not go bathing so soon.

_hinungá_, (B) To finish a meal, end a repast; dessert, fruits or
sweetmeats served after a meal. Anó ang buút mo ihinungá? Ságing
o kalámayhátì? What would you like for dessert? Bananas or
"kalamayhátì? (cf. tungá, úndang, hingúndang).

_hinúnlan_, The slough or cast skin of snakes, cast claws of crabs,
etc. (cf. hilinúlwan).

_hinunúd_, To set, go down (of the sun, etc.). (cf. hingunúd).

_hinupáng_, To grow or develop well, to eat much, (as a
growing youth). Nagahinupáng siá. He is growing well, eating
much. (cf. súpang).

_hinúptan_, One kept for work or service, as a menial servant,
a concubine, one adopted into the family, etc. (cf. hupút).

_hinurág-ol_, To drop--, fall--, with a thud or thump. (cf. rág-ol).

_hinurángus_, Life; breath; stomach. (cf. kabúhì; ginháwa; solóksolók).

_hinuráy-húray_, Division, distribution, part, share; to divide,
distribute. (cf. huláy, huráy).

_hinuríng-húring_, (H) Whisper, rumour; to whisper,
etc. (cf. hudíng-húding).

_hinuróng_, To loaf, idle away the time, be a mischief-maker;
loafing. (cf. huróng, tiyógtiyóg, lág-it).

_hinurungán_, Climax, apex, acme, culmination; to be absorbed,
immersed, engrossed, be at the acme of, reach the height or summit
of. Nagahinurungán gid ang íla sugilánon nga walâ silá makabatî sang
panóktok sa ganháan. Their conversation was so animated that they
did not hear the knock at the door.

_hínyo_, To think, plan; to long for, etc. See híngyo.

_hiól_, Trial, hardship, difficulty; to be a trial, be hard, become
difficult; pahiól--to beset, bother, molest, harass, cause trouble,
hardship or difficulty. Naghiól na ang íya kahimtángan. His position
has become difficult. Nagpahiól siá sa ákon. He caused me trouble. He
molested me. Ginpahiolán (Ginpahíl-an) ni Fuláno si tátay sa lakás
nga pangáyò. Father was greatly bothered by the insistent request
of N.N. Pahiolí (Pahíl-i) siá túbtub nga magákig. Harass him till he
gets angry. Mahiól ang íla pangabúhì. Their life is a hard or trying
one. (cf. huól).

_hióm_, Closed, shut (of doors, etc.). (cf. haóm, haóp).

_híom_, To close, shut. Hióma ang bábà mo, ang ganháan, ang baúl,
etc. Shut your mouth, the door, the trunk, etc. Ihíom akó ánay sang
bintánà. Kindly close the window. (cf. kípot, dápat, háop, háom).

_híos_, To move, stir, wriggle, writhe, fidget. Anó ang ginahíos
mo? Why are you restless (or moving to and fro)--or--Why can't you sit
(stand, lie) still? Pahimúyong ka, índì ka magságad sang híos. Be
quiet, don't fidget. (cf. húlag, íwos, híwos, híwod, hílod, híyod,
íyos).

_hípal_, To insult, upbraid, ridicule, scoff, use insolent
language. (cf. pasipála, yagutâ, yagúm-at, uligâ, ulígyat, tiáw-tíaw).

_hípgid_, A kind of vine whose stems are much used for binding
purposes, especially in fish-traps, as they are very resistant to
the action of water. (cf. síg-id).

_híphip_, To suborn, bribe, give secretly, pervert by gifts, give
hush-money, tamper with, grease one's palm; bribe, hush-money,
etc. Hiphipí siá sing písos. Pass him secretly a peso--or--Tip him
a peso. Indì ka makahíphip sa íya, kay siá índì gid magpahíphip. You
cannot bribe him, for he absolutely will not accept bribes. Ihíphip
sa íya iní. Bribe him with this. Hiniphipán níya si Fuláno sing isá
ka gatús. He gave N.N. a bribe of one hundred (pesos). (cf. líklik).

_hípid_, (H) To be or become or make nice, trim, neat, tidy. Naghípid
siá karón; sádto damák siá. She has become tidy now; formerly she
used to be slovenly. Nahipídan akó sa íya. She appears to me to
be very neat. Pahipída (-íra) siá. Make her observe the rules of
tidiness--or--Try to make her tidy--or--Order her to dress tidily, etc.

_hípig_, (B) To be tidy, etc. See hípid id.

_hípon_, A kind of small fish, very thin and slender. Ang hípon
sing masúnsun ginalusgusán. The hipon-fish is often cooked by the
lúsgus-method (i.e. boiled in a nicely determined quantity of water).

_hipón-hípon_, Anything resembling a hipon-fish.

_hipón-hipón_, A kind of plant.

_hípu_. To take in, gather, collect, appropriate to oneself. Indì
mo paghipúhon ang tanán, kóndì pahilábta man ang ibán. Don't gather
in all for yourself, but let others also have a share. (cf. karipón,
harípo, hirípo, típon, ángkon).

_hípus_, Silence! Hist! Hush!; silent, dumb, mute, noiseless, mum,
speechless, still, hushed; to be silent, keep quiet, hold one's
tongue, be still. Hípus--or--maghípus ka. Be quiet. Hold your peace
(tongue). Ginhípsan (ginhipúsan) níya ang íya nga salâ. He kept silent
about his fault. Pahípsa (Pahipúsa) siá. Order him to be quiet. Make
him keep silence. Hípsa (hipúsa) ang ímo bábà. Keep your mouth shut. Be
silent. (cf. himúyong, linóng).

_híra_ (Sp. jira) Picnic, outing, holiday, party,
excursion. (cf. paliwálíwa, píknik, pahangínhángin, laguyáwan,
dayándáyan).

_hírà_, A pus-like mucus that accumulates in the inner angle of the
eye, when the latter is inflamed. (cf. múrì, mútà).

_hírab_, (B) To exhaust, weaken through hunger, etc. See hílab.

_hirábong_, Dense, affording shade, shady, etc. See hilábong. Also:
Screen, cover; supernumerary, substitute, stop-gap, filling a vacancy
or just increasing the number of. Siá amó ang isá sang mga manugkánta
nga hirábong lang. He is only a supernumerary of the (regular)
singers. Iníng mga daándaán nga hénero ibutáng mo lang nga hirábong
sa kílid sang altár. Use these old cloths as a cover for the sides
of the altar.

_hirâ-hírà_, Dim. and Freq. of hírà.

_híram_, (B) To touch, grope about, finger, etc. See hílam.

_hirán_, Restlessness, fidgetiness, naughtiness, liveliness (of
boys, etc.).

_hirán-hirán_, Restless, naughty, lively, etc. (See darándarán,
harásharás, etc.).

_hirán-hiranón_, Restless, etc. See hiránhirán.

_hiráon_, Full of "hírà" (pus); pertaining to or affected with "hírà"
(which see).

_híras, hirás_, To be stingy, give little, treat in a miserly way, be
parsimonious, shabby, mean, niggardly, close, "penny-wise". Ginhirasán
lang níya ang íya útud sang mánggad nga íla pinanúblì. He gave his
brother only a small amount of the property they inherited. Indì
mo paghirasán ang ímo libáyon sing tinápay. Don't treat your young
brother so stingily in the matter of bread.

_hirás_, Crack, split; to crack, split. May hirás ang tása. The cup
is cracked. Naghirás ang tása. The cup is cracked. Iníng pínggan
nahirasán. This plate has a crack in it. (cf. litík, balanâ).

_hirát_, Wide open (of eyes, eyelids). (cf. kírhat).

_hiratáy_, To chastise, punish severely, inflict corporal
punishment. (cf. tarítári).

_hiráw_, The spike of a plant. Also: only half-open, nearly closed
(of eyes). (cf. pirót).

_hiráwhan_, Spiky, having or forming a spike.

_hírba_, (Sp. hierba) Grass, herb, pasturage. (cf. hilamón, tanúm).

_hírba artemísa or artemísia_, (Sp. artemisa, artemisia) A kind of
plant; mug-wort.

_hirbabuéna_, (Sp. hierba buena) A kind of plant; peppermint, mint.

_hiriábut_, (B) To reach, etc. See hiliábut.

_hiriabút_, (B) To come to, etc. See hiabút.

_hirigíta_, A worthless woman, a slattern. (cf. girigíta).

_hirîhî_, To laugh heartily. (cf. hîhî, harákhak, talángkaw).

_hirihímo_, Glad, pleased, content on account of some accession of
help. Hirihímo akó kay dirí na ikáw. I am glad that you are here (to
help me). Hirihímo akó kay naghánggud ka na kag saráng ka makabúlig
sa ákon. I am pleased that you are now grown up and able to help me.

_hirí-hirí_, The neighing of a horse; to neigh. Ang kabáyo
nagahiríhirí. The horse neighs. Anó ang ginahiríhirí mo nga daw
kabáyo? Why are you neighing like a horse? Ginhiríhirihán akó
sang kabáyo. The horse neighed at me or at my approach. Ang íya nga
pagkádlaw daw hiríhirí sang kabáyo. His laughter is like the neighing
of a horse.

_hiriláum_, To rely one upon the other, trust that another will
do what one should do oneself. Walâ níla pagbayári ang íla útang,
kay naghiriláum silá. They did not pay their debt, because each one
thought that the other one had paid (would pay).

_hiringítyon_, (B) The last of a series, end, termination,
finishing stroke or touch. Amó iní ang hiringítyon nga tínday siníng
matsóra. This is the last calf of this old cow. (cf. ití; hiringítyon
literally means the last portion emitted by a hen evacuating her
bowels; kinágut).

_hiripáw_, (B) To relieve, console, cheer up, gladden. Ang sulát
sang íya anák nagpahiripáw sa íya. Her son's letter gladdened
her. Nahiripawán siá sang íya ginháwa tungúd sang amó nga sulát. That
letter cheered her up. (cf. lípay, úmpaw).

_hirípo_, To gather, collect, take in, appropriate, etc. (cf. harípo,
hípu, karipón, típon).

_híro_, (Sp. hierro, herrar) Mark, brand; to mark or brand with an
iron. May híro ang kabáyo. The horse is branded. Magahíro akó sang
ákon karakáw. I will brand my buffalo. Magapahíro akó sang ákon
báka. I will have my cow branded. Sa taghiriró madámò nga mga háyup
ang pagahiróhan. During the branding season many domestic animals
will be marked. (cf. márka, doón, óso, úso).


_hírup_, Intimacy, tender affection; to be intimate, have tender
affection for. Nagahírup or nagahirupáy silá. They are very
intimate. Ginahirúpan níya ang íya ábyan. He has a tender affection
for his friend.

_hísà_, Envy, spite, grudge, malevolence, malignity, malice, ill-will,
bad-blood, ill-nature, spleen; to envy, grudge, be spiteful, bear
a grudge, vent one's spleen, harbour ill-will, etc. Indì ka maghísà
sa íya--or--Indì mo siá paghisáan. Don't envy him--or--Bear him no
ill-will. (cf. híkaw).

_hísà_, To slap, kick, pinch, strike, or the like (especially among
children). Dílì ka maghísà sa íya. Don't pinch him. (cf. sakít, kodót).

_hisáhò_, To agree well, get on--, pull--, hit it--, well together, be
in accord, correspond. (cf. sahô, hitóhog, hiúsa, hiúgyon, binuligáy).

_hisálò_, To fit, suit, agree, correspond, match. Walâ paghisálò ang
íla sugilánon. Their conversation is all out of joint. They do not
understand each other (their answers not agreeing with the questions,
or the like). Walâ na silá paghisálò. They are not on good terms any
longer. (cf. salô).

_hisálo, hisálok_, To sit down together with others, take meals in
common; to agree, harmonize, live in harmony. (cf. sálo, hisálò,
hisáhò).

_hisáyod_, To know, be aware of, understand, be acquainted with
the facts. Nakahisáyod ikáw sinâ? Ginahisayóran (ginahisáyran,
ginahisayódan) mo inâ? Do you know that? Have you knowledge of
that? (cf. sáyod, hibaló, hántup, hangúp, áto, balíntúnod, álam).

_hisô_, Oil, ointment, pomade (for the hair).

_híso, hísò_, To oil the hair, use hair-oil. Hisói (hisóhi) ang
ímo bohók sing lána. Oil your hair with coconut-oil. May hisô ikáw,
kay manghíso akó? Have you got some hair-oil, for I wish to oil my
hair? (cf. háplas, bádlis, pamánhop).

_hisónò_, According to, in consonance with, conformable to; to agree,
correspond, be in consonance or harmony with. (cf. sonô).

_histórya_, (Sp. historia) History, story, event. (cf. marágtas).

_hítà_, The groin.

_hitáas_, High, elevated, above, eminent, elated, lofty, tall,
towering; above, before, previously, some lines or pages back. Ibutáng
mo ang krús sa hitáas sang simbáhan. Put the cross on the highest
point of the church. Ang nasámbit sa hitáas----. What has been stated
above or before----. (cf. táas).

_hitabô_, Event, accident, incident, happening, deed,
occurrence. (cf. tabô, hatabô).

_hítad_, To stretch, open or smooth out cloth, paper, etc. Ginahítad
mo lang ang tulún-an nga walâ mo pagabasáha. You are keeping the
book open without reading it. Hitáda (-ára) ang mantél. Smooth out
the table-cloth. (cf. bítad, hínat).

_hitâ-hítà_, Dim. of hítà. Anything resembling the groin, as an angled
groove, indentations in fruits, etc.

_hítam_, Remains of food adhering to the inside of a kettle,
pot, pan. Tinloí sing maáyo ang kólon, agúd makúhà ang tanán nga
hítam. Clean the rice-kettle well, so that all the adhering particles
of food may be removed. (cf. ríka).

_hitáo, hitáwo_, To impersonate, personify. (cf. táo, táwo).

_hitápul_, To come to an understanding, agree. (cf. sápul, hitúpul).

_hitíng-híting, hitíng-hitíng_, To throb, pulsate, beat (of boils,
etc.).

_hitô-hítò_, Management, contrivance, resourcefulness, machination,
ways and means. Maáyo silá sing hitôhítò. Their management is good,
(they are managing well). They are quite resourceful. Maáyo ang íla
hitôhítò sang piniliáy. Their election-campaign is well managed or
organized. (See pahitôhítò--to manage, etc.).

_hitóhog_, To agree, pull well together, get on well together,
hit it well together, be well joined, harmonize, square with, suit
or fit together. Silá nga duhá nagahitóhog gid. The two of them are
well mated or matched,--are pulling well together. Ang ibán nga mga
magasawá walâ paghilitóhog (paghitóhog). Some married couples are not
well suited,--are ill-assorted. Hitohóga silá. Try to make them pull
together. (cf. tóhog, alóghog, hisáhò, hiúsa, hitúpul).


_hitsúra_, Form, figure; impertinence, shame, cheek. (cf. etsúra,
tsúri, súri, hitsúri).

_hitsúri_, See hitsúra.

_hitúkul_, To seize suddenly, make a dash for, fall upon, jump and
catch; to overlap, overtake, catch up with. (cf. túkul, tóklò).

_hitúpul_, To come together, meet, conspire, agree, make common cause,
pull together. (cf. túpul, típon, húmon, húmut, hitóhog).

_hiúgyon_, To cooperate, collaborate, work together, unite, combine,
join in, help each other, have unison. Hiúgyon (maghiúgyon)
kamó. Cooperate, unite. Naghiliúgyon silá sa pagpatíndog sing
ermíta. They helped each other to erect a chapel. They joined together
in building a chapel. Hiugyoní nínyo ang kalaíngnon, aradohón,
etc. Assist each other in burning out the jungle, in ploughing,
etc. (cf. hitóhog, hiúsa, binuligáy).

_hiúpud_, (H) To accompany, be or go together, live together, consort
with, bear or keep company with. Maghiúpud ka sa íya--or--hiúpdi
siá. Bear him company. Go along with him. (cf. upúd, búylog, tawás).

_hiúsa_, (H) To be one, be of one mind, be in unison, have
union. Nagahiúsa ang íla pagtóo, or: Nagahiliúsa silá sa pagtóo. They
are one in faith. (cf. isá, usá; hiúgyon, hitóhog, hisáhò).

_híwà_, To slice, carve, cut off slices, cut in pieces; slice, piece,
cutlet. Hiwáa ang ísdà, kárne, etc. Cut the fish, meat, etc. in
slices. Hiwái akó sing duhá ka híwà nga kárne. Cut me off two pieces
of meat. (cf. hiníwà).

_hiwâ_, Cut up, cut in slices or pieces, dissected. Hiwâ na ang báboy
sang ámon paglígad sa ihawán. The pig was cut in pieces when we passed
the butcher's shop. (cf. híwà).

_hiwág-os_, To toil, drudge, work hard at, fag, moil, labour,
struggle. Nagahiwág-os siá sa pagdáro, sa pagtuángtúang, etc. He toils
at the plough, at carrying goods on his shoulders, etc. (cf. hágò,
patáypátay, putóypútoy).

_hiwál_, To loll or hang out the tongue; to flirt, be a
coquette. Nagahiwál ang dílà sang idô, kay ginahápò sang dalágan. The
dog's tongue is hanging out, for he is tired from running. Pahiwalá
ang dílà mo. Put out your tongue. (cf. diwál).

_hiwalán_, Glib, flippant (of tongue or speech); flirt, coquette,
prostitute. (cf. buraán, babáan, púta, bigáon).

_hiwáos_, Dearth, misery, famine, scarcity, want. Ang pitó ka túig
sang hiwáos. The seven lean years. (cf. hiwág-os, kalisúd).

_hiwasâ_, To writhe, move about restlessly, stir and wriggle
as one struggling to get free from some superimposed weight
or the like. Nagahiwasâ siá sa íya higdáan, kay masakít gid
ang íya solóksolók. He is writhing in bed, for he has a severe
stomach-ache. Anó na man ang ginahiwasâ mo? What are you wriggling
for this time? (cf. híos, híwos, íwos, híwod, pólok, etc.).

_híwat_, To prepare, make or get ready, take steps or make arrangements
for; to grow up, develop, advance. See híkot, hímos. Hiwáta,
hiwáti--hikóta, hikóti).

_hiwî_, Not symmetrical, awry, twisted on one side, aslant, slanting,
lop-sided, leaning; to be, become or make awry, etc. Hiwî ang íya
bibíg. His lips are all awry (twisted). Naghiwî ang baláy tungúd
sang bágyo. The house has become crooked (twisted) on account of the
storm. (cf. sambigî, kiwî).

_hiwî-híwì_, Dim. and Freq. of hiwî. Naghiwîhíwì ang íya bábà. She
pouted. She puckered her lips.

_hiwít_, A spell, bewitchment, charm, fascination; to bewitch, throw a
spell over, cause evil by witchcraft. Nahiwitán siá. He was bewitched,
(got sick from a spell). Ginhiwitán siá sang manughiwít. He came under
the influence of the sorcerer. He was put under an evil spell by the
spell-binder. (cf. bárang).

_híwod_, To move, stir, wriggle, writhe. See hílod, húlag, etc.

_hiwód-híwod_, Dim. and Freq. of híwod. See hilódhílod.

_híwos_, To move, stir, etc. See híwod, hílod, húlag.

_hiwós-híwos_, See hilódhílod, hiwódhíwod, etc.

_híya_, To be busy, occupied, have much to do. Nagahíya (nagahiníya)
silá sang óbra, hámpang, sugál, etc. They are busy at work, at play,
gambling, etc. (cf. sákò, dánghos, dúlup).


_hiyás_, Adornment, decoration, etc. See hiás id.

_híyod_, (H) To move, stir, etc. (cf. híwod, híwos, hílod, húlag).

_hó_, A term to urge on horses, buffaloes, etc. Gee up! Get up! Also an
exclamation expressive of annoyance or the like. Hó, kagamú siní! Oh,
what a nuisance! Oh, what a bother!

_hóbhob_, To eat like an animal (as pigs and dogs). (cf. hábhab,
láklak).

_hobót_, See hubót--to puff, etc.

_hódhod_, To clean or scrape with an edged tool (as a chisel,
shovel or the like). Hodhodá (-rá) ang bulíng sa síya. Scrape
the dirt off the chair. Ihódhod ang tigíb sa lamésa. Scrape
the table with the chisel. Hodhodí ang lamésa nga natolóan sang
espérma sang kandílà. Scrape the table on which candle-grease has
dropped. Ginhodhodán níla sang pála ang binít sang kalóg túbtub nga
nagsaláma. They scraped the edge of the ditch with a shovel till it
became even.

_hohô_, To shake empty, shake and pour out the contents of a sack or
the like. Ihohô ang sáko. Shake out the contents of the sack. Hohoá ang
kalámay sa bayóong. Pour the sugar out of the bag. Hohoí akó sing isá
ka gántang nga humáy sa ság-ub. Pour me out one ganta of rice from the
bamboo-receptacle. Ginhohô níya ang taón kag naggwâ ang mga katáng,
uláng kag ísdà nga magamáy. He shook the small fish-trap and crabs,
shrimps and small fish fell out.

_hóhon_, Yes, yea; to say yes, connive, consent. Naghóhon siá. He
consented. He said yes. (cf. hóo, hóod, hóon).

_hohón-hóhon_, Dim. and Freq. of hóhon. Nagahohónhóhon siá, ápang
walâ man siá sing katuyoán sa pagtúman. He says "yes, yes", but has
no intention of making good his word. (cf. hóon, hóhon).

_hókhok_, To sip, suck or draw in liquids noisily as ducks and other
large-billed birds. Ang bíbi nagahókhok sang túbig. The duck sips
water noisily. (cf. hígop, sópsop, súyup, láklak).

_hokmánan_, Court of justice, judgment-seat. (cf. holokmánan, hokóm).

_hókmong_, To hide, conceal from view, keep out of sight; to hide or
conceal oneself; to stay, lodge, reside, be stationed at, have a base
or headquarters at. Nagahókmong siá sang íya baráha. He is hiding his
cards. Hokmongá ang ímo baráha, agúd índì makítà sang ibán. Hide your
cards, so that they cannot be seen by others. Ang mga manugpangalág
naghókmong sa kakógnan. The thieves (on All Soul's day) hid themselves
amongst the cogon-grass (cf. tágò, panágò, dáyon, tóon, lúntad, puyô;
húkmong id.).

_hokóm_, Judge; to judge, pass sentence upon, try a court-case. "Indì
ka maghokóm, agúd ikáw índì man paghókman". "Judge not, and you shall
not be judged". Hókmi siá. Judge him. Pass sentence on him. Ginhókman
siá sang hokóm nga magbáyad sing tabís nga limá ka mángmang. He was
sentenced by the Judge to pay a fine of five pesos.

_hókon_, To roll up in a bundle, etc. See hamókon id.

_hokón-hókon_, Dim. and Freq. of hókon. To roll or bundle up, pull
together clothes, etc. (cf. hamókon, okón-ókon).

_hokót-hókot_, To skulk, shun, lurk, be in hiding, elude capture,
hide for fear of capture or punishment. Ang makáwat nagahokóthókot,
agúd índì madakúp. The thief is hiding, lest he should be
caught. Hokóthokóti ang polís, kay kon dílì dákpon ka níla. Hide
yourself from the police or you will be caught. (cf. hupúthúput).

_holágting_, To tinkle, jingle, clink, emit a sharp, metallic
sound. (cf. lágting).

_hólhol_, To bark, yelp, yap, (of dogs). Naghólhol ang idô. The
dog barked. Ginholholán akó sang idô. The dog barked at me. Anó
ang ginahólhol sang idô? Sín-o ang íya ginaholholán? Why is the dog
barking? Whom is he yelping at? (cf. tághol).

_holó-holó_, To wail, moan, complain, sigh. (cf. pangháyhay, pangaróy,
pangharóy).

_holokmánan_, Seat or court of justice. (cf. hokmánan, hokóm).

_hólon_, (H) To gather, collect, come--, flock--, together, assemble,
to perch, alight, settle. Nagahólon ang mga táo sa plása. The people
are gathering in (on) the public square.

_holonán_, (H) Perch, roost; meeting, trysting place. (cf. hólon,
hululunán).


_holóng-hólong_, To look about curiously, inquisitively, warily,
narrowly, or closely. Anó ang ginaholónghólong mo nga daw haló? Why are
you looking about so curiously like an iguana? Indì ka magholónghólong
kon umatúbang ka sa punoán. Don't look about curiously, when you are
in presence of one in authority. Holóngholóngi sing maáyo, kay básì
may dalíngag sa bánas. Look out well or carefully, for there may be
sharp thorns on the path. (cf. lísi, lisílísi).

_holón-hólon_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of hólon--to gather,
etc. Paholónholóna ang mga táo sa pagpamátì sang diskúrso. Gather
the people to hear the discourse. (cf. hubónhúbon).

_holót_, Room, apartment. (hulút id.).

_holótholót_, A little room or apartment, a very small room, closet,
boudoir.

_holóy_, Sweet, gentle, modest, downcast, mild (of eyes or looks);
to have sweet, etc. eyes, have the eyes only half-open. Holóy siá
sing matá--or--Nagaholóy ang íya mga matá. His eyes are only half
open--or--He or she has modest, sweet or downcast eyes. Ginpúkaw ko
siá, ápang nagpaholóy lang siá sang íya mga matá, naglísò kag tumúlug
liwát. I woke him, but he opened his eyes only a little, turned round
and fell asleep again.

_hólwà_, To adapt or alter clothes so as to fit another person;
to transform, change, convert. Holwaá ang delárgo ko kag idápat sa
bátà. Alter my trousers and make them fit the boy. (cf. tugálbò).

_homóg_, Damp, wet, moist, dank, humid, muggy, soggy. See hamúg,
hámog, humúg.

_hómok_, Softness, mildness, gentleness, impressionableness,
impressionability; to soften, become soft, impressionable, be easily
susceptible of impressions or feelings. Naghómok na ang tinápay
nga kaína mahágpok pa. The bread that was crisp a short while
ago, has become soft. Homóka ang paglútò sang kárne. Cook the meat
soft. Pahomóki akó sing maís, nga tinanók. Boil for me some corn very
soft. Ginpangayóan ko siá sing patáwad, ápang ang íya tagiposóon walâ
maghómok. I asked his pardon, but his heart did not soften. (cf. lamî,
lúm-ok).

_hómoy_, Quiet, taciturn, silent, mum, retired, saying little, mild,
soft, gentle; to be or become quiet, etc. Hómoy siá nga táo. He
is a quiet man, a man of few words, of a retired disposition or
the like. Sádto ánay palahámbal siá kag támà kabíbo, ápang kútub
sang pagbalatián níya naghómoy na siá. Formerly he used to be very
talkative and of a lively disposition, but since he passed through
a sickness he has become more retired. Hómoy siá sing pamatásan. He
is gentle in his manners. (cf. úgdang, lígdong, hípus, komód).

_hómoy_, Stale; to be stale (of bread). (cf. pán-os, etc.).

_homóy-hómoy_, Dim. and Freq. of hómoy. Also: A kind of very small
fish.

_hónhon_, To make compact, join well, near or close together, unite
closely. Honhoná ang sókdap sa pagrára. Weave the bamboo strips
closely together. Nagahónhon ang mga táo sa bánkò. The people on
the bench are tightly squeezed together. Anó ang lúyag mo: Buháton
námon ang salúg nga hónhon ukón lakâ?--A, lúyag ko ang ísa ka salúg
nga hónhon. What do you prefer: Shall we join the flooring closely
or leave rather wide open seams?--Well, I like a closely joined
floor. Dugángi ang mga bánkò, índì mo pagpahonhonón ang mga bátà sa
siníng tátlo ka bánkò. Increase the number of benches, don't crush
the children together on these three benches. (cf. ímpon, dápat,
gutúk, doót, símput, dókdok).

_hón-og_, Wet, soaked, moist, impregnated, soggy, sodden; to wet, soak,
etc., said especially of things liable to melt or dissolve. Ang asín,
kalámay nagpahón-og sa sáko. The salt, sugar moistened the sack. Ang
bayóong ginhon-ogán sang muskobádo. The bag was impregnated with
muscovado (unrefined sugar). (cf. hún-og id.).

_hónos_, To draw or pull out, etc. See húnus id.

_honós-hónos_, Dim. and Freq. of hónos. Anything that can be drawn,
pulled out or unsheathed, as a drawer, the lid of a wicker-work basket
made as deep as the basket itself, etc.

_hóo_, Yes; to say yes, consent, assent. (cf. hóod, hóon).

_hóod, hoodí_, (B) Yes. See hóo.

_hóog_, (B) To be constipated, costive. Nagahóog ang bátà. The child
suffers from constipation, is constipated. Naghóog siá. He became--,
was--, constipated. (cf. tubúl).


_hoól_, See hiól, huól--to be hard, trying, etc.

_hóom_, To shut, close (a door, etc.). See háom id.

_hóom_, To enwrap in leaves, ripen artificially fruit that has been
picked green. (cf. búut id. Hoóma--buúta).

_hóon_, (B) Yes. See hóo.

_hoón-hóon_, (B) Yes; to assent, consent, say yes.

_hoót_, To feel tight, clogged, or blocked up (of the chest and
respiratory organs, etc.). Nagahoót ang ákon dúghan nga daw dílì akó
makaginháwa. My chest feels blocked up, so that I can scarcely breathe.

_hórma_, (Sp. horma) Form, mould; to form, set in order,
repair. Hormahá ang baláy, sapátos, etc. Repair the house, boots,
etc. Hormahí akó sang ákon atóp, sinélas, etc. Repair my roof, my
slippers, etc. for me.

_hormáhan_, Form, mould. See hórma.

_hornaléro_, (Sp. jornalero) Labourer, workman,
journeyman. (cf. mamumugón).

_hórno_, (Sp. horno) Oven, stove.

_horó-horó_, To moan, sigh, etc. See holóholó id.

_hós_, Shoo, a term used in driving away or dispersing poultry, etc.

_hosô_, To draw, unsheathe (a sword, etc.). Hós-a (hosoá) ang
sáble sa tagúb. Draw the sword from its scabbard. Hós-i akó sang
binángon. Unsheathe the bolo for me. Sa hinálì nagákig siá, hinós-an
níya akó sang binángon kag buút siá maglabô sa ákon. Suddenly he got
angry, drew his bolo at me and wanted to slash me. Ihosô akó ánay
siníng binángon, kay akó índì makadaúg. Please unsheathe this bolo for
me, for I am not able to do it. Hós-on mo ang tigíb sa ápal. Wrench
the handle off the chisel. (cf. húnus, gúnut, hábnus).

_hospitál_, (Sp. hospital) Hospital, infirmary. (cf. bulúlngan).

_hótlog_, To put or lay down side by side or lengthwise,
alongside. Hotlogá ang mga káhoy, kawáyan, etc. Put the wooden
posts, bamboos, etc. together (lengthwise). Ihótlog ang káhoy
sa idálum sang baláy. Lay the wood together lengthwise under the
house. (cf. patángday, pabatáng, butáng).

_hóy_, An exclamation to draw one's attention. Hey! Hi! Hoy! hye! Hóy,
sín-o ikáw dirâ? Hey, who are you over there? Hóy, maanó kamó
dirâ? Hey, what are you up to there? Hóy, índì nínyo pagkawáton ang
ákon mga serigwélas. Hoy, don't you steal my plums.

_hóyhoy_, To hang down loose or limp (as clothes drenched with rain or
the like). Nagahóyhoy ang pakô sang iya báyò. The sleeve of his jacket
is hanging loose. Ang ulán nagpahóyhoy sang íya mga panápton. The
rain caused his clothes to hang limp. (cf. lóyloy).

_hoyóhoy_, Breeze, wind, air. (cf. dupóydúpoy, hángin).

_hoyót-hóyot_, Bad, poor, miserable, etc. See huyúthúyut id.

_huád_, To imitate, make like, make a copy or replica of, copy,
translate, transfer. Huadá (-ará) iníng sulát nga ininglés sa áton nga
panghámbal. Translate this English letter into our language. Huadí akó
siníng sulát, kay akó índì makahibaló sang inalemán. Translate this
letter for me, for I do not understand German. Huadá ang íya maáyo
nga batásan. Imitate his good behaviour. Ihuád akó siníng kwádro,
kay úyon ko gid. Please copy this picture for me, for I like it
very much. Makahuád ikáw sinâ? Can you copy, (translate, imitate)
that? Ang kán-on nga nabilín sa kólon ihuád sa pínggan kag tagóon. Put
the rice left in the kettle on a plate and hide it--or--keep it in
a safe place. (cf. lubád, pátpat; sáylo).

_huádan_, (B) Example, model, type, original, something to be copied
or imitated. (cf. huád).

_huád-huád_, Dim. and Freq. of huád. Also: changeable, not firm,
fickle.

_huáran_, (H) Model, etc. See huádan, huluáran, palanganináwan.

_húas, hú-as_, To take out of, extricate, liberate. See háwas, húwas.

_huásò_, False, counterfeit, spurious. (cf. kulirô, pálso).

_huáy_, Free from work, idle, having nothing to do, able to take it
easy, unoccupied.


_húay_, To be light or easy (of work, etc.). Mahúay nga trabáho. Light,
easy work. Mapahúay akó. I am going to take it easy, to take a
rest. Nagapahúay na siá, kay nabúdlay. He is resting, for he is
tired. Papahuáya na ang karabáw, kay maínit. Give the buffalo a rest,
for it is hot. Ginpapahúay níya kamí sa íya baláy. He let us take a
rest in his house. (cf. pahúay).

_húbad_, To open, untie, unfasten, solve--, loosen--, undo--, a knot,
unbind, unlace. Hubáda (-ára) ang písì. Untie the string. Ginhúbad
níya ang pinutús. He opened the parcel. Hubádi akó sang higót sang
ákon sapín. Undo my shoe-strings or: unlace my boots. Ihúbad akó ánay
sing isá ka binúgkos nga bungálon. Please loosen up a bundle of green
fodder. Ihúbad iníng dágum sa hílo nga nagbalíghot. Use this needle
to open the knotted thread with. Makahúbad ka siníng paktákon? Can
you solve this riddle? (cf. huád, lubád).

_hubág_, (H) Swelling, boil, ulcer, tumour; to swell, bulge. Nagahubág
ang íya kamót. His hand is swollen. Ginhubagán ang íya bútkon. His
arm swelled up. Pahubagá lang ang ímo hubág túbtub nga magbúswang
kag ugáling búlngon. Just let your boil swell till it bursts, then
apply remedies. Nahubág ang padér, pángpang, etc. The stone wall,
river-bank etc. bulged (and broke down).

_hubán_, A large cloth or blanket worn round the neck and used
to carry a baby in; to wrap (a baby) up in such a blanket or
cloth. (cf. abóyaboy, hubánan).

_hubánan_, The pouch in which marsupial animals carry their young. Ang
hubánan sang kangúro ginahubanán níya sa íya nga bátà. The kangaroo
carries her young in her pouch.

_hubás_, Evaporated, dried up, shrunk (of eggs, etc.).

_hubás_, To evaporate, dry up, pass off in vapour, vaporize. Nagahubás
na ang túbig sa áwang, sa tiníg-ang etc. The water in the well, in
the boiling rice, etc. is evaporating, (drying up). Nahúbsan na ang
tiníg-ang sing túbig. The water in the boiling rice has evaporated. Sa
tingádlaw madámò nga mga áwang ang ginahúbsan (pagahúbsan) sang
túbig. During the dry season many wells run dry. Pahúbsa ánay ang
túbig. Let the water first evaporate.

_hubáyhubáy_, Neighbourhood, border, rim, edge; to be or walk in the
neighbourhood of, go along the side of. (cf. binít, kílid; alíhid,
panghubáyhubáy).

_húbgon_, From hubúg--to be drunk, etc. See húgbon id.

_húblag_, To move, get moving, stir, bestir oneself, get busy,
be active, be up and doing something. Indì ka maghúblag. Don't
stir. Halá, húblag kamó sa pagtánum, sa pagdúmug, sa paglakát, etc. Now
then, bestir yourselves and plant rice,--and wrestle,--and march,
etc. Pahublagá silá sa trabáho. Hustle them in their work. Get them
to set to work with a right good will. (cf. húlag, íwos, etc.).

_húblas_, Naked, bare, stripped, deprived of; nude, undressed;
to strip, take off, bare, despoil, deprive of. Ang Aton Ginúo
ginhublasán sang mga soldádo sang íya mga panápton. The soldiers
stripped Our Lord of his garments. Indì mo pagpahublasón ang ímo mga
bátà nga dolodalágkò na. Don't allow your bigger children to go about
naked. Nahublasán siá sang tanán níya nga mánggad. He was deprived
of all his wealth. (cf. hubô).

_húbol, huból_, Feeble, weak, enervated, debilitated, lacking strength
or vigour, dull, unable to resist fatigue or physical exertion;
to be or become feeble, etc. Kútub nga naumpawán siá sa balatían
naghúbol siá nga sádto ánay mabákas sa tanán nga mga bágay. Since he
recovered from sickness, he who before was able to work hard at any
task, has become unfit for work. (cf. hábul, pígaw, lúya).

_hubón_, Committee, group, herd, sect, crowd, gathering. (cf. búnghay,
panóng, hút-ong).

_húbon_, To gather, collect, come together, meet, have or hold a
meeting. Ang mga píspis nagahúbon sa mga káhoy. The birds are flocking
together on the trees. (cf. hinubónhúbon, hólon).

_hubón-húbon_, Dim. and Freq. of húbon. (cf. hinubónhúbon, holónhólon,
tinipóntípon).

_hubót_, To draw, pull, puff, jump with quick movement. See kórbot
id. Pahubotá--pakorbotá.

_hubót_, A fabulous creature or evil spirit supposed to run
very swiftly. Abáw, kadásig sa ínyo daw súbung kamó sang isá ka
hubót! How swift you are, almost as swift as a "hubót"! Hubót nga
salsálon--railway, train.


_hubô_, Naked, bare, stripped, nude, undraped; to strip, disrobe,
undress. Ginhubuán siá sang mga buyóng sang íya mga panápton. The
brigands stripped him of his clothes. (cf. húblas).

_hubúg_, Drunk, intoxicated, boozed, inebriated, fuddled,
etc. etc.; to be or become drunk. Nahubúg siá kahápon. He was drunk
yesterday. Ginpahubúg siá ni Fuláno. N.N. made him drunk. Indì mo
siá pagpahúgbon (pagpahúbgon). Don't make him drunk. Don't let him
get drunk. Mga ilímnon nga makahulúbug. Intoxicating liquors. Strong
drinks. (cf. balúng).

_hudáw-húdaw_, To roam about idle, loiter, stroll, loaf, idle away
one's time, spend the time in idleness. (cf. puág-puág, landólándo,
lagáwlágaw, tiyógtiyóg, etc.).

_hudiánan_, Late, backward, tardy, taking a long time to ripen or
produce fruit. Maís nga hudiánan. Late corn. (cf. munáhan--early).

_hudíng-húding_, To whisper, speak very softly, have a quiet
conversation. Ihudínghúding mo lang inâ sa ákon, agúd índì mabatián
sang ibán. Just whisper it to me, lest it should be overheard by
others. (cf. haníháni, hurínghúring, hinudínghúding).

_hudír_, (Perhaps a corruption of the Sp. urgir). To bother, molest,
disturb. Indì ka maghudír sa ákon--or--Indì mo akó paghudirón. Don't
bother (molest) me.

_húdlot_, To hang down, dangle as mucus from the nose. Daláyon gid
lang nagahúdlot ang síp-on siníng bátà. This boy always has mucus
hanging from his nose. Indì mo pagpahudlotón ang ímo síp-on, kóndì
pahíran mo sang pányo. Don't let mucus hang from your nose, but wipe
it off with a handkerchief.

_hudlótsíp-on_, Snotty-boy, ragamuffin, paltry fellow, mean
wretch. (cf. húdlot, síp-on).

_hudyánan_, Tardy, etc. See hudiánan.

_huébes_, (Sp. Juéves) Thursday. Huébes Sánto. Maundy Thursday.

_huégo_, (Sp. juego) Play, game, set; a suit of clothes, especially a
woman's dress. (cf. hámpang, sipál; térno--a suit of clothes for men).

_hués_, (Sp. juez) Judge. (cf. hokóm). Hués de Pas. Hokóm sa
paghidáit. Justice of the peace.

_huéting_, A kind of lottery, a game of chance, jueteng.

_hugâ_, Tired, tired out, exhausted, fatigued, wearied.

_húgà, hugâ_, To tire, tire out, exhaust, fatigue. Nahúga siá. He
got tired. Ginhúgà siá sang trabáho. He got tired from work. Hugaá
(pahugaá) siá sa trabáho. Tire him out with work. (cf. hágò, búdlay).

_hugáb_, To waver, vacillate, falter, act irresolutely, be infirm
of purpose, but mostly construed with a negative and hence meaning:
To act with determination, purposefully, without evasion, etc. Kon
hugabán mo ang pagkósò índì maúrut ang bulíng siní nga panápton. If you
rub this garment so remissly, you will not get all the dirt out. Walâ
níya paghugabí ang paghánot sa íya anák. He did not hesitate to give
his son a sound beating.

_hugáb-húgab_, Dim. and Freq. of hugáb. Bunálon ka karón sang ímo amáy
sa walâ sing hugábhúgab, kay ígò lang ikáw sang lágaw. No doubt you
will get a good beating from your father to-day, as you are always
loafing about. (cf. dugádúga).

_hugák_, Loosely tied, loose, slack, not tight; relaxed; to
tie loosely. Hugák iní; húgtà sing maáyo. This is loosely tied;
tighten it. Hugakí ang balíghot, wáklos, etc. Tie the knot, the belt,
etc. loosely. Loosen the knot, the belt, etc. Hinugakán níya ang íya
wáklos, kay lakás kabusúg sa íya. He loosened his belt, for he had
eaten too much. (cf. tugák id.).

_hugakâ_, Loose, slack, not tight, relaxed; not fervent, not very
sincere. Hugakâ man lang ang pagtúman mo sang ákon mga sógò. You are
slack in carrying out my orders. (cf. halungkakâ id.).

_hugákom_, To take or grasp all, appropriate the whole amount,
seize greedily everything to be had without consideration for
others. Indì ka maghugákom sang tanán nga tabákò, ságing, etc. Don't
take all the cigars, bananas, etc. (but have some consideration for
others). Hugakóma lang ang tanán. Just grasp everything. Take it
all. (cf. kayába, ángkon, kúhà, guráput, kapút, kápyot).


_hugánas_, To roar, thunder, howl, to make a noise as of rushing
waters, trees shaking in the wind or the like. Nagahugánas ang hángin
sa baláy. The wind is howling through the house. Naghugánas ang káhoy
nga napúkan, ang mga apán nga naglubás, etc. The tree came down with
a crash, the locusts passed with a whirring sound, etc. (cf. hugpáas).

_hugár_, (Sp. jugar) To play (cards, draughts, etc.); to pay out, give
more, relax (a rope, line, etc.). Mahugár kitá sang ténis, bésbol,
baráha, etc. Let us play tennis, baseball, cards, etc. Ginahugár níla
ang ahedrés. They are playing chess. Hugarí ang písì. Pay out the rope,
give more rope, slacken the string, let the line run out. (cf. hámpang,
hugák, tugák).

_húgas_, To rinse, wash, clean, cleanse with water. Hugási ang
báso. Rinse the glass (with water). Mahúgas pa akó ánay sang
ákon tiíl. First I am going to wash my feet. Ihúgas iníng túbig sa
pínggan. Use this water to clean the plates with. Hinugásan níla ang
mga kópa. They cleaned the wine-glasses (with water). Ihúgas akó siníng
supéra. Kindly clean this soup-tureen for me. Ipahúgas iníng mga báso
sa mutsátso. Have these glasses cleaned by the servant--or--Order
the servant to clean these glasses.

_húgaw_, To lessen, weaken, become easier to bear (of grief, pain,
a strong smell, etc.). (cf. hagánhágan, búhin, púas).

_húgaw_, To undo or loosen a knot; loose, undone; to become loose,
come undone. Húgaw iníng balíghot. This knot is loose. Naghúgaw
(nahúgaw) ang balíghot sang písì. The knot of the string has come
loose. Hugáwa ang balíghot. Undo (loosen) the knot. (cf. hugák, tugák).

_hugáw_, To leak out, escape (of air, etc.). (cf. hungáw, sungáw).

_húgbon_, From hubúg. See húbgon id.

_húgmay_, To soften, make flexible or pliable, to become soft
or flexible. Naghúgmay na ang tabákò nga kigás. The dry tobacco
has become soft. Pahugmayá ang ímo tagiposóon. Let your heart be
softened. (cf. hómok, hálmok).

_húgnà_, Crowd, bunch, gathering, sect, herd, troop,
division. (cf. panóng, búnghay, hút-ong, hubón, púngpung, púndok).

_húgnà_, Period, season, time; to time, regulate as to
time. (cf. pahúgnà, húgnat).

_húgnat_, Period, while, season, spell (of time). Kagáb-i nagkatulúg
akó sing tátlo ka húgnat. Last night I had three short snatches of
sleep. Nagtrabáho silá kaína sang ága sing duhá ka húgnat. They were
at work this morning for two short spells.

_hugnát-húgnat_, Dim. and Freq. of húgnat. To do at intervals, on and
off, by fits and starts, by spells, do something in alternate periods
as working and resting, walking and riding, sleeping and waking,
etc. Nagahugnáthúgnat silá sang íla pagarádo. They are doing their
ploughing by fits and starts. Ginahugnáthúgnat lang níla ang íla
paglakát. They took frequent rests during their walk. Hugnáthugnáta
lang ang ímo trabáho, kon índì ka makaántus magpangabúdlay sing
lángkoy. Work a bit and then rest awhile if you cannot stand working
at a stretch.

_húgnit_, To fall upon in a body, make common cause against. Indì nínyo
siá paghugnitón. Don't fall upon him in a body. Ang mga gamít nga
nabilín ni ánhing Fulána ginhulúgnit sang íya kahinablúsan. All the
furniture and clothes of the late N.N. were seized by her nieces and
nephews. Ila ginhulúgnit sang sakít ang makáwat nga íla nadákpan. They
(all together) maltreated the thief they caught. (cf. púli).

_hugós-hugós_, Lean, thin, emaciated; to become lean, lose
weight, etc. Naghugóshugós ang íya nawóng. His face has become
thin. (cf. hágwos, hágpis, hálwos, níwang).

_húgpà_, To alight, perch, land, come to rest (especially of
birds). Nahugpaán sang manók ang ugá. The chickens alighted on the
dry rice. Ang píspis naghúgpà sa atóp sang ámon baláy. The bird
perched on the roof of our house. Indì mo pagpahugpaón ang mga manók
sa humáy. Don't permit the chickens to alight on the rice--or--don't
allow the chickens to tread on the rice.

_hugpáas_, To whir, buzz, whiz, roar, crash, howl, rush by
noisily. (cf. hugánas).

_húgpay_, To abate, mollify, pacify. (cf. lúgpay).

_húgpung_, To be attached or joined to; part, division; stanza,
strophe. Ang tátlo ka búlak naghúgpung sa isá lámang ka pungángo. The
three flowers were attached to the same stem. Ang ikaduhá ka húgpung
sang amó nga binaláybay----. The second strophe of that poem----.

_húgsoy_, To drop, droop or hang down limp as the limbs of a person
in a swoon or the like. Nagahúgsoy ang íya bútkon kon maglakát nga
walâ sing hayónháyon. He lets his arms hang down when he walks,
without swinging them. (cf. lóyloy, hóyhoy).

_húgud_, To apply diligence, do with zeal, ardour, care, earnestness,
be assiduous, execute diligently. Maghúgud ka sang ímo pagtoón or
hugúdi (--úri) ang ímo pagtoón. Study with zeal. Be diligent at your
studies. Ginhugúdan níla ang pagpatíndog sang baláy. They set about
briskly building the house. (cf. úkud, písan, bákas).

_húgum_, To steep in, pervade, diffuse, saturate with (odours,
etc.). Ang kahumút sang habón naghúgum sa mga panápton nga sa
sulúd sang baúl. The scent of the soap suffused the clothes in the
trunk. Nahugúman ang íya ulús sang bahô sang binódo. Her clothes are
saturated with the smell of salt fish. Ihúgum (ipahúgum) iníng pahumút
sa ákon mga panápton. Scent my clothes with this perfume. Nahúgum
gid siá sang amó nga pagtoloóhan. He is steeped in that creed--or:
He is a votary of that creed. (cf. lúgum, húpug).

_hugúm_, Steeped in, dyed, pervaded, suffused with, saturated
with. (cf. hupúg).

_hugúng_, Hard, heavy, grave, serious (of work, disease, difficulties,
etc.); to be or become serious, etc. Sa hugúng nga kabúdlay----. With
hard work----. Hugúng na, konó, ang íya balatían. His disease, they
say, is serious now. Naghugúng ang íya ginabátyag. His sickness has
become serious. He feels seriously or dangerously ill. (cf. sugúng).

_hugús_, To be or become lean, thin; to waste, shrink, wither, shrivel,
contract. (cf. hágpis, hágwos, níwang; kúlpà, kúpus).

_hugút_, Fast, firm, taut, tight, tense, stretched, not slack; to
tighten, make taut, etc. Húgta ang kalát. Tighten the rope. Húgti akó
sináng kalát. Make that rope taut for me. Sa hugút níya nga paghigót
nabúgras ang písi. On account of his tying so tight the string
snapped. Sa hugút nga pagtúo.----. With firm, unshaken faith----.

_húgut_, To gather, pick, pluck (peas, beans, etc.). Hugúta ang kadyós,
kay nagapalanggusáng na. Pluck the cadios-peas, for they are beginning
to burst (i.e. are ripe). Hugúti akó sing balátong. Gather some beans
for me. Ihúgut mo akó ánay sang ákon mónggo. Kindly gather my monggo
for me.

_hugyánan_, Late (of corn, etc.). See hudiánan, hudyánan.

_húgyaw_. To be noisily cheerful, shout with joy and pleasure. See
hinúgyaw.

_húkab_, An excursion or picnic (with a generous supply of toddy);
to arrange--, have--, take part in--, such a picnic.

_húkab_, To loosen (earth, etc.). Pahukábi--pahabóki. See hábok.

_húk-ab_, To get loose and fall off, peel off, scale off (as plaster
from a wall, labels pasted on boards, etc.). Nahúk-ab ang pínta sa
baláy, ang ápog sa padér, etc. The paint on the house, the plaster on
the wall loosened--or--came off in scales, etc. Huk-abá ang sílyo sa
sóbre. Take the stamp off the envelope. Huk-abí ang puertáhan sináng
papél. Take that paper off the door. Sín-o ang naghúk-ab sang abíso
nga ákon ginpapilít sa tápì dirâ? Who tore off the notice I pasted
on that board there? (cf. ukáb, lúk-ab, húl-ab).

_hukás_, To take off a peg, seize, snatch. Maghukás ka sang (hukasá
or húksa ang) báyò sa salab-ítan. Take the jacket off the peg. Húksa
ang síngkaw sa líog sang karabáw. Take the yoke off the buffalo's
neck. Ihukás akó ánay sang síya sang kabáyo. Please unsaddle the
horse (for me). Nahukás (nákhas) ang tokó. The supporting (upright)
beam gave way, (became loose or fell down). (cf. húklas, kúhà).

_hukás_, Finished, at an end, terminated. Hukás na ang íla laláw. Their
mourning is at an end, is finished. (cf. tápus, humán).

_húkas_, To unhitch, release (animals, etc.) Hukási ang báka. Unhitch
the ox. Nahukásan na ang karabáw. The buffalo is unhitched. Sang
hinúksan na níya ang kabáyo sa kílis dáyon níya hinukás ang síya
nga nagakábit sa díngding, gindápat níya sa likód sang kabáyo kag
sumakáy siá pakádto sa íya palangúmhan. When he had taken the horse
out of the rig he at once snatched the saddle that was hanging on
the wall, put it on the horse's back, mounted and rode off towards
his farm. (cf. hukás).

_hukáw_, A small beetle or weevil very injurious to corn, monggo,
cadios, etc.

_húkaw_, To interrupt one's sleep, hinder or prevent from
sleeping. Nahúkaw ang íya katulúgon sang súnug. His sleep was
interrupted by the fire. (cf. uláng, útud).

_hukawón_, Infested or attacked by the hukáw-weevil.

_húkay_, Assemblage, aggregation, cluster, heap, bunch, collection;
to gather, collect, be or become many. (cf. katilíngban, katipúnan,
púnsok, púngpung, búnghay, hút-ong; dámò, típon, tingúb).

_hukáy-hukáy_, Dim. and Freq. of húkay. To cluster, crowd, be many
together.

_húkdò_, To burrow in the ground, crawl, creep along the ground, squat,
crouch. Nagahúkdò siá sa kalóg. He is squatting in the ditch. Naghúkdò
siá dirâ nga nalípdan sang kawáyan. He sat, watched or crouched there
under cover of the bamboo.

_húkhuk_, To suck, sip, lap. See hókhok.

_húklas_, To tear away, take down, etc. Ginhúklas (ginhuklasán) níla
ang punót. They cleared away or took down the fish-trap, i.e. removed
the lág-i, etc. (cf. húblas).

_húkmay_, To be soft or tender, to soften. (cf. húgmay, lúm-ok,
hálmok, hómok).

_húkmong_, To hide, conceal oneself; to stay, lodge, reside, be
stationed at, have a base or headquarters at. (cf. dáyon, tóon,
lúntad, puyô, púngkò; tágò, panágò, hókmong).

_hukó_, One who seldom goes out, a stay-at-home, recluse. (cf. húkò).

_húkò_, To be a--stay-at-home,--recluse. Hukó siá, kay nagahúkò sa
baláy. He is a stay-at-home, because he scarcely ever leaves the
house. N.B. Notice the different accent in noun and verb. Kútub sang
pagpakasál níya naghúkò siá sa baláy. Since her marriage she has
become a stay-at-home. (cf. lokoón, lókon, balayón, baláynon).

_hukód_, (B) To stop flowing or running, cease to flow or run, to
merely or barely trickle (of tubâ, etc.). (cf. kúntà, kunól, kutóng).

_huksáray_, To fall down unconscious, lie on the floor in a fit or
swoon, tumble to the ground, have a breakdown. Sa hinálì naghuksáray
siá. Suddenly he dropped and lay there motionless (without a sign of
life). (cf. hupsáray, hurápsay, id.).

_húkson_, From hukás--seize, snatch, take away.

_hulâ_, To stop, cease, give over, leave off (of wind, rain,
etc.). (cf. húlaw, húraw, puút).

_húl-ab_, To loosen, peel or scale off, take off as plaster from a
wall, etc.). (See ukáb, lúk-ab, húk-ab).

_húlag_, To move, stir, bestir oneself, get active or busy, set
about. Ang mga sangá sang káhoy nagahúlag sa hángin. The branches of
the tree are swaying in the wind. Tungúd sinâ man gánì nagahúlag na
ang mga punoán. For that very reason the authorities are now bestirring
themselves. Hulága or pahulága ang kalát, káhoy, etc. Shake the rope,
the tree, etc. (cf. húblag, híos, etc.).

_hulagán_, A fidget, one who is restless, always on the move, never
quiet, as children who won't sit still or the like.

_hulág-húlag_, Dim. and Freq. of húlag. Maghulághúlag na kamó. Do
something now, bestir yourselves a little.

_hulágok_, To snore; snoring. Indì ka maghulágok. Don't snore. A,
pahulagóka lang siá. Just let him snore. (cf. hurágok).

_huláhon_, To unwind, slacken, pay out (rope, etc.). (cf. hugár,
hugák, lubád).

_hulá-húla_, A witch, sorceress; one in league with the devil.

_hulám_, (H) Borrowing; to borrow, get a loan, raise money. Nakahulám
siá sang ákon kwárta. He borrowed money from me. Pahulamá akó sang ímo
kwárta. Lend me some money. Hulamí akó sing pílak kay Fuláno. Get
me an accommodation from N.N. Ipahulám sa ákon ang ímo karabáw
karón sa hápon. Let me have (let me have a lend of) your buffalo
for this afternoon. Sa karón índì nákon ikáw mapahulám sing kwárta,
kay balasúbas akó gid. For the present I cannot advance you money,
because I am completely out of cash. Indì ka maghulám kag índì ka
magpahulám. Neither borrower nor lender be. Ang amó nga pílak saráng
mapahulám sa íla. That money can be given them as a loan, (they can
borrow that money). (cf. língit, útang, ángkat).

_hulánò_, To flatter, wheedle, cajole, blarney, humbug. (cf. unís,
utís, odót).

_hulápay_, (H) To be heavy with sleep, scarcely able to keep the
eyes open. Nagahulápay ang íya mga matá. His eyes are heavy with
sleep. (hurápay id.).

_hulapáy_, (H) Heavy, sleepy (of eyes).

_hulás_, To be or become easy, facile. Naghulás ang pagdáro, kay
naulanán ang dútà sing madámol kagáb-i. Now it is easy to plough,
for a heavy rain fell on the fields last night. Pahulasá ang íya
trabáho. Make his work easy. Nahulasán akó sa pagtoón sang ininglés. It
was easy for me to learn English. (cf. hapús).

_húlas_, Steam, radiation of heat. Húlas sang láwas. Radiation of
heat from the body. Húlas sang túbig. Steam, heat emanating from hot
water. Sakayán-húlas. Steamer.

_húlas_, To dry (rice, etc.) by artificial means. The "húlas" is often
resorted to in rainy weather, when sun-drying is often out of the
question for many days in succession. Hulása ang humáy, kay bayohón
ko. Dry the rice, for I am going to pound it. Hulási akó sing tátlo
ka gántang nga humáy. Dry three gantas of rice for me. May hinúlas
kamó? Have you any dry rice (dried artificially)?

_hulát_, To wait, await, expect, look--, be ready--, for. Hulatá akó
dirâ. Wait for me there. Ihulát akó ánay sing diótay nga tión. Please
wait for me a moment. Daliá, kay índì na akó makahulát. Hurry up, for
I cannot wait any longer. Anó ang ginahulát mo? What are you waiting
for? What do you expect? Ginahulát níya ang ángay nga bálus. He
is expecting a fitting reward. Hulát ánay! Wait a little! Wait a
bit! (cf. paabút, angán).

_húlaw_, (H) To cease, stop, give over, leave off (of rain); die down,
burn out (of fire). Naghúlaw na ang ulán. The rain has stopped. It
has stopped raining. (húraw id.).

_huláy, húlay_, To divide, partition, share out, distribute,
apportion. Hulayá ang humáy, kwárta, etc. Divide the rice,
distribute the money, etc. Hulayí akó sang ákon báhin. Let me have
my share--or--give me my portion. Ginhuláy níla ang mga háyup
nga pinanúblì níla. They divided amongst themselves the animals
they had inherited. Ari ang limá ka mángmang; ipahuláy lang sa mga
músiko. Here are five pesos; let the musicians divide them amongst
themselves. (cf. báhin, párte).

_húlay_, To stagger, lurch, reel, walk unsteadily, sway to and fro,
walk with a wavering gait (as a drunkard). (cf. dúling, dulíngdúling).

_huláy-húlay_, Dim. and Freq. of húlay. Ang mga hubúg
nagahuláyhúlay. Drunken persons reel in their walk. (cf. dulíngdúling,
panayódò).

_húlbot_, To eradicate completely, take out or pull up with all
the roots attached. Hulbotá ang tanúm. Pull up the plant by the
roots. (cf. gábut).

_húlid_, (B) A sleeping companion; to lie down alongside, sleep
together with another. Nagahúlid silá. They are lying down side by
side. (cf. dulúg, doróg).

_hulíd-húlid_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of húlid. Nagahulídhúlid silá sa
salúg. They are lying side by side on the floor.

_hulík_, To snap--, swallow--, the bait, bite. Anó ang ihulík mo
sa ísdà? What are you using as bait for the fish? Nakahulík na ang
ísdà. The fish has snapped at the bait. Bisán anó ang hámbal mo,
índì siá maghulík. Whatever you may say, he will not bite, i.e. will
not agree with you--or--do your bidding.

_hulíng-awít_, A kind of bird.

_húlio_, (Sp. julio) July. (cf. hidapdápan).

_húlip_, (H) To mend wickerwork, repair a mat, basket, thatched roof,
etc. Hulípi ang amákan. Repair the bamboo mat. Ginhulípan níla ang atóp
nga kógon. They repaired the cogon-roof. Ihúlip iníng mga sókdap sa
tabungós. Use these bamboo strips to mend the tabungós-basket. Ihúlip
akó ánay sang ákon bakág. Please mend my carrier's basket. (cf. húrip
id.).


_hulíp_, Turned-up (of eyes). (cf. dorós, sulíp, turóng).

_hulíp-húlip_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of húlip. Ginahuliphulípan na níla
ang mga atóp, kay malapít na ang tingulán. They are now repairing
their roofs, because the rainy season is approaching. (cf. huríphúrip).

_húlon, hulón-húlon_, (H) To gather, etc. See hólon, holónhólon.

_hulóy_, Gentle, mild, modestly downcast, demure, etc. (of eyes). See
holóy.

_huluádan_, (H) See huluáran.

_huluáran_, (H) Example, model, type, pattern, original, precedent,
standard, ensample, something to be copied or imitated. (cf. huád;
laráwan, palanganináwan, solóndan).

_hulubadán_, (H) See the following hulubarán.

_hulubarán_, (H) Place where a thing is opened or untied, anything
bound that should be untied or set free. Diín náyon ang hulubarán
siníng bakág? Where is the opening of this carrier's basket
(i.e. where do you start to untie the string with which this basket
is fastened)? Gingápus níla iníng táo nga walâ sing salâ; hulubarán
siá. They have bound this man who is innocent (has done nothing wrong);
he should be set free. (cf. hubád).

_hulubarón_, (H) What is to be untied, as a knot, parcel,
etc. (cf. hubád, hulubarán).

_hulubáton_, (H) Proverb, saying, saw, maxim, aphorism, adage, axiom,
apothegm, apophthegm, truism; incantation, invocation or the like,
as used in superstitious rites. Also verb. Anó ang ginahulubáton sang
babáylan sa íya nga búhat? What incantations does the soothsayer chant,
when practising magic? (cf. hurubáton id.).

_húlug_, To drop, throw, fall down, cause to fall down, tumble
down, precipitate, precipitate oneself. Andam ka, agúd índì ka
mahúlug. Take care lest you should fall. Hulúga ang bató. Throw down
the stone. Nahulúgan siá sing bátà. She had a miscarriage. Nahulúgan
akó sing tokô sang nagakatulúg akó. A gecko dropped down on me whilst
I was asleep. Ihúlug mo lang ang martílyo sa bintánà. Just throw the
hammer down from the window. Sang isá ka túig ang Pagkatáo nahúlug
sa isá ka Domíngo. Last year Christmas fell on a Sunday. Halín ka
dirí kay básì hulúgan ka sing lubí. Go away from here, for a coconut
might drop down on you. (cf. dágdag).

_hulugasán_, (H) What is to--, should be--, rinsed or cleaned with
water, as dirty glasses, crockery, table-ware, feet, etc. (cf. húgas).

_hulugníton_, (H) One who is about to be, or should be, attacked by
others in a body; a prey or victim (of many) (cf. húgnit).

_hulugpáan_, (H) Landing place (for airships, aeroplanes); perch,
roost. (cf. húgpà).

_hulukdúan_, (H) Burrow, burrowing ground, den, lair, hiding
place. (cf. húkdò).

_hulukmánan_, (H) See holokmánan--court of justice.

_hulukmóngan_, (H) Station, base, base of operation, centre
(of activity), quarters, head-quarters; hiding place,
concealment. (cf. húkmong).

_hululáman_, (H) Place where money can be borrowed, where loans are
negotiated, etc. (cf. hulám--to borrow).

_hululanúon_, (H) Amenable to flattery, one easily tricked, cheated,
wheedled, cajoled. (cf. hulánò; ulutíson, uluníson, olodóton).

_hululánwon_, (H) See hululanúon.

_hululátan_, (H) Waiting room. (cf. hulát).

_hululugán_, (H) Place where anything is thrown upon, receptacle into
which a thing is dropped. Hululugánsulát. A letter-box. (cf. húlug).

_hululunán_, (H) Roost, perch; gathering, meeting, trysting
place. (cf. húlun, hulunán).

_húlum_, (H) To soak, pickle, put into a liquid, steep in
colour. Hulúmi ang ímo panápton sing (sa) túbig nga may habón. Put
your clothes in soap and water. Ginhulúman níya ang madámò nga mga
páho sa lánggaw. He pickled many mangoes in vinegar. Ihúlum ánay iníng
habón sa mga lalábhan kag buás ugáling lábhan mo. Soak the wash in
soapy water first and then wash it to-morrow. Indì ka magpahúlum sa
línaw. Don't step into the pool. (cf. lúgum).


_hulumánan_, (H) Workshop, apprenticeship, final preparation, finishing
touch, or stroke. (cf. humán).

_hulumáyan_, (H) Rice-land, paddy-fields, fields fit for the
cultivation of rice. (cf. humáy).

_húlun_, (H) To come together, roost, perch, etc. See hólon.

_hulunán_, (H) See hululunán--perch, etc.

_hulunáwan_, (H) A wash-basin, washhand-basin. (cf. hunáw).

_hulúng_, Shadow, shade; growing or situated in the shade; to
overshadow, give shade, throw a shadow upon. Magpúngkò kitá sa hulúng
sang páhò. Let us sit down in the shade of the mango-tree. Hulúng
nga tanúm. A plant overshadowed by other plants or growing in the
shade. Ginahulungán ang ámon kalán-an sang madábung nga mga sangá
sang páhò. Our dining room is shaded by the leafy branches of the
mango-tree. Ang mga tanúm índì magdakô sing maáyo kon hulungán sang
mga káhoy. Plants do not grow well when they are overshadowed by
trees. (cf. hándong, lándong, háron).

_húlung_, To have or emit a strong, pungent, rank, penetrating
smell. Iníng mga sardínas nga lináta nagahúlung. These tinned sardines
have a strong smell. Nahulúngan akó siníng ísdà. This fish has too
penetrating a smell for me.

_hulúng-húlung_, To look about curiously, investigate, etc. See
holóng-hólong.

_hulungkagíng_, Rattle, clatter, noise, uproar; to rattle, clatter,
make a noise. (cf. gáhud, halungkágay).

_hulunungán_, (H) Place where one is kept quiet; detention room,
confinement, restraint, prison. Ginpasulúd níla siá sa madulúm nga
hulunungán. They shut him up in a dark prison. (cf. húnong).

_hulupáon_, (H) Night-mare. (cf. húpà).

_hulusayón_, (H) An account to be settled, affairs to be
arranged. (cf. húsay).

_hulút_, Room, apartment, chamber. Hulút nga tululugán. A
bedchamber. (cf. holót, kwárto).

_huluyáon_, (H) Bashful, shame-faced, shy, ashamed, timid. (cf. huyâ).

_húlwà_, To adapt; to change, etc. See hólwà.

_húlyo_, (Sp. Julio) The month of July. (cf. húlio, hidapdápan).

_humá_, (B) To low, moo; lowing (of cattle). Ang báka nagahumá, ang
karabáw nagaingâ. The cow moos, the buffalo bleats. Ginahumahán sang
báka ang íya nga tínday. The cow is lowing for her calf. (cf. umá,
mámá, má).

_humâ-húmà_, To investigate, ask for information, seek, look for,
find out, try to find. Ipanghumâhúmà mo akó ánay kon sín-o ang may
kawáyan nga pulúnton nga ibalígyà. Please find out whether anybody
sells bamboos fit for fish-traps. (cf. pangusísà, dúngas, lághap,
ságap, pangítà, pamángkot).

_humalámpang_, A player; gamester, gambler. (cf. hámpang).

_humán_, Ready, done, finished, complete, accomplished, terminated;
condensed, congealed, solidified, coagulated; to finish, accomplish,
terminate, complete a job, finish a piece of work or the like;
to condense, coagulate, congeal, solidify. Humán na ang baláy,
táytay, panápton, etc. The house, the bridge, the clothes,
etc. are ready. Humanón mo ang sulát sa madalî, agúd makaábut pa
sa koríyo. Finish the letter at once so as to be in time for the
mail. Ihumán akó sing isá ka síya. Please make me a chair. Finish
a chair for me. Nahumán na ang ímo sapátos. Your boots are done
now. Nagahumán na ang kalámay. The sugar is now thickening, condensing,
crystallizing. (cf. tápus, lísto; lapúyot, tíg-a).

_humán-humán_, Dim. and Freq. of humán. Also: Rather prosperous
or well-to-do, neither very rich nor poor, quite sufficient
or satisfactory; comfortable, easy (of life, circumstances,
etc.). (cf. hingánhingán, dirâdirâ, dawâdawâ).

_húmaw_, To soak in water (rice, etc.); to make "hinúmaw". Humáwa
ang dokót sa kólon. Make "hinúmaw" of the rice that has stuck to the
inside of the kettle. (cf. hánggup).

_humáy_, (H) Rice, rice-grain, unhulled rice, rice in the husk or
growing in the field. (cf. pálay, páray; bugás; kán-on).


_humáyan_, One who has plenty of rice, is rich in rice; full of rice,
under rice, (of fields). (cf. hulumáyan).

_húmbak_, Wave, billow; sea, ocean, stormy waters; difficulty,
distress. (cf. balúd).

_humbáya_, To see-saw, move up and down, teeter. Ang mga
bátà nagahumbáya sa tápì. The boys are see-sawing on the
board. Pahumbayáha ang mga bátà sa dúyan. Let the children swing in
the hammock. (cf. humbíya, sumpíya).

_humbáyag_, See humbáya id.

_humbíya_, To move up and down; to run fast, gallop (of a horse). Ang
kabáyo nagahumbíya. The horse is galloping. Pahumbiyáha ang
kabáyo. Gallop the horse. (cf. humbáya; túwad).

_húmhum_, To fill--, cram or stuff into--, the mouth. (cf. óm-om).

_húmlad_, To spread out, open, unfold (an umbrella, a folded sheet,
etc.). Humladá (-ará) ang páyong. Open the umbrella. Ginhúmlad níla
ang baníg. They spread out the mat. Nahumladán (-arán) na siá sing
buót. He has reached the age of discretion, has come to the use of
reason. (cf. bulád).

_húmog_, To wet, moisten, dampen, drench, soak, saturate with, imbrue,
imbue. (cf. hám-og, húlum, húpug, lúgum, basâ).

_humóg_, Wet, damp, moist, drenched, soaked, sodden, imbrued, imbued,
saturated with. (cf. hupúg, hamúg, etc.).

_húmok_, To be soft, etc. See hómok.

_húmon_, To agree, intend, plot, conspire, confabulate, plan, come
to an agreement. Naghúmon silá nga pátyon níla ang íla kaáway. They
conspired to kill their enemy. Naghúmon silá nga mamándut. They
agreed to assist at the Feast. Ginhumónan níla ang pagatí sang
minurô. They hatched a plot to plunder (ransack) the village. Ang
tátlo ka táo sa limá nga naghulúmon sing ribók sa bánwa nadakúp
na. Three of the five men that plotted a revolution in the town have
been caught. (cf. sugút).

_húmong, humóng-húmong_, To shake, tremble (as a building when it
thunders, or the like).

_húmoy_, See hómoy--taciturn, silent, etc.

_humóy-húmoy_, See homóyhómoy--of a retired disposition, etc.

_húmpil_, To assist, side with, take part, be a partner in, help,
protect. Humpilí siá. Help him. Indì ka maghúmpil sa maláin. Don't
take part in bad (or wicked) things. (cf. ámpin, ápin, dámpig, dápig).

_húmtan_, From húmut and humút.

_húmut_, To intend, plan, strive, have a mind to. Ginhúmtan
(Ginhumútan) siá níya nga patún-on sa isá ka buluthúan nga matáas
kag bántug. He intended to have him educated in a famous High
School. (cf. túyò).

_humút_, Hatred. See dumút.

_humút_, Scent, fragrance, smell, odour, aroma, perfume; scented,
fragrant, sweet-smelling, odoriferous, odorous, perfumed. (cf. hamút).

_hunâ_, A landslide, avalanche; to fall, slide, break down (of
a hill-side, etc.). Naghunâ ang bánglid, búkid, etc. There was a
landslide on the slope, in the mountain, etc. Nahún-an ang baláy
sang dútà. The house was covered with earth, was crushed by the
avalanche. (cf. tíbhag, típhag, tímpa).

_húnad_, Mostly used with pa- in the meaning of giving some respite,
leaving alone or in peace, and the like. Indì akó pagpahunádon ni
Akáy. My little daughter never gives me any rest, is always keeping
me busy. Walâ akó níya pagpahunáda, kon walâ ko siá pagbákli sing
bág-o nga báyò. He would not leave me in peace till I bought him a
new jacket.

_hunágay_, To feel relieved, improve, get better, be more at
ease. Nagahunágay na ang ginháwa ko, kay nakainúm akó sing bulúng. I
feel relieved now, for I have taken some medicine. Nagahunágay na
ang ginabátyag ko. I have not so much pain now--or--I am feeling
better. (cf. hagánhágan).

_hunáhon_, To open a way through a crowd, make way, make room; to
force one's way, push aside. Hunahóna ang mga táo. Order the people
to make way. (cf. hígin).

_hunâ-húnà_, Thought, thinking, idea, reflection, cogitation,
consideration, surmise, guess, opinion; to think, cogitate,
reflect, ponder, consider, surmise, opine, guess. Hunàhunáa inâ
sing maáyo. Think well over it--or--Consider that well. Naghunâhúnà
akó nga----. I thought that----. Ginahunâhunáan na níla karón sing
mabinalák-on kon anó ang maáyo nga isagáng sa maláut nga pamatásan sang
mga bág-ong túbò. They are now considering with great solicitude what
is the best way to check the bad habits of the rising generation. Sa
ákon hunâhúnà----. In my opinion----. Walâ akó sing hunâhúnà nga----. I
had no idea that----. Kon maghunâhúnà ka sing súbung nagasayúp ikáw. If
you think that, you are mistaken. (cf. dúmdum, painóíno, sálig).

_hunâ-húnà_, (B) Loose, shaky, not firmly set, wobbly; to loosen, shake
to and fro, waggle. Hunâhunáa ang ngípon mo túbtub nga magábut. Waggle
your tooth to and fro till it can be extracted. (cf. hungâhúngà).

_hunápit_, Closely woven or wrought, not transparent; to weave close,
make compact. Hunapíta gid ang paghabúl. Weave very close. Hunápit
nga hénero. Closely woven cloth. Ihunápit akó sang ákon háblon,
bakág, amákan, etc. Please weave my cloth, basket, bamboo mat,
etc. close. (cf. húpit).

_hunás_, The ebb, ebb-tide, low-water, slack-water; to ebb. May
hunás na, or: nagahunás ang dágat. The tide is out. The sea is at
low ebb. Mapahunás kitá ánay sang dágat kag makádto sa baybáyon sa
paglagáwlágaw. Let us wait for low tide and then go to the beach for a
walk. Ginahunasán karón ang baybáyon. The beach is free of tide-water
at present. (cf. táub--high tide).

_hunásan_, Foreshore, the part of the beach covered with water at
high tide and dry at low tide. (cf. hunás).

_hunáw_, To wash one's hands. Naghunáw ka na sang ímo kamót? Have you
washed your hands? Hunawí ang bátà. Wash the child's hands. Ihunáw
lang iníng túbig sa ímo kamót. Wash your hands in this water. Ihunáw
akó siníng bátà. Please wash this child's hands. Ang mga nagakaláon
sa tábad ginahunawán níla ánay ang íla kamót. Those who partake of
a banquet wash their hands first. (cf. hináw; panghilám-os--to wash
one's face; panghúgas--to wash one's feet).

_hunáwan_, Wash-basin (for the hands). (cf. hulunáwan, palanggána).

_hunáy-hunáy_, To recover, recuperate, convalesce, regain strength,
improve in health, get better. Nagahunáyhunáy ang íya ginháwa. He is
recovering. Nagapahunáyhunáy siá sang íya ginháwa. He is trying to
get back his health and strength.

_húndak_, Interruption, interval, rest, pause; to stop, cease,
pause. Walâ sing húndak. Continually, constantly, always, without
interruption. (cf. puút, úntat, langán).

_hundáus, hundá-us_, To writhe, struggle, make frantic efforts to
get free of a superimposed weight, or the like. Nagahundáus siá nga
mabángon. He is making frantic efforts to rise. (cf. hiwág-os).

_hungâ_, To shake to and fro, waggle. See hunâhúnà, hungâhúngà.

_húnga_, Wager, stake, bet; to lay, wager, stake, bet.

_hungág_, Wide, dilated, large (of nostrils). Hungág siá or hungág
siá sing ilóng. He has wide nostrils. Kahungág sang ilóng mo! How
large your nostrils are!

_hungâhúngà_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of húngà--to shake loose, etc. See
hunâhúnà.

_hungáw_, Pervious to air or odour, not air-tight, leaky, porous; to
be pervious to air, smell, etc. Nagahungáw ang bíno sa botílya. The
smell of the wine is escaping through the bottle. Sungsungí ang
botílya sing maáyo, agúd nga índì maghungáw ang bínò. Cork the bottle
well, lest air should come in contact with the wine. Ginhungawán
kamí dídto sang báhò sang ginamús nga sa sulúd sang pasók. We
were annoyed there by the smell of salt fish coming from the
bamboo-receptacle. Hungáw nga paníngug. A sound or voice that escapes,
a piercing shriek. (cf. sungáw).

_hungáy-hungáy_, To be feeble, weak, exhausted (from sickness,
lack of food, overwork, etc.); to trudge, walk with an effort or
with feeble steps. Naghungáyhungáy siá sa dálan. He trudged along
the road. Nagahungáyhungáy siá sa gútum. He is exhausted from
hunger. (cf. lúya, etc.).

_húnghung_, To shout or roar into a hollow or tube; to
telephone. Hunghungí siá. Telephone him.

_hunghungánan_, Mouth-piece, transmitter; telephone.


_hungít_, A mouthful, morsel; a dose. (cf. tíl-og; láb-ok--a draught).

_húngit_, To feed by hand or spoon (children, sick persons,
etc.). Ihúngit sa masakít nga bátà iníng linúgaw. Feed the sick
child with this rice porridge. Hungíti ang bátà sing kán-on. Give the
child some rice--or--Put some rice into the child's mouth. Si nánay
nagahúngit sing kán-on sa ámon kalibáynan. Mother is giving rice to
our youngest brother.

_hungít-hungít_ Dim. and Freq. of húngit, hungít. A morsel, bit of
food. (cf. timótimó, timótimohán, tinimótimohán, tíl-og).

_húngkoy_, A pair of bellows. (cf. hasóhasohán; húngkoy seems to be
of Chinese origin).

_húngkyang_, A (Chinese) game of cards.

_hungóy-hungóy_, Poor, miserable, wretched, penniless. (cf. makalolóoy,
ímol, dungúl).

_hungúd_, Premeditated, deliberate, wilful; to intend, purpose, mean,
do deliberately, on purpose, purposely; intentionally, with free
volition, knowingly, freely. Ginhímò níya iní sing hungúd sa buót
(sa hungúd nga buót). He did this intentionally, with premeditation,
deliberately. Ginhungúd (ginhúngdan) níya inâ. He intended that,
did it on purpose. Nakahungúd siá magbutíg. He told a deliberate
lie. Húngda sa buót mo ang pagsímba sa mga Domíngo kag Piésta. Make
a firm resolution to go to church on Sundays and Feast-days. Dílì
inâ hungúd sa buót níya, kóndì nakatabinás lang siá. That was not
deliberate on his part, but he acted from a sudden impulse. (cf. túyò).

_hungút_, (B) A drinking bowl made from the shell of a
coconut. (cf. kabô).

_húngyot_, Cluster, bunch, tuft. (cf. púngyot).

_húnhun_, To make compact, etc. See hónhon.

_huní_, Humming, chirping, singing, warbling; to hum, chirp, chirm,
chirrup, cheep, chirk, murmur, drone, sough, warble, carol, sing
(of birds, insects, whistles, etc.). Nagahuní ang mga sirúmsirúm. The
crickets are chirping. Pahunihí siá sang píspis. Let the bird sing to
him. Pahunihá ang tuláli mo, agúd masayóran námon ang íya tíngug. Play
your flute that we may know its sound. Ginhunihán akó sang píspis sang
pagsulúd ko sa kwárto. When I entered the room the bird sang to me.

_huní-húni_, Dim. and Freq. of huní. Also: To murmur (of a mountain
stream, a fountain, waterfall, rapids, approaching rain, or the like).

_húnio_, (Sp. Junio) June. (cf. kabáy).

_húnit_, Toughness, hardness, durability, tenacity, tenaciousness,
flexibility with strength; to be or become tough, etc. Naghúnit ang
pánit kay nagmalá. The skin became tough as it dried. May batásan siá
sa pagpahúnit sang tinápay, kay índì siá makaúyon sang mahágpok. He
has the custom of letting the bread get hard, for he does not like it
fresh. Mahúnit ang kuríng sing kabúhì. The cat is tenacious of life,
has great vitality.

_hunít-húnit_, Dim. and Freq. of húnit. Huníthúnit (mahuníthúnit)
iníng kárne sang báka. This beef is rather tough. (cf. húnlit).

_húnlit_, Tough; to be tough, etc. Ang lanítlánit húnlit (mahúnlit)
gid. Tendons are very tough. See húnit.

_hún-og_, Wet, moist, damp, dank, soaked, drenched, sodden; to be
or become wet, to moisten, dampen, soak, drench. (cf. hón-og, basâ,
húmog, humóg).

_húnong_, To quiet, still, silence, tranquillize, calm, placate, allay,
abate; to arrest, put in a safe place. Hunónga siá sa bilanggóan. Shut
him up in prison. (cf. túnung).

_húnsoy_, (H) Any kind of cigar-holder or pipe for smoking
tobacco. (cf. sánsoy, kwáko).

_húnta_, (Sp. junta) Meeting, board; to hold a meeting. Naghúnta
silá. They held a meeting. Ang húnta probinsyál. The Provincial
Board. Húnta sang komérsyo. Board of Trade. (cf. típon, tinipóntípon,
hubónhúbon, kasapulán puodnánon; hubón sang palatikángan).

_hunúb_, (B) To enter, pass--, ooze--, percolate--, filter--,
soak--, through. Ang túbig nagahunúb sa bangâ. The water is filtering
through the jar. Ang mga bág-o nga kólon sing masamí ginahunubán sang
túbig. New clay-pots are frequently porous (not water-tight). Pahunubí
ang salaán sang túbig. Pass the water through the filter. Sa súbung
siní nga ulán índì magbahâ ang subâ, kay ang tanán nga ulán mahunúb
gid sa dútà nga kigás. With such a rain-fall there will be no flood in
the river, for the dry ground will absorb (soak up) all the rain-water.

_hunúd_, (B) To be afraid, in fear of, apprehensive, to
shudder. Nagahunúd ang íya ginháwa. He is afraid. Ginahúndan
sang íya ginháwa ang mga buyóng. He shudders at the thought of
brigands. (cf. kúlbà, hádluk, etc.).

_hunúd-húnud_, Dim. and Freq. of hunúd.

_hunúl_, To stop--, cease--, growing, be retarded or impeded in
one's growth. Naghunúl ang pagdakô siníng bátà kútub sang nagbalatián
siá. This boy has not grown from the time he became sick. Nagahunúl
ang pagtúbò sang talóng kay nainítan sing lakás. The eggplants stopped
growing, for they were exposed to too much sunshine. (cf. kunól,
kutóng).

_húnul_, Shoot, stolon, layer; a plant developed from the seed
in a seedling-pot to be transferred later on, together with the
seedling-pot, to some suitable ground; to rear or grow plants in
that manner. Húnul ka sing páhò. Grow a seedling from the mango
(in a seedling pot). Itanúm ang húnul. Plant the seedling, pot and
all. Hunúli ang páhò. Layer the mango-tree (by bending down one of
its branches to the ground and covering it partly with earth. Roots
will develop in due time and the layer is then detached from the
parent tree).

_hunulán_, The receptacle or pot used in developing
seedlings. (cf. húnul).

_hunúl-húnul_, Dim. and Freq. of húnul. Also: to rear, bring up,
nurture.

_húnus_, To draw out, pull out, extract, drag or tear off from between
or underneath. Húnsa (hunúsa) ang kawáyan. Pull out the bamboo,
draw or drag it off. Húnsi akó sang hunúshúnus sang aparadór. Pull
out open the drawer in the cupboard for me. Ihúnus akó ánay siníng
káhoy sa idálum sang kawáyan. Please pull out this piece of wood from
underneath the bamboo. (cf. hosô).

_hunús_, Gust, blast, gale, squall, capful of wind, strong wind,
stiff breeze; to blow hard. (cf. unús).

_hunús-húnus_, Dim. and Freq. of húnus--to pull out, etc. Also:
A drawer. (cf. honóshónos).

_húnyo_, June. See húnio.

_huól_, Trouble, trial, hardship, hard lines; to be or become
difficult, hard (of life, conditions, etc.); pahuól--to molest,
trouble, vex, bother, pester, annoy, distress, cause misery or
hardship. Indì mo akó pagpahúl-an. Don't annoy me. Don't make
any difficulties for me. Nagapahuól siá sa ákon. Ginapahuolán
(ginapahúl-an) níya akó. He is giving me trouble. He is putting
difficulties in my way. Nahúl-an akó karón, kay napátyan akó sang
ákon ilóy. I am in sore distress at present, because mother has
died. (cf. hiól, lisúd).

_húpà_, Nightmare; to cause a nightmare. Ginahúpà siá. He
suffers from nightmares. Ginhúpà siá kagáb-i. Last night he had a
nightmare. (cf. hulupáon).

_húpay_, Nightmare. See húpà. N.B. The difference between húpà and
húpay seems to be, that the former is usually combined with violent
movements, shouts or unintelligible mumblings, whilst the latter
is free from such symptoms. One affected with "húpay" lies stiff
and motionless.

_húpit_, To join well, weave close, etc. (See hunápit). Hupíta ang
pagrára sang amákan. Weave the bamboo-mat close.

_hupsáray_, To collapse, fall down unconscious, lie
motionless. (cf. huksáray, hurápsay).

_húptan_, Passive form of hupút.

_húpug_, To soak, saturate, pervade, permeate, impregnate (of odours,
perfumes, etc.). Nahúpug (nahupúgan) ang ákon báyò sang habón, tabákò,
ágwa, etc. My jacket is saturated (reeking) with the smell of soap,
tobacco, scent, etc. (cf. húgum, húmug, salúgsug).

_hupúg_, Scented, perfumed, soaked, saturated, pervaded, impregnated,
(with some odour, scent, etc.). (cf. humúg).

_hupúng_, Scarcely able to breathe or think, upset, dizzy, confused; to
be or become dizzy, confused, etc. Hupúng ang íya ginháwa. He is quite
upset (scarcely able to breathe or think). Nagahupúng ang ákon úlo. I
am confused--or--unable to think or collect my thoughts. Naghupúng
ang íya ginháwa sang pagsákà níya sa matáas nga lubí. He became quite
dizzy, when he climbed the tall coconut-palm.

_húput_, To steep, dye, pervade, saturate with, etc. See húgum.


_húput_, One kept or guarded by another (as a foster-child, a ward,
a concubine, a servant, etc.).

_hupút_, Steeped, soaked, dyed in, imbued, imbrued, saturated,
etc. See hugúm, etc.

_hupút_, Animals owned or taken care of. Madámò ang íya báka, báboy,
kánding kag manók nga hupút. He owns (takes care of) many cows, pigs,
goats and chickens.

_hupút_, To keep, guard, take care of, mind, preserve, maintain. Hupti
(huputí) sing maáyo iníng mga papéles. Take good care of these
papers. Yanáng mga púlong sang íya ilóy ginhúptan níya sa alibútud sang
íya nga tagiposóon. Those words of his mother he guarded carefully in
the innermost recesses of his heart. Ihupút akó ánay siníng tulún-an
túbtub nga magbálik akó. Please mind this book for me till I come
back. (cf. típig, ámlig, tátap).

_hupút-húput_, Dim. and Freq. of hupút. Also: to hide, elude capture,
change one's residence frequently. In this latter sense see hokóthókot.

_hurâ_, (B) No, none. See warâ, walâ. Hurâ angód tána magabút. He
has not come yet. (cf. Walâ pa siá magabút).

_hurâ_, To stop, cease. See hulâ.

_hurâ_, (B) To be or become fine, nice, sunny (of the weather, as after
a storm or rain). Nagahurâ na ang tiémpo. The weather is now fine.

_hurág_, Dark-coloured, brown, nearly ripe, especially applied to peas
and beans; to be or become brown, to ripen (of peas, etc.). Nagahurág
na (ron) ang mónggo námon. Our monggo is nearly ripe, is ripening.

_hurágok_, To snore. See hulágok.

_hurág-ol_, Thud, thump, etc. See rág-ol, hinurág-ol.

_hurágon_, Dark-coloured, brown, blackish, of the colour of ripe
(brown) beans. Hurágon siá sing pamánit. He is dark-skinned,
swarthy. (cf. mailóm, maitúm, kayumánggì).

_hurápay_, See hulápay--to be drowsy.

_hurapáy_, See hulapáy--heavy with sleep.

_hurápsay_, To collapse, fall down exhausted, etc. See hupsáray,
huksáray id.

_huráp-us_, To solicit help, take refuge, make great efforts to obtain
a favour. (cf. paningúhà).

_hurár_, (Sp. jurar) To take an oath, to swear. Maghurár
ka. Swear. Hurahí ang kamatuóran siní. Swear to the truth of
this. Ginhurahán níya ang mga kabutigán nga íya sinúgid. He swore
to the lies he told. Indì mo paghurahán ang mga butáng nga dìmatúod,
dìmatárung kag walâ sing ígò nga kabangdánan. Don't swear to things
that are not true, not just and not sufficiently grave to warrant an
oath. (cf. súmpà).

_huraráy_, (B) End, termination; rest, interruption, pause, stop. Warâ
tána ti huraráy sa sulúd kang baláy. There is no end of work for her
to do in the house. (cf. (H) Walâ gid siá sing pahúway sa sulúd sang
baláy). (cf. langán, puút, hinayón).

_húraw_, (B) See húlaw--to stop, give over, (of rain, etc.). (cf. hulâ,
hurâ).

_huráw_, Formal, cold, stiff, not hearty or sincere, only for
show or as a mere formality. Huráw kag pagkuláhaw gid lang ang
íya pagyuhúm. His smile was very cold and forced (not hearty or
sincere). (cf. pakuláhaw, hiláw).

_huráy_, (B) See huláy, húlay.

_huráy-ad_, Lying face up or on one's back. See hayáng, kayâ, kayáng.

_huríng-húring_, To whisper, etc. See hudínghúding id.

_húrip, huríp-húrip_, (B) To mend wickerwork, patch a hole in a
thatched roof, etc. See húlip, hulíphúlip.

_hurô_, Rotten, spoilt, decaying (especially of fish). (cf. lúb-ok,
gabúk, garók).

_hurobadán_, (B) Opening, place where a thing (a parcel, or the like)
is to be opened; that is to be untied, undone, unfastened, loosened,
opened, solved. See hulubarán, hulubadán. (cf. hubád).

_húron_, Gathering, meeting; to gather, come together. See húlon.

_huróng_, A loafer, idler, good-for-nothing, wastrel; mischievous,
naughty, wayward, bad, misbehaved, rude. Huróng siá nga táo. He is
a loafer, a worthless man. (cf. landólándo, lagáwlágaw, tiógtióg,
agóng, lág-it, batinggílan).

_hurón-húron_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of húron--to gather, etc. See
hulónhúlon.

_hurót_, Noise, roar, howl (of wind, etc.); to howl, hiss, roar, rush,
hit, strike, blow (of wind). Ginhurót sang hángin ang íya likód, kay
naghígdà siá nga waláy baníg sa salúg nga kawáyan. The wind howled
and beat against his back, as he was lying there on the bamboo-floor
without a mat.

_hurubadán_, See hurobadán.

_hurubáton_, Saying, proverb, saw, adage, sentence, motto, maxim,
axiom, truism. (cf. hulubáton).

_húrum_, (B) To soak, etc. See húlum.

_hurúng_, See huróng--a loafer, etc.

_hurúng_, (B) Shaded, in the shade, not exposed to the sunlight. See
hulúng.

_húrung_, Penetrating (of smell). See húlung.

_húrus_, To deceive, cheat, be false to, play a nasty trick
on. Naghúrus siá sa ákon--or--ginhurúsan níya akó. He cheated
me. (cf. lág-it, límbong, dáyà, hásò).

_húsà_, Privacy, shelter, protection, freedom from noise, etc. Walâ
gid sing húsà sa ámon baláy ang kinánta kag sináut sa baláy ni
Fuláno. The singing and dancing in N.N.'s house is plainly heard in
ours. (cf. sorondayón).

_húsà_, To look for things needed, go in search of things one lacks
or stands in need of. Maghúsà ka sing pílak. Try to get some money
(i.e. get a job or loan, etc.). Husái akó sing humáy, kay nawádan
akó. Get me some rice, as I have run short. (cf. hágap, etc.).

_húsay_, To regulate, settle, arrange, set in order, put or set to
rights, square up; comb (of hair). Husáya ang ímo bohók, panumdúman,
hunâhúnà, tulún-an, etc. Comb your hair, regulate your mind, set your
thoughts in order, arrange your books, etc. Husáyi na akó sang ímo
útang sa ákon. Settle your debt to me. Nagahúsay silá sang íla nga
kwénta. They are squaring their accounts. Ihusay mo akó siníng mga
líbro. Please arrange these books for me. Ginhúsay na níla ang íla
suluayón. They have now made up their quarrel--or--they have fought
it out.

_husáy_, A comb. Ang íya husáy túl-an, góma, etc. Her comb is made
of bone, celluloid, etc.

_húsi_, (Sp. jusi) Jusi, a light transparent fabric, delicate cloth
made of maguey, silk, piña, etc.

_húslò_, To draw, pull, unsheathe. See hosó. Nahúslò ang
íya binángon. His bolo was bare--or--had fallen out of its
scabbard. Ginhúslò níya ang íya binángon. He drew his bolo.

_husô_, See hosô--to draw, pull, etc.

_hustísya_, (Sp. justicia) Justice, right; court of justice, tribunal,
bench; authorities. Ang íya nga búhat nakadángat sa hustísya. His
case was brought before the authorities, was brought to court, came
before the court (bench). (cf. hokmánan, hokóm, katarúngan, punoán).

_hústo_, (Sp. justo) Just, right, proper, enough, sufficient, exact,
precise. Hústo gid iní. This is quite enough, this is exactly right,
this is the proper amount. Indì maghústo iní. This will not be
sufficient, will not meet the requirements or the like. (cf. tárung,
áyaw, túman, ígò, síbò, ángay, sinántò).

_hútal_, To be or get loose, shaky, wobbly. Naghútal ang diróskas,
ngípon, etc. The screw, tooth, etc. got loose. See kútal.

_hutál_, Loose, not firmly set, shaky, wobbly. (cf. kutál).

_hutál-hútal_, Dim. and Freq. of hútal.

_húthut_, To toot, sound, blow (a musical instrument, wind (a horn),
blow into a pipe or tube, etc.). Huthutá ang kornetín. Blow the
cornetin. Ihúthut akó sang klarinéte. Please play the clarinette to
me. Huthutí akó nínyo sing isá ka matahúm nga sonáta. Play (by blowing)
me a nice piece of music. Pahuthutá siá sang kornetín. Order him to,
or let him, play the cornetin. Metaphorically: Huthutá ang háblon
mo. Finish quickly the cloth you are weaving. (cf. húyup, húnghung;
hingágaw, dúsdus).

_hutík_, (H) To whisper, murmur, speak very softly, speak in an
undertone. Hinutikán akó níya nga mapakasál siá sa dílì na madúgay. He
whispered to me that he is going to be married before long. Indì ka
maghutík siní sa kay bisán sín-o. Don't breathe a word of this to
anybody. (cf. haní, hudínghúding).

_hutík-hútik_, Dim. and Freq. of hutík. Ihutíkhútik mo lang sa ákon
ang ímo kinahánglan. Just whisper to me what you want.

_hutô_, To maintain--, keep--, stay--, long, protract, prolong, put
off. Indì mo paghutoón ang mga panápton nga bulingón, kóndì bunákan mo
gilayón. Don't keep the dirty clothes (lying about) for a long time,
but wash them at once.

_hút-ong_, A troupe, troop, body, drove, crowd, section, herd, flock,
company, bunch. (cf. hubón, búnghay, sosón, panóng, húgnà).

_hutúhut_, Sincere, honest, hearty, real, genuine, guileless; to do
wholeheartedly, frankly, honestly, etc. Hutúhut gid ang íya paghágad
sa ákon. He invited me most heartily. Kon hutúhut gid ang ínyo
paghigugmaánay magpakasál lang kamó. If your love is true then get
married. Hutuhúta ang ímo pagtoón. Study with a right good will. Dílì
hutúhut, kóndì pakuláhaw gid lang ang íya nga pagkádlaw. His smile
was not natural but forced. Hutuhúti silá sing mga pangágda. Send
them hearty invitations--or--Invite them with sincerity (not as a
mere formality). (cf. túod, hugút, bunáyag, turúk sa tagiposóon, etc.).

_huwá-húwa_, A children's game. (cf. pahuwá-húwa--to smoke big cigars).

_húwas_, To extricate, etc. See hú-as.

_huyâ_, Shame, shyness, bashfulness, confusion, abashment; to be
ashamed, feel reproach, etc. May huyâ siá or nagakahuyâ siá. He
is ashamed. Ginahúy-an (ginahuyaán) akó níya. He is ashamed of
me--or--feels shy in my presence. Ginapakahúy-an akó níya. He puts me
to shame--or--makes me ashamed. Táo siá nga waláy huyâ. He is a man
without shame or self-respect. Dílì dápat igkahuyâ ang kaimolón. One
should not be ashamed of poverty.

_húyab_, To scamper off, run pell-mell, disperse quickly, hurry
off, to spread rapidly (of an eruptive disease). Ang mga bátà,
kánding, etc. nagahúyab. The children, the goats, etc. are scampering
off. Pahuyába ang mga karnéro gíkan sa áton pamulákan. Drive the sheep
quickly out of our garden. Kápti ang bastón nga saráng mo ikapahúyab
sa mga bátà nga nagagáhud sa atubángan sang áton baláy. Take the
stick and with it you can quickly disperse the boys who are making
such a noise in front of our house. Naghúyab ang íya katúl. His catul
spread rapidly. Pahuyába ang áwto. Drive the automobile at a high
speed. (cf. huyánap, dalágan).

_húy-ab_, A yawn; to yawn. (cf. pangúy-ab, panghúy-ab).

_huyáb-húyab_, Dim. and Freq. of húyab--to hurry or scamper off, etc.

_húyad_, To be near giving birth, in the last stage of pregnancy. Húyad
na siá--or--nagahúyad na siá. She is near her time, near giving
birth. (cf. búsyad, burántoy, sámbol; mábdus, búsung).

_huyágpà_, Low, not steep, only slightly inclined, sloping gently
(particularly of roofs).

_huyágpà_, To tumble or fall down, crash to the ground, be brought
low. Ang íya baláy hinuyágpà sang pagdulús sang hángin. His house
crashed to the ground through the force of the wind.

_huyáhoy_, Thin, lean, gaunt, slender; to be or become thin,
etc. (cf. hágpis); straight, not crooked. (cf. bungáyon, bunáyon).

_huyáhoy_, Carelessly, slovenlily or shabbily dressed, the clothes
not fitting well. Huyáhoy kaáyo ang íya pagnaúg. He dresses very
shabbily. (cf. hóyhoy, lóyloy).

_huyâ-huyâ, huyâ-húyà_, Dim. and Freq. of huyâ--shame, etc.

_huyâ-huyâ_, A kind of mimosa, the sensitive plant. Its leaves are
very sensitive to touch; hence the name huyâ-huyâ--bashful. It is
used as a remedy against dysentery.

_húyak, huyák-húyak_, Shrunken, fallen in, shrivelled, empty, thin,
void of contents; to shrink, etc. (cf. kupús, kúpus).

_huyánap_, To walk or step quickly, hurry, hasten, speed,
scurry. Nagahuyánap silá pakádto sa tiénda, sa simbáhan, etc. They
are hurrying towards the market, the church, etc. Huyánap kamó sa
paglakát, kay napúlut na ang mga linggánay. Walk briskly, for the
bells have stopped ringing. (cf. dalî, dásig).


_húyang_, Weak, feeble, unsteady, shaky; to be or become weak,
etc. Naghúyang iníng baláy. This house has grown shaky, is tottering.

_huyangô_, The death-rattle,--agony, to be in the last
agony. (cf. tingâ, yangô).

_huyáp_, (B) To slap, smack, strike with the palm of the hand. Huyapí
siá. Smack him. Naghuyáp siá sa ákon--or--hinuyapán níya akó. He
slapped me. Ihuyáp sa íya ang ímo sinélas. Slap him with your
slipper. Ginhanâ níya akó nga huyapán. He lifted his hand and
threatened to slap me. (cf. támpà).

_húyaw_, To loiter, loaf, roam about idly, stroll. Nagahúyaw gid lang
siá. He roams about doing nothing. (cf. landólándo, lagáwlágaw, etc.).

_huyáw-húyaw_, Dim. and Freq. of huyáw. Indì ka maghuyáwhúyaw. Don't
loiter--or--don't be a loafer. (cf. tiógtióg).

_húy-od_, To perish, succumb, die; to kill, do away with. Hinúy-od siá
ni Fuláno. He was killed by N.N. Naghúy-od siá. Sín-o ang nagpahúy-od
sa íya? He died. Who caused his death (killed him)? (cf. patáy,
músduk, múyod).

_huyúg_, Shaky, unsteady, inclined, not straight, leaning, all on one
side; to be or become inclined, etc. Naghuyúg ang baláy tungúd sang
bágyo. On account of the storm the house is leaning, is not standing
straight. (cf. hiláy, húyang).

_húyug_, To shake, cause to vibrate. (cf. úyog).

_huyú-huyú_, Famished, starved, hungry; to famish, get weak
or exhausted from lack of food, starve. Naghuyúhuyú siá
kahápon sa gútum. Yesterday he was quite exhausted from
hunger. (cf. hungáyhungáy).

_húyung, huyúng-húyung_, To shake, tremble, sway to and
fro. (cf. dúyug, duyúgduyúg, húyug, úyog).

_huyúp_, A puff or whiff of smoke, etc.; a gust--, puff--, of wind.

_húyup, huyúp_, To blow, to expel the breath with some effort,
to breathe upon, puff, whiff, exhale. Húypi siá. Breathe or blow
upon him. Ihuyúp sa íya iníng taláyhup. Blow on him with this
blowing-tube. Naghuyúp siá sa lusóng. He blew into the rice-mortar
(i.e. he burned his fingers, he made trouble for himself, the result
was a miserable failure or ended in his own discomfiture).

_huyús_, Pale, bloodless, lean, wan, emaciated, gaunt, meagre,
haggard; to be or become pale (of face, etc.). Panghuyús is commonly
used. Nanghuyús ang íya guyá. His face grew pale. (cf. láspì, lúspad,
lún-ad).

_huyút-húyut_, Bad, wretched, poor, miserable, hard (of times, seasons,
etc.). Huyúthúyut gid ang karón nga túig. This is a very bad year,
(a year of famine, misery, disease, or the like). Naghuyúthúyut ang
karón nga panahón, kay nagmínus ang patubás kag maíwat kaáyo ang
pilak. Times are hard, because the harvest was poor and money is
extremely scarce. (cf. sarót, buísit, malisúd, hoyót-hóyot).

_hwád, hwád-hwád_, See huád, huád-huád.




I


_i_, The letter "i" is pronounced in Visayan as in Spanish, except
when it has an abrupt sound as in the words:--dalî, dalîdálì, tahî,
hibî, etc. To avoid an hiatus "i" slurs into a following vowel as if a
"y" had been inserted, and in fact "y" is often inserted in modern
spelling, e.g. hiás, hiyás, tián, tiyán; íos, íyos, etc. However
a distinct hiatus occurs when an abrupt "i" is followed by a vowel,
e.g. daliá, dali-á, not dalyá; tahión, tahi-ón, not tahiyón; ginharían,
ginharí-an, not ginharíyan, etc. (From dalî, tahî, hárì, etc.).

_i-_, A prefix used:--
1.) in forming all the passive tenses of many verbs having a passive
in "i". Many verbs indicating an action that removes something
from the agent belong to this class, as: to sell, send, throw, pay,
give, hand over to (balígyà, padalá, pilák, báyad, hátag, túnghol),
etc. In the forms with gina- and gin- the "i-" is either prefixed
or (now commonly) left out entirely, whilst in the forms with
paga- and pag- the "i-" comes between the root and paga- or pag-,
e.g. hátag--to give. Iginahátag (ginahátag) níya iní sa ákon. He
is giving me this. Iginhátag (ginhátag) níya iní sa ákon. He gave
me this. Pagaihátag gid níya iní sa ákon. He will surely give me
this. Walâ níya pagihátag iní sa ákon. He did not give me this. Indì
níya pagihátag iní sa ákon. He will not give me this. Ihátag iní sa
ákon. Give me this, etc.
2.) in expressing the idea of--the means by which--,--the instrument
with which--, a thing is done, e.g. búhat--to make. Ibúhat iníng káhoy
sang ákon baláy. Make use of this wood for building my house. Bakál--To
buy. Iníng tátlo ka mángmang ibakál mo sing bág-o nga kálò. Buy a
new hat with these three pesos, etc.
3.) in expressing a polite request, e.g. Ipalíhog mo akó ihátag sang
ákon katahurán sa kay Fuláno. Do me the favour of paying my respects
to N.N. (cf. ig-, iga-, ika-, inog-).

_-i_, A suffix used in the passive impersonal imperative, in the
passive negative present, and in the passive negatived past of verbs
having a passive in -an, e.g. patíndog--to set up, build. Patindogí
(walâ níya pagapatindogí, walâ níya pagpatindogí) sing baláy iníng
lugár. Build (he is not building, has not built) a house on this spot.

_ía_, His, etc. See íya, ána. (cf. ákon).

_íak_, To squawk, squeal, etc. See iyágak, íyak.

_iás_, A grain (separated from the ear), a shelled pea or bean,
or the like. Madámò ang mga iás sa ímo tabíg. There are many loose
rice-grains in your harvesting basket. (cf. iyás, uyás, lamígas).

_íbà_, A kind of tree with a sour, edible fruit.

_ibá_, (B) Company, companion, chum, pal, friend; to accompany, go
with, go along with, keep--, bear--, company. Sín-o ang ibá mo? May
ibá ikáw? Who is your companion? Have you a companion? Sín-o ang
ibá mo kahápon? Sín-o ang nagibá sa ímo kahápon? Who was with you
yesterday? Ibahí akó pakádto sa Ilóngílong. Come along with me to
Iloilo. Ibahán ko siá. I shall keep him company. Ibahón ko siá. I
shall have him as my companion. (cf. upúd, búylog, tawás).

_ibabaláy_, To mind the house, to take care or charge of a house in
the absence of its owner or administrator. Sín-o ang magaibabaláy
kon magpamanílà ikáw? Who will take care of your house when you go to
Manila? Paibabalayá si Fuláno túbtub nga mabálik ikáw. Let N.N. mind
your house till your return. (cf. ibá, baláy, igbabaláy).

_ibábaw_, Above, on top of, in or to a higher place, above (in books
or writings); to be above, etc. Ibutáng mo ang ákon maléta sa ibábaw
sang ibán nga lúlan. Put my suitcase on top of the other luggage. Ang
salagyáwan nagalupád na sa ibábaw sang kawayánan. The hawk is now
flying above the bamboo-clump. Ang mga naibábaw----. Those placed in
a high position----. Ang sinámbit sa ibábaw----. What was mentioned
above (before)----.

_ibágo_, Whereas, but, still, yet, notwithstanding, nevertheless,
however. Nagpamanílà siá, konó, ibágo walâ man. He had gone to Manila,
they said, but he had not gone. Silíng níya nga íya iníng tulún-an,
ibágo íya galî sang ibán. He said this book was his, but it really
belongs to somebody else. (cf. gái, ugái, igái).

_ibá-íba_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of ibá. Also: Friend, chum, pal,
playmate. Ibá-íba ko siá. He is my chum. (cf. ábyan, kahírup,
atíd, upúd, idól); mate, concubine, paramour, mistress,
correspondent. (cf. upúd, kahagúgma, alaasáwa).

_ibán_, (H) Other, another, the others, some, someone else, the
rest. Dílì akó súbung sang ibán. I am not like the rest--or--I am
different from others. Dílì akó mangákò siníng trabáho; mangítà
ka sing ibán. I am not going to undertake this work; try to find
somebody else. Dílì ákon iníng kálò, kóndì íya sang ibán. This hat
does not belong to me, but to someone else. Ang ibán nagapaísug, ang
ibán nagapatálaw sa íya. Some are encouraging, others are discouraging
him. Ang ibán nagapakamaáyo siní, ang ibán nagapakaláin. Some approve
of this, others are against it. (cf. laín, túhay).

_íban_, To subtract, diminish, take from, deduct from, take away part
of, shorten, lessen, reduce. Ibáni ang humáy sa tabungós sing limá ka
gántang. Take five gantas of rice from the tabungós-basket. Ginibánan
níya ang ákon sóhol nga binúlan sing duhá ka mángmang. He deducted
two pesos from my monthly salary. Iíban akó sang ákon dalá, kay lakás
kabúg-at. Please lessen my burden (take some off my load), for it is
too heavy. (cf. búhin).

_ibán-íban_, Dim. and Freq. of íban. Ibánibáni lang ang maís nga
kinokót. Just take a small amount of the shelled corn.

_ibán-ibán_, Dim. of ibán. Kon ibán-ibán lang ikáw, índì gid akó
magpáti sang ímo sógò. If you were someone else, I would not obey
your order.

_ibíd_, A water-lizard about the size of an iguana.

_ibíd-ibíd_, To be very submissive to, follow close behind, act like a
slave or monkey, to ape, mimic, echo, imitate servilely. (cf. upúdúpud,
tawástáwas, ilógilóg).

_íbok_, (B) To move, stir, wriggle, writhe, squirm, show life by
motion. Ang úlud nagaíbok sa dútà. The worm is wriggling on the
ground. (cf. húlag).

_íbok_, (H) To lie on the ground and move restlessly, as pigs often
do. (cf. dúm-ug, lukó, lúp-ug).

_íbok_, (B) To root (of pigs). Tabúga ang báboy nga nagaíbok
dirâ. Drive away the pig that is rooting over there. Indì mo
pagpaibókon ang báboy sa atubángan sang baláy. Don't allow the pig
to root in front of the house. (cf. súbok id.; inibókan--a piece of
ground turned up by a pig's snout).

_ibók-íbok_, Dim. and Freq. of íbok. Sín-o ang tagíya sináng mga
báboy nga nagaibókíbok dirâ sa hilamón? Who is the owner of those
pigs that are lying and wriggling over there in the grass?

_ibóy_, A (small) monkey, ape. (cf. amô).

_ibubungán_. Ridge, top of a building, highest point in a
roof. (cf. bubungán, bubúng, alibubungán).

_íbug_, To have a passion for, crave, desire vehemently, covet,
lust after, long for passionately. Indì ka magíbug sang mánggad sang
ímo isigkatáo. Don't covet your neighbour's goods. Indì mo pagibúgan
(pagíbgan, pagígban) ang íya sang ibán. Don't covet what belongs to
another. (cf. hingamó, etc).

_ibulúndak_, The butt of a rifle, butt-end of a spear, or the like.

_íbus_, Rice mixed with gatâ (the juice of coconut meat) and stewed in
coconut-leaves in the form of rolls; to make a dish of íbus. Ibúsa
iníng kalanáy. Make "ibus" of this kalanáy-rice. Iíbus akó ánay
siníng pilít. Kindly prepare a dish of "ibus" for me from this
pilít-rice. (cf. ilibusón).

_íbwal_, To flare or shoot up high, flame, blaze, rise (of
fire). Nagaíbwal na ang kaláyo. The fire is flaring up. Naibwalán
sang kaláyo ang atóp sang digamohán. The fire shot up to the roof of
the kitchen. Indì mo pagpaibwalón ang kaláyo. Don't allow the fire
to blaze. (cf. síbwal id.).

_idág_, To lean against some support while sitting (as a sick person
against several pillows or the like). Nagaidág siá sa mga ulúnan. She
is leaning against the pillows. Ginaidagán níya ang díngding. He is
leaning against the wall. Ang masakít nga bátà íla ginpaidág sa isá
ka butáka. They put the sick child half reclining in a comfortable
armchair. Si San Huán nagaidág sa dúghan sang Aton Ginúo. St. John
leant against the breast of Our Lord. (cf. sándig).

_idágan_, Back (of a chair), support, anything to lean or rest
against. (cf. idág).

_idálum_, Under, below, beneath, underneath, farther down, down,
nether. Sa idálum sang baláy. Underneath the house. Sa idálum sang
dútà. Below the surface of the ground. Dálhi akó sang rebísta nga árà
sa idálum sináng mga tulún-an. Bring me the review there from under
those books. (cf. dálum, paidálum, paidalúm, pakitidalúm).

_ídas_, Row, line, file, range, rank, tier; to line up, stand in
file, form a regular line or row. Idas--or--magídas kamó. Stand
in line. Idáson mo silá. Put them in line. Paidáson mo silá. Make
them form a line. Idásan mo iníng dútà sang ímo arádo sing makapúlò,
kay támnan ko sing kamóti. Make ten straight furrows in this piece
of ground, for I am going to plant some sweet-potatoes there.

_íd-id_, Exactness, preciseness, precision, accurateness, accuracy,
correctness, attention to detail; to be careful, exact, heedful,
accurate, precise, correct, conscientious, particular, attentive to
details. Walâ siá sing kaíd-id sa íya mga buluhatón. She does not
exercise any care in the performance of her duties. Id-idón mo ang
ímo mga búhat, kay sudyaón ka gid kunína. Be careful in your work,
for you will certainly be called to account later on. Nagaíd-id
siá sang íya bág-o nga galamitón. She is very careful with her new
furniture. Iníng maéstra nagaíd-id gid sang íya kláse. This teacher
is very painstaking in giving class. (cf. písan, húgud, úkud, túl-id).

_ídik_, To call piglets together. (cf. ódok, dúkan; idík).

_idík_, A small young pig. (cf. báboy, nayón, udók, urók, butakál).

_idilímdim_, (H) Taste, sense of taste. (cf. dímdim).

_idíngan_, A young pig. (cf. idík, odók, orók).

_ídlab_, Spark, scintilla; to emit or throw off sparks, to spark,
sparkle, glitter, scintillate. Ang bató nga matíg-a kon pakibyasán
mo sing salsálon magaídlab. A hard stone, if struck a glancing blow
with iron, will emit sparks. Paidlabá ang ímo santíkan, agúd makódtan
sang kaláyo ang bárok. Strike a spark from your flint, that the tinder
may take fire. (cf. ídlak, ígpat, sídlak, sílak).

_ídlak_, To twinkle, spark, glitter, flash. Ang diamánte nagaídlak
kon gáb-i. The diamond sparkles in the dark. (cf. ídlab, etc.).

_idlák-ídlak_, Dim. and Freq. of ídlak. Ang mga kabitoónan
nagaidlákídlak. The stars are twinkling. (cf. igpátígpat).

_ídlas_, To be wild, not tame. (cf. ilá).

_idô_, (H) Dog, hound, mongrel, cur, whelp. (cf. áyam).

_idóg_, (H) To shift a little, change place or position, step or move
forward (back, aside), give way, make room, recede, stand back,
recoil, fall back, withdraw a little. Magidóg ka dídto. Stand
(back) there. Idóg kamó sing diótay. Shift a little. Paidogá
siá. Make him--get back a little,--move a little (in any direction
desired). (cf. isdóg, ísol, sáylo).

_idóg-idóg_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of idóg. Idógidóg ka, kay gutúk. Stand
back a little, for there is no room.

_idól_, Chum, pal, male friend, companion. (cf. atíd, akíd, ábyan,
ibáíba, kadápig, kahírup; bábay, báine--female friend).

_idulúngug_, (H) Hearing, the sense of hearing. (cf. dungúg).

_ídwan_, (B) Passive form of íro--to stand, tolerate, suffer, etc. Indì
akó maídwan sang ibán, kay may balatían akó nga manlaláton. Others
don't like to come near me, for I am suffering from a contagious
disease. (iróhan id.).

_ídyok_, A kind of palm. See hídyok.

_ig_--, See i--. "I--" and "ig--" can often be used promiscuously,
e.g. ighámbal, ihámbal; igsilíng, isilíng; igdápat, idápat; igbátok,
ibátok; etc. But words beginning with the letter "k" have nearly
always "ig--" instead of "i--", e.g. igkasubô, igkasákit, igkahuyâ,
igkúdlit, etc.

_íga_--, See "i--". For euphony's sake "íga--" is more used in phrases
like: Ari akó, kon may igasógò (isógò). I am at your service. I am
here. Command me, I am at your orders. Walâ akó sing igahátag sa íya. I
have nothing to give him. May igahámbal (ihámbal) ako sa íya. I have
to tell him something. I have to bespeak him about something.

_igái, igá-i_, But, yet, still, however. See ibágo.

_igá-igá_, A simulated cough, hem, hum; to cough, to hem (hum) and
haw, to speak in a very hesitating manner. Nagaigáigá gid lang siá. He
just hems and haws. Ginigáigahán gid lang níya akó nga walâ gid siá
maghámbal sing maáthag. He just kept coughing (hemming and hawing)
at me without saying anything distinctly. (cf. ígham).

_igaláhum_, Faculty, capacity, power, authority, might. (cf. gahúm).

_ígang_, A hard, sharp stone; reef (of rocks).


_igbabaláy_, See ibabaláy, id.

_igbalátì_, Sense, sensation, sensitive faculty. (cf. bátì).

_ígham_, To hem, cough slightly (in order to attract attention,
express doubt, etc.). Ighamí siá. Draw his attention by coughing
slightly. Ginighamán akó níya kag sang pagbalikíd ko nagkádlaw
siá. He coughed and when I looked back he smiled. Walâ ka magígham,
haw! Yes, but you might have given a cough to let me know you were
there! (cf. igáigá).

_ígi_, A snail. (cf. kuúl, puúl).

_igíl-igíl_, Stunted, dwarfed, checked in growth or development,
below the natural or normal size; to be or become stunted,
etc. (cf. agíl-agíl, arí-arí, daúl-daúl).

_igít_, A small amount of liquid excrement: to evacuate or discharge an
"igít". Ang bátà nagigít sa íya delárgo, kay nagapanlibáng siá. The
boy soiled his pants a little, for he is suffering from diarrhoea.

_igkulúdlit_, (H) Anything used for making lines, scratches, strokes,
etc. as a pencil or the like. (cf. kúdlit).

_iglésya_, (Sp. iglesia) Church, temple, basilica, fane
(poetical). (cf. simbáhan).

_ígmà_, (B) Meal; dinner; to dine, eat, take food. Maígmà kitá
ánay. Let us first take our dinner. Diín ka magígmà? Where did
you dine? Paigmaí siá. Get dinner ready for him. Ginpaigmaán akó
ni Fuláno. N.N. kept me to dinner--or--had dinner prepared for
me. (cf. panyága, káon).

_ignoránte_, (Sp. ignorante) Ignorant, ignoramus, unlettered,
illiterate, uncultured, unschooled, untaught, unlearned,
uneducated. (cf. pákok, urá-is, walâ sing tinón-an).

_ígnuk_, Stir, move, movement, motion; to stir, move, jerk, move with
a start. (cf. líhok, lítok, húlag, lígnok, díhok, íwos, híos, ígnut).

_ígnut_, To move (with a start, or by starts). See ígnuk.

_ígò_, Meet, fit, just, proper, suitable, adapted, right; to
fit, adapt, adjust, accommodate; to hit, strike, score, make a
hit. Igò gid inâ. That's just the thing. Paigóon mo gid sing maáyo
ang mga tápì. Adjust the boards very well. Ang íya mga batásan
nagakaígò gid. His manners are just right--or--His behaviour is
excellent. Paigói ang ímo baláy sing digamohán. Make a suitable
kitchen for your house. Pagaigóon ko gid siá. I shall certainly hit
him. Makaígo ka sináng píspis dirâ sa sangá sang káhoy? Can you hit
that bird there on the branch of the tree? Madámò ang naígò sang mga
lisó sang lúthang. Many were hit by rifle-bullets. Iigò sa íya iníng
bató. Hit him with this stone. Walâ níya akó pagigóa. He did not hit
me. (cf. síbò, ángay, sinántò).

_ígod_, To drag oneself along without using the feet, crawl, creep,
said of animals like snakes, snails, slugs, etc. Magígod ka lang sa
salúg, kon índì ka makalakát. Push yourself along the floor if you
cannot walk.

_igód_, A kind of shell-less snail, a slug.

_igók-ígok_, To grunt. (cf. sámbo).

_ígong_, To groan, moan. Nagaígong siá. He is moaning. Ginigóngan
akó níya. He moaned in my presence, or at me. Iígong mo lang, agúd
maghagánhágan ang ímo pagbátyag. Just groan softly, to relieve your
feelings.

_ígot_, To creak, emit a grating sound as by friction or the like. Ang
kángga nagaígot, kay walâ sing síbo. The cart creaks because it is not
greased. Ginpaígot níya ang galingán sang kapé. He made the coffee mill
creak. Huy, sapatéro, índì mo pagpaigóton ang ákon mga sapátos. Now,
shoemaker, don't make my boots creaky. Don't make me boots that creak.

_ígpat_, To sparkle, flash, twinkle, glow, glitter. Ang mga bitóon,
bató nga mahál, etc. nagaígpat. The stars, precious stones,
etc. sparkle. (cf. ídlab, ídlak).

_igpát-ígpat_, Dim. and Freq. of ígpat. Ang mga ipótípot (aninípot)
nagaigpátígpat sa káhoy. The fire-flies are glowing on the
tree. (cf. kídlab, ínggat).

_ígpit_, To jam, press, squeeze, etc. See ipít, lígpit.

_igsáwà_, Grievance, reason for complaint, censure, finding fault
with. Walâ gid akó sing igsáwà sang pagtátap níla sa ákon. I have no
reason to complain of their treatment.

_igsóon_, To stand in the relationship of Godchild to the Godparent's
own child. Igsóon silá--or--nagaigsóon silá. One is son, the other
godson.

_igsulúlat_, That is used for writing, as a pen, pencil, etc. (sulát).

_igtubá_, The place or region beyond a river or brook, on the farther
side or bank of a river, across the river. Sa igtubá----. On the other
(farther) side of the brook or stream----. (cf. tubá).

_igulúlut_, (H) Anything used for cutting, a knife, etc. (cf. gulút).

_ígwà_, To be near vomiting, to retch. See dígwà.

_iháda, ihádo_, Goddaughter, Godson. (cf. anák, aiháda, aihádo).

_ihaláplas_, Ointment, unguent, salve, plaster, remedy. (cf. háplas).

_íhaw_, To kill, slaughter, slay (an animal); to roast (corn);
slaughter, the killing of beasts. Iháwa ang báka. Slaughter the
cow. Sín-o ang nagíhaw sang báboy? Who killed the pig? Iháwi
ang kasál sing isá ka toréte. Slaughter for the marriage feast a
medium-sized calf. May íhaw silá karón nga ádlaw. They are slaughtering
to-day. Iháwi akó sing maís. Roast some corn for me. (cf. patáy; bóog).

_ihawán_, Place where beasts are slaughtered, slaughter-house,
shambles, abattoir. (cf. íhaw, ilihawán).

_íhi_, (Sp. eje) Axle, axle-bar.

_íhì_, Urine, pee; to urinate, make water, pass water, pea. Ang bátà
nagíhì sa baníg. The baby peed on the mat. Ang íhì mapángsot. Urine
has a penetrating smell.

_ihián_, Urinal, chamber-pot. (cf. ilihián id.).

_ihibaló_, The faculty of understanding, intellect, mind, reason,
thought. (cf. hibaló).

_ihíd_, To neglect, abandon, pay no attention to, ignore. Ginaihíd lang
siá sang íya nga tíyà. His aunt ignores, neglects him--or--leaves him
to himself--or--does not take proper care of him. (cf. ihíg, ahígahíg).

_ihíd-ihíd_, Dim. and Freq. of ihíd.

_ihíg, ihígihíg_. See ihíd, ihídihíd. Ginihígihíg gid siá sang íya
mga ginikánan. He was quite neglected by his parents.

_ihî-íhì_, Dim. and Freq. of íhì. Nagaihîíhì siá, kay ginabusisáw. He
has to discharge urine at frequent intervals, for his urethra is
affected.

_ihím_, An exclamation: Why! Look here! Grand! Fine! Excellent! Ihím,
katahúm sang kálo mo! Why, what a fine hat you have got! (cf. abáw,
aráw, kananáks).

_ihô_, (B) To follow suit, do likewise, do the same, imitate; imitation
of others (often just for the sake of appearances). Walâ pagasapaká
ni Fulána ang íya mga hináblus, ápang kon dalôdalóon sang ibán,
dáyon man siá nagaihô--or--dáyon man níya ihô. N.N. does not care
for her nephews and nieces, but when they are caressed by others,
she follows suit at once.

_íhoy_, An exclamation expressive of joy or used to stimulate to great
exertions, especially in lifting or carrying a heavy load. Isá, duhá,
tátlo; íhoy! One, two, three; hurrah, now go to it! Ihoy, kamí amó
ang nakadaúg! Hurrah, it is we who have won!

_ihulúngit_, (H) Anything used to put food into the mouth, as a spoon,
etc. (cf. húngit).

_íka-_, A verbal prefix like "i-", but with the additional meaning
of the adaptability of a material to, or the possibility of, an
action. Indì ko pagibalígyà iní sa ímo. I will not sell you this. Índì
ko ikabalígyà iní sa ímo, kay dílì ákon. I cannot sell it to you,
for it does not belong to me.

_ikaáyo_, (H) That is for the good or improvement of, weal, welfare,
benefit. Sa ikaáyo sang bánwa. For the good of the town. Nahanabô
inâ sa ákon ikaáyo. That turned out to my advantage. (cf. áyo).

_ikaduhá_, (H) Second.

_ikalimá_, Fifth.

_íkang_, To limp, halt.

_ikáng-íkang_, Dim. and Freq. of íkang. Nagaikángíkang siá kon
maglakát, kay may rióma siá sa íya nga páa. He walks with a slight
limp--or--he limps slightly when he walks (in his walk) for he suffers
from rheumatism in his legs. Nagikángíkang siá kahápon, kay sinúyak
siá sing dalíngag. Yesterday he limped a little, for a sharp thorn
had pricked him.

_ikán-um_, Sixth. (cf. ánum--six).

_ikáon_, Side-dish, meat, fish, eggs, shrimps, crabs, etc., but not
vegetables nor rice. (cf. káon, súd-an, daráplì, kalán-on, tinúla).

_ikáp-at_, Fourth. (cf. ápat--four).

_ikapitó_, Seventh. (cf. pitó--seven).

_ikapúlò_, Tenth. (cf. napúlò--ten).

_ikasaráng_, Possibility, feasibility, resources, means. (cf. saráng).

_ikasiám_, Ninth. (cf. siám--nine).

_ikátlo_, Third. (cf. tátlo--three).

_ikáw_, You, thou, often shortened to "ka", which see.

_ikawaló_, Eighth. (cf. waló--eight).

_íkbaw_, To pop up one's head, raise or lift one's head a little
in order to spy or observe slyly, peep. Nagíkbaw siá sa tungâ sang
tígbaw. He popped up his head from among the tígbaw-grass. Iíkbaw
ang úlo mo kag tan-awón kon sín-o dirâ. Lift up your head a little
and see who is there. (cf. úkbaw).

_ikbáw-íkbaw_, Dim. and Freq. of íkbaw. Ikbáwikbáwi silá kon anó ang
íla ginahímò dirâ. Pop up your head a little to see what they are
doing over there.

_ikî_, (B) A small copper coin, half a centavo (now out of
circulation); small, little, tiny, wee, minute, slight. (cf. tikî,
gamáy, dítay, diótay).

_ikíb_, To nibble, gnaw, bite off a piece, snap, etc. Ikba (ikibá)
ang ságing. Nibble the banana. Ikbi ang ságing. Take a bite out of the
banana. Ang tinápay iníkban sang ilagâ. The bread had been nibbled
(gnawed) by rats. Ang idô nagaikíb sang túl-an. The dog is gnawing
the bone. (cf. íngkib, íngkit, kíbkib, etc.).

_íkit_, Condition of being dense, compact; close or near together,
crowded; to be close or near together, dense, compact, with little
space between. Nagaíkit ang humáy sa ákon umá. The rice on my field
is growing thick. Indì nínyo pagikíton ang pagtanúm sing lubí. Do
not plant the coconuts too close together. Naikítan akó sináng mga
lubí. It seems to me that those coconuts are crowded. Magídas kamó
sing íkit, dílì sing lakâ. Stand in a row close together, not far
apart. (cf. garót, gutúk).

_ikláhag_, To make a false step, stumble; shake up and down, swing
to and fro. (cf. tikláhag).

_iklahás_, To shun, avoid, etc. See aklehís id.

_íklip_. To be hidden behind a screen, out of sight,
concealed. Paíklip--to hide oneself, keep out of sight. (cf. íplok,
panágò, palipúd).

_íkning_, To tiptoe, walk on tiptoe, go about softly, quietly,
silently, step carefully, warily, gingerly. Ikning ka dirí kay madámò
sing dógi iníng lugár. Step carefully here, because there are many
thorns in this place. Ikningí siá, kon maglubás ka, kay nagakatulúg
siá. Walk softly when you pass him, for he is sleeping. Ikningá ang
ímo pagtikáng. Step quietly, softly. Paikningá siá. Order him to move
about quietly. (cf. tíid).

_íkog_, Tail; to put on a tail. Ikógi siá sa báyò níya. Put a tail to
his jacket. Ginikógan níla ang idôídò. They put a tail on the toy-dog.

_ikógan_, Long-tailed, having a long tail.

_ikóg-íkog_, Dim. of íkog. A small tail, anything resembling a tail.

_íla_, (H) Their, theirs; by, through, etc. them. Sa íla. Them, to
them. Ila ginhímò iní. They did this. Ila inâ. That is theirs. That
belongs to them. Ihátag mo iní sa íla. Give them this. (cf. ánda,
níla; silá--they; ákon).

_ilá_, Wild, savage, ferocious, not domestic, undomesticated,
untamed, not tame; to be or become wild, etc. Nagilá ang manók, báboy,
etc. The chicken, the pig, etc. has become wild. Indì mo pagpailahón
ang manók. Don't let the chicken run wild.

_ílà_, (H) To like, covet, desire, wish for, be attached to, long for,
want very much, lust after. Nagakaílà siá sa kay Fulána, sang ákon
mga páhò, etc. He likes N.N., covets my mangoes, etc. Ginakailáan
níya siá, ang duág nga hiláw, etc. He is attached to her, he likes
the colour green, etc. Ipaílà sa íya iníng relóh. Make him wish
for this watch. Sín-o ang dílì magkaílà sinâ? Who would not like
that? (cf. lúyag, íbug, sahô, íma, makailílà, kalailáan).

_iláb_, (H) Roasted, scorched, burnt. (cf. siláb).

_ílab_, (H) To scorch, roast over a fire, toast, burn
superficially. Ilába lang ang maís sa pagbóog, agúd áton makáon sa
madalî. Just toast the corn, when you roast it, so that we may be
able to eat it soon. Indì mo pagilábon ang kárne, kóndì bóg-on mo
sa bága. Do not simply scorch the meat in a flame, but roast it over
glowing coals. (cf. sílab, sírab).

_ilagâ_, Mouse, rat. (cf. balábaw).

_iláhas_, The wild chicken; wild, untamed. (cf. ilá, simarón).

_ilâ-ílà_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of ílà--to like, etc.

_ilá-íla_, The fine feathers or down underneath the wings of a fowl
or other bird.

_ílak_, A kind of fish.

_ilalakúb_, The eyelid. (cf. lákub).

_ilalangúb_, See ilalakúb.

_ilalapák_, The sole of the foot. (cf. lápak; dapádapá).

_ilám_, (B) I don't know. (cf. ambót, ambáy).

_iláng-ílang_, A kind of tree with very fragrant flowers that are
often made into a much esteemed perfume; ylang-ylang.

_ílaw_, Glare, splendour, brightness (of light, etc.). (cf. íraw).

_iláw_, To cooperate, help mutually. Ilawí akó sing duhá ka ádlaw,
kay balúsan ko man ikáw sa isá ka simána. Help me for two days and
I will help you in return within a week. (cf. híl-o).

_ilawód_, To be situated in the direction towards the sea; at the
seaside, on the sea-coast, towards the sea. Ang ákon baláy yárà sa
ilawód sang bánwa. My home is situated in that part of the town which
is nearest the sea. Ang mga minurô nga nailawód----. The villages on
the coast, or: situated towards the sea----. (cf. iláwod).

_iláwod_, Towards the coast or sea, seaward. Diín ka makádto?--Sa
iláwod. Where are you going to? Towards the sea. Nagpailáwod
siá kaína. He went in the direction of the sea some time
ago. (N.B. "Iláwod" supposes a greater distance from the speaker,
town, place, etc. at issue than "ilawód". (cf. lawúd, kalaláwran;
iláya, ilayá--inland).

_iláya_, (H) Towards the land, remote from the sea, in the interior,
land-ward, inland; up river. Diín ang ginapúy-an mo?--Sa iláya. Where
do you live?--Up river, in the direction of the mountains. Nagpailáya
siá kahápon. Yesterday he went up country, up river.

_ilayá_, (H) Landward, etc.; to be situated in a direction away
from the sea, etc. but not so far as the distance implied by
"iláya". Ang ákon baláy nailayá sa simbáhan. My home is situated near
the Church--or--a little behind the Church (in the direction of the
mountains). (cf. iláya; iláwod, ilawód--seaward).

_ilibusón_, (H) Materials for making a dish of "íbus".

_ílig_, To flow, run, stream. Ang túbig nagaílig. The water is
flowing. Pailíga ang túbig dirâ sa kalóg. Make the water flow there
through the ditch. Pailígi sang túbig ang talámnan ko. Let the water
flow over my fields.

_ilíg_, A discharge of pus from the ear, usually very evil-smelling.

_iligán_, The course, channel or bed of flowing water. (cf. ílig;
ililigán, hililigán).

_ilighámon_, A slight sore throat with coughing. (cf. ígham; irighámon,
olóbhon, oróbwon).

_iligmáon_, Food for dinner, provisions for a meal. (cf. panyagahón,
irigmáon).

_iligón_, One affected with the disease of the ear called "ilíg",
pertaining to "ilíg".

_ilihán_, A high, steep rock unaccessible on all sides except by
climbing a ladder, etc. (N.B. Houses are often built on such rocks
as a protection against thieves and robbers).

_ilihawán_, (H) A butcher's shop, slaughterhouse. (íhaw; cf. ihawán).

_ilihawón_, (H) That is to be slaughtered or roasted. (íhaw).


_ilihián_, (H) A urinal, chamber-pot. (íhì; cf. ihián).

_ilí-íli_, To lull to sleep, to quieten a baby by rocking it gently in
the arms and singing a lullaby to it. Ilíilíha (--íhi) ang bátà. Sing
the baby to sleep with a lullaby. (cf. láylay).

_ililigán_, (H) Channel, water-course, river-bed, ditch; a vessel
used for drawing a liquid and then pouring it out into a cup or
glass. Kabô nga ililigán. A coconut shell used for drawing a liquid,
mostly water or toddy. Ililigán nga sukì--or--pasók nga magamáy nga
ililigán sang tubâ. A small bamboo-vessel into which "tubâ" is poured
from a larger receptacle, and then measured out by the glassful to
customers. (cf. ílig, iligán, hililigán).

_ililúbon, ililubón_, (H) That is to be borne or suffered
patiently, that should be borne with fortitude; trial, hardship,
visitation. (cf. ílub).

_ilímnan_, (H) A drinking-cup or -glass; bar, saloon, place where
drink is to be had. (cf. inúm).

_ilímnon_, (H) Beverage, drink, draught, potion, swill, nip,
sip. (cf. inúm).

_ilin-, -ilin-_, This prefix and intercalation conveys the same meaning
as "in-, -in-" 2). The syllable "il" is prefixed to "in" either for
mere euphony's sake or to emphasize still more the frequency of,
or the great number of participants in, an action. (cf. ilináway).

_ilináway_, (H) Fight, quarrel (on a large scale with many partakers),
engagement, battle, strife, war; to fight, quarrel, wage war. Ang íla
ilináway--or--pagilináway tápus na. Their war (fighting) has come to
an end, is over. Ang mga táo nagailináway sa dumugán. The people are
quarrelling (fighting) on the wrestling ground. Ginilinawáyan níla
ang bulangán. They fought in the cockpit. (cf. áway).

_ilíngod_, (H) A very frequently used plural form of íngod--to be near,
side by side, etc. (cf. íngod, ingód).

_ilinitán_, (H) Any utensil for boiling or cooking. Láta nga ilinitán
sang túbig. A can used for boiling water. (cf. ínit).

_ilintindíhon_, (H) That is to be inferred or understood; an allusion,
broad hint. (cf. intiénde, intíndi).

_ilintúon_, One amenable to flattery, easily coaxed or
wheedled. (cf. íntò; uluníson, ulutíson, hululanúon, olodóton).

_ilipitán_, (H) Press; hot-iron. (cf. ipitán, ipít, lígpit).

_ílis_, Change, alteration, variation; to change, alter, vary,
replace, substitute, exchange; successor, instead of. Makaduhá sa
simána may ílis sang prográma. Twice a week there is a change of
programme. Sín-o ang ílis níya? Who is his successor? Who takes
his place? Maílis--or--magaílis pa akó ánay. First, I shall change
(my clothes). Ilísan mo ang ímo kálò nga dáan sing bág-o. Exchange
your old hat for a new one. Isli--or--ilísi ang salúg nga kawáyan
sing tápì. Take up the bamboo-floor and make one of boards. Sang
paghalín ni Pédro nailísan siá ni Páblo. When Peter left, Paul took his
place. Iníng mga kawáyan iílis ko sa kodál nga dáan. These bamboos I
am going to use to replace the old fence. Nabasâ ang ákon panápton kag
walâ akó sing iílis. My clothes got wet and I had no change. Tandaán
mo gid ang mga ílis sa íya baláy. Mark well the alterations in his
house. (cf. báylo, tál-us).

_ilísan_, That is to be changed. (cf. ílis).

_ilisán_, Dressing-room, place where one changes his clothes, or
the like.

_ilís-ílis_, Dim. and Freq. of ílis. Dáyon gid lang siá nagailísílis
sang íya mga ulús. She is constantly changing her clothes. Ang mga
manugtátap siníng talapuánan ginailísilísan sa tuígtúig. The managers
of this company are being changed every year.

_ilisipón_, (H) That is to be counted or reckoned with; that can be
counted, inconsiderable, small in number. (cf. ísip).

_ilíslan_, (H) Things to be changed or altered, change (of clothes),
exchange, object or person to be replaced by another. (cf. ílis).

_ilistáran_, Place to stay or live at, abode, residence, quarters,
lodging. (cf. estár, ginaestarán, pulúy-an).

_ilô_, To be nice to, ingratiate oneself with, flatter. Ang nagailô sa
ímo talíkdi, ang kaáway atubánga. Run away from flatterers, bravely
face your enemies.


_ílo_, An orphan; to be or become an orphan, be orphaned. Naílo
siá sa amáy, sa ilóy. He was bereft or bereaved of his father, his
mother. Kon mapatáy si tátay mo magaílo ikáw. If your father dies
you will be an orphan. Ilo siá nga mulómúlo. She (He) is a complete
orphan, bereft of both his (her) parents.

_ílog_, (H) To follow, imitate, do like, copy, take pattern by,
emulate. Ilóga ang mga sántos. Follow the Saints. Ilóga ang mga búhat
nga maáyo. Imitate good deeds. Ipaílog sa íya ang maáyo nga batásan
ni N.N. Let him emulate N.N. in good manners. (cf. sunúd, huád).

_ílog_, (H) Brook, brooklet, small river, rill, stream, streamlet,
burn, beck, channel, water-course. (cf. sapâ, sápà).

_ilóg-ilóg_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of ílog. To copy, follow or imitate
in a servile manner, to ape.

_ilóg-ilogán_, (H) One who servilely follows or imitates
another. (cf. ílog, ilô, mailógilógon, irógiróg).

_ílok_, (H) The armpit. (cf. írok).

_ilóm_, Dark-coloured, brown, brunette, dusky, swarthy, sun-burnt,
sun-burned; to be or become dark-coloured, sun-burned, etc. Nagilóm
ang íya nawóng sa ínit. Her face was sun-burnt. Ang ibán nagasilíng
nga maputî siá, ápang akó nailomán sa íya. Others say she is white,
but I consider her dark. (cf. girómgiróm, kayománggì).

_ilóm-ilóm_, Dim. and Freq. of ilóm.

_ilóng_, (H) The nose; to lead by the nose. Ginailóng níya ang
karabáw. He is leading the buffalo by the nose. Ilongá siá. Lead
him by the nose--or--Win him over to your side--or--Make him follow
you. (cf. iróng).

_ílong_, To smell, sniff at, snuff, run after, pursue (as a bull after
a cow), nuzzle, be nice to, wheedle, cajole, flatter, caress. Indì
ka magílong sa íya. Don't run after him--or--Don't try to win favour
with him. Ilóngi siá. Coax him--or--Win him over by flattery, etc.

_ilongán_, (H) One with a large prominent nose.

_ilóy_, (H) Mother, mamma, madonna, dam; to be or become a mother. Si
María Santísima gintundaán sang Arkánhel nga si Gabriel nga pagailoyón
siá ni Hesukrísto. The blessed Virgin was told by the Archangel
Gabriel that she was to become the Mother of Jesus Christ. (cf. nánay).

_ilóynon_, (H) Motherly, maternal, tender, mild. (cf. inilóy).

_ílub_, To bear patiently, suffer humbly or meekly, endure with
fortitude, undergo, brook, stand, put up with. Ilúba ang mga kalisúd
nga nagabút sa ímo. Suffer with fortitude the troubles that have come
upon you. Magpaílub ka lang sinâ. Just bear it patiently.

_ílwak_, To spill, etc. See álwak, ályak.

_íma_, (B) To like to have, to like, desire, wish for, long for,
covet, want, hanker after. Nagaíma siá siníng mga sapátos, bísti,
dólse, etc. She would like to have these boots, clothes, sweets,
etc. Ginimáhan níya ang ákon páhò. He longed for my mango. Kon magkáon
ka sing mga manámit nga kalan-ónon, ang mga bátà magaíma. When you
eat nice side-dishes, the children want to join in. (cf. lúyag, íbug,
ílà, hingamó, híngyo, hándum).

_imâ_, Bleating, baa; to bleat, baa (of sheep). Ang karnéro
nagaimâ. The sheep bleats. (cf. mîmî).

_imâ_ To low, moo (of cattle). (cf. humá, ma, má-má).

_imán-imán_, Frequently, often, often-times, many times, repeatedly,
again and again, time and time again. (cf. masúnsun, masamî,
himánhimán).

_imáw_, (B) The same, that, that there. See iná. Imáw riá. (amó
inâ). That's it. Bokón ti imáw riá. (dílì amó inâ). It is not so. That
isn't it.

_ímaw_, (B) To be together, live or do anything together, be in the
same predicament. Kay sín-o ikáw nagaímaw--or--Sín-o ang ginaimáwan
mo? Whom are you working, living, staying, etc. with? Who is your
companion? Nagaímaw silá sa pagkáon, ápang dílì sa pagpangítà. They
take their meals in common, but follow different callings. (cf. ibá).

_ímaw_, (B) Companion, partner, chum, pal, mate. (cf. ibá, kaúpud).

_imáy_, Grandmother; ancestor, granny, grannie. (cf. bayí, úyang,
úway).


_ími_, (Sp. eme--the name of the letter "M") To squat with the
legs bent in the form of the letter "M". Nagaími siá sa salúg. He
is squatting on the floor. Imi ang paglíngkod níya. He sits with
legs drawn up. Ginimíhan níya ang salúg. He squatted down on the
floor. (cf. lupágì, lupán-ak, katínkátin, kúung, kúmung, singkayóng).

_ímo_, Your, yours, thine (singular); by or through you, thee; sa
ímo--you, thee; to, at, from, towards, etc. you, thee. (cf. nímo,
mo; ákon, etc.).

_ímol_, Poor, pauper, without wealth; to be or become poor, indigent,
penniless, penurious, destitute, pinched, straitened. Imol siá. He
is poor. Nagímol siá. He became poor. Naimólan gid akó sa íya. He
seems to me to be very poor. Ginpaímol siá sang Mahál nga Diós,
kay bugalón siá sádto ánay. God deprived him of his worldly goods,
because he used to be so proud. Indì ka magpakaímol. Don't pretend
to be poor. Imol siá, konó, ápang sang pagdúaw ko sa íya walâ gid akó
pagimóli sang íya baláy. They say he is poor, but when I visited him
his house did not appear to me to be poor. (cf. dungúl, póbre).

_ímon_, Jealousy, envy; to be or become jealous, jaundiced,
green-eyed. Nagaímon siá. She is getting jealous. Nagapangímon
siá. She is of a jealous disposition. Nagímon siá. She has become
jealous. Ginaimónan ni Fulána ang íya nga bána. N.N. is jealous of her
husband. Nagaimonáy silá nga duhá. The two are jealous of each other.

_ímot_, (B) Parsimony, stint, niggardliness, stinginess; to be or
become stingy, niggardly, close, parsimonious, mean, miserly. Indì ka
magímot sa mga ímol. Don't be stingy toward the poor. Imóti (ímti)
ang ímo pagkáon. Take little food, eat very sparingly. Ginaimótan
akó sang ákon agálon. My master stints me. Naimótan akó siníng táo. I
consider this man a miser. (cf. dingót, ínot).

_impanáda_, (Sp. empanada) Meatpie, fruit-pie, a mixture of meat,
eggs, shrimps, raisins, etc. baked in pastry, in flour, battered;
to batter, to bake in pastry. Impanadáha ang manók. Cook the chicken
in pastry. Impanadáhi akó sining búgsò nga kárne. Bake me this piece
of meat in batter.

_ímpas_, To discharge a debt, pay in full, settle an account. Nagímpas
na siá sang íya nga útang sa kay Fuláno. He has discharged his debt
to N.N. Naímpas na ang íya nga útang. His debt is paid in full. Walâ
pa akó níya maimpasí. He has not yet paid me all. (cf. túmbas, kábis).

_impátso_, (Sp. empacho) Indigestion; frequently applied to a cold,
headache, influenza, sore throat or the like.

_impéryo_, (Sp. imperio) Empire; sway. (cf. ginharían).

_impiérno_, Hell. See inpiérno.

_impíne_, (Sp. empeine) Tetter, ringworm.

_ímpon_, To join, associate with, cooperate, join in, take
part in. Impon--or--magímpon ka sa íla. Join them. Imponí silá
sa hámpang, pangabúdlay, etc. Join them in their play, work,
etc. Imponá silá nga duhá. Put the two of them together. Ginímpon
níya ang lubí kag kalámay sa binókbok nga bugás, kay himóon nga
bayébáye. He has mixed coconut-meat and sugar with powdered rice,
for he is going to make a dish of "bayé-báye". Dáyon gid lang silá
nagaimponáy. They are constantly together. They are always in each
other's company. (cf. símpon, abáy).

_imprénta_, (Sp. imprenta) Printing; to print. Imprentahá ang
líbro. Print the book. Ipaimprénta ang líbro. Have the book
printed. Ipaimprénta ko sa ímo ang ákon mga ilimprentáhon, kon
magkasugtánay kitá sa baláyran. I'll let you do my printing, if
we can agree as to payment. Naimprentahán siá sing isá ka líbro
nga íya sinulát. A book written by him was printed, appeared in
print. (cf. bálhag, balhágan).

_imprentáda_, (Sp. imprenta) Singing to music; to play and sing a
serenade, etc. Sín-o ang nagaimprentáda kagáb-i sa atubángan sang
baláy ni Fulána? Who was it that serenaded last night outside Miss
N.N.'s house. Ginimprentadáhan ni Felípe si Salbasyón. Felipe serenaded
Salvación. Iimprentáda (imprentadáha) nínyo iníng bág-o nga kansyón
sa kay Fulána. Sing this new song as a serenade to Miss N.N.

_in-, -in-_, The prefix in- and the intercalation -in- are often used:
1) instead of gin- and na- to form the past passive, e.g. inabután
(ginabután, naabután) from abút--to arrive; binúhat (ginbúhat,
nabúhat) from búhat--to make; hinadlukán (ginhadlukán, nahadlukán)
from hádluk--to fear, etc.

2) to denote an often repeated action or an action by many,
e.g. nagahinámpang (nagahilinámpang, nagahalámpang) silá--they
are playing. (hámpang--to play); nagagiliniósgíos silá--they are
moving. (gíos--to move).
3) to form verbs from adjectives, e. g. támad--lazy. Indì ka
magtinamád. Don't be lazy.
4) to form a great number of adjectives, e.g. mainamlígon--careful
from ámlig--to be careful, etc.

_inâ, iná_, Female parent, mother (used only of animals); a
dam. (cf. ináng, inahán). (From the Tagálog dialect).

_inâ_, (H) That, that there (not so far away as "yádto" nor so near as
"iní"). Amó inâ. That's it. Kon amó inâ índì akó makakádto dídto. If
that is so, I cannot go there. Kuháa ináng (inâ nga) líbro dirâ. Take
away that book over there. Dílì inâ, kóndì yádto dídto. Not that one,
but the one over there, farther on. (cf. diá, riá).

_inád-ad_, Sliced, cut up in thin slices. Bulará ang mga kamóti
nga inád-ad. Spread the sliced sweet potatoes in the sun to
dry. (cf. ád-ad).

_inádlaw_, By the day, a day, per day, daily, daily wages. Pilá ang
inádlaw mo? What is your daily wage? How much a day do you get? Anó
ang ginkasugtánan nínyo nga inádlaw? How much per day did you agree
upon? (cf. ádlaw, aladláwan).

_inág_, Transparent, pellucid, translucent, diaphanous; to be
or become transparent, etc. Iníng hénero nagainág. This cloth
is transparent. Nagailinág ang íla mga báyò. Their jackets are
transparent. You can see through their jackets. (cf. sinág).

_inagahán_, Pertaining to the early part of the day, for the morning,
used--, being--, occurring--, in the morning. Balasahón nga inagahán. A
morning paper. (cf. ága, agahán).

_inágaw_, To scuffle, scramble, fight for the possession of. Ang mga
bátà nagainágaw sang mga bukáka. The boys are fighting for the ripe
fruit of the camunsil-tree. (cf. ágaw).

_inagíhan_, Event, passage, happening, experience, anecdote,
what--happened,--took place, anything experienced or gone
through. (cf. ági, inágyan).

_inagón_, Transparent, not opaque. See inág.

_inágpang_, Made up into a hank; by the hank. Nagbakál akó sing bunáng
nga inágpang. I bought some yarn by the hank. (cf. ágpang).

_inágsap_, A chip, splinter, small piece. (cf. ágsap).

_inagúsan_, Scraped clean, dressed (of rattan, etc.; cf. águs).

_inágyan_, Past passive of ági. (cf. inagíhan).

_inahán_, Female parent (used only of animals; cf. inâ, ináng). (From
the Cebuano dialect).

_inâ-inâ_, Dim. of inâ. To use the term "inâ" i.e. to speak or pretend
to speak the Hiligáynon dialect.

_inakúp_, To receive hospitably, take care of, treat well. Iya siá
gininakúp sa dakô nga paghálung kag paghigúgma. He received him with
great affection and love. (cf. ákup, báton, tátap, sagúp, batití,
sagúd).

_inalabúab_, (H) Progeny, offspring, descendants; turbid, full of
dirt or sediment (of water). (cf. alabúab, hinalabúab).

_inaláw_, Pertaining to or affected with the skin-disease "aláw". Also
active plural and perf. passive form of "aláw"--to entertain visitors,
etc.

_inalóng-ong_, Understanding, knowledge, inkling. Walâ siá sing
inalóng-ong sang ginpanáysay kaína. He knows nothing of what was
explained a short while ago. (cf. alóng-ong).

_ináloy_, Sham, pretense, imitation, fake, feigned, assumed,
simulated; to feign, simulate, a disease, etc. Ináloy gid lang ang
íya balatían. His sickness is only a sham. Nagaináloy siá nga may
hilánat. He is only pretending to have a cold. (cf. áloy, aloyán).

_inamáy_, (H) Fatherly, paternal. Inamáy nga paghigúgma. Fatherly
affection. (cf. amáy, tinátay).

_inamerikánhon_, American, according to American customs, manners
or usage.

_inanák_, Scion, offspring, child, children, progeny; childlike,
filial. (cf. anák, binátà).


_inanáy_, Slow, soft, tender, mild; to do tenderly, etc. Inanáy nga
pagkahúlug. A soft fall. Inanáy nga ulán. A gentle rain. Ibutáng inâ
dirâ sing inanáy. Put it there carefully. Hakwatá ang masakít nga bátà
sing inanáy, or: inanayá ang paghákwat sang masakít nga bátà. Lift
the sick child tenderly. (cf. ananáy, alugáynay, hínay).

_inánay, inanáyan_, Full of--, infested with--, white ants, attacked,
or ruined, by white ants or termites. (cf. ánay).

_ináng_, A contraction of inâ nga. Ináng baláy, for: inâ nga
baláy. That house.

_ináng_, A female parent, mother (used only of animals), a
dam. (cf. inâ, iná, inahán).

_ináng_, The body or main part of a garment (not including collar,
sleeves, fringes, etc.).

_inangán_, Goal, end, bourne, destination, expected result; asylum,
refuge. (cf. angán; aláypan, dalángpan, apútan, salampútan).

_ináng-ináng_, As or like a mother, motherly. (cf. ináng,
amángamáng--fatherly).

_ináng-ínang_, Dim. of ináng. Also: to pretend to be wise
or experienced, lay claim to great knowledge; a wiseacre,
a would-be-wise person (said only of women). Daw si ináng-ínang
siá. She is a wiseacre. Nagpakaináng-ínang siá. She pretends to be
a wise (experienced) matron.

_ináno_, (Sp. enano) Dwarf, pigmy, midget, runt; an idiot, simpleton,
fool. (cf. putót, kímay; buangít, kulángkuláng).

_ináno_, To happen, chance or come to pass "whatever". Bisán
magináno malakát gid akó sa buás. Whatever happens, I shall go
to-morrow. (cf. iríwan).

_inános_, Consumptive, phthisical; pertaining to
consumption. (cf. ános, anosón, as-asón).

_inantarán_, Distance; difference. Malayô kaáyo ang inantarán sang
íya nga hámbal kag sang íya nga búhat. There is a great difference
between what he said (says) and what he did (does). (cf. ántad).

_inapâ_, Pertaining to the manners and customs of the deaf and dumb;
dumb-show; to talk by signs and gestures as the deaf and dumb. Maálam
ka balá maginapâ? Do you know how to talk by signs and gestures? Inapâ
nga sugilánon. A conversation conducted in the manner of the deaf
and dumb. (cf. apâ).

_inarabúab_, Offspring, etc. See inalabúab.

_inaradóhan_, A ploughed field, what has been ploughed,
tillage, tilled. Sa inaradóhan. On the ground that has been
ploughed. (cf. arádo).

_inarohál_, (B) To jest, joke, etc. See arohál.

_inaról_, (B) See inarohál. (cf. aról).

_inarót_, (B) Voluble, glib, fluent; to
talk--fast,--glibly,--fluently,--volubly, to gabble. Nagainarót siá
kon maghámbal. He is very voluble in his talk. (cf. arót).

_ínas_, To go or pass over frequently, repeatedly, as over a path,
a book, a lesson, etc.; to harden by being gone over, as a road,
etc. Naínas na ang dálan. The road is now trodden hard. Ginínas ko
yanáng líbro. I had often gone through that book--or--I perused it
many times--or--I studied it well. Inása iníng alágyan. Make this
footpath hard by going frequently over it. Pagainásan ka gid sing
bánas sa ímo nga talámnan, kon índì ka magpatíndog sing maáyo nga
kodál. You will certainly have a footpath trodden through your field,
unless you erect a strong fence. (cf. hánas).

_inás_, Hard, trodden hard. Inás nga alágyan. A well trodden footpath.

_inasál_, Roasted on a spit. Manók, kárne nga inasál. Roast chicken,
roast beef. (asál).

_inasinán_, Salted, salt. Inasinán nga kárne, ísdà, páhò, etc. Salt
meat, salt fish, salted mangoes, etc. (asín).

_ináton_, According to our customs, manners, way of living, mode of
speech, etc. (áton--our, ours, including the person or persons spoken
to). (cf. ámon, kitá).

_ináw-ináw_, Pellucid, translucent, shining or showing through, limpid,
clear, bright, diaphanous; to be pellucid, etc. Ináwináw ang íya mga
matá. His eyes are lustrous, bright, clear. Nagaináwináw ang íya dugô
sa písngi. Her blood shows through the cheeks. Her cheeks are rosy. She
has rosy cheeks. Maayóayó na si Fuláno, kay ináwináw na liwán ang íya
tubúg. N.N. is a little better now, for his windpipe is visible again.

_ináy_, Mother. (cf. ilóy, nánay, inâ, inahán, ináng).

_ináynon_, Motherly. (cf. ilóynon, inilóy).

_indaháng_, To suffer from too much heat, be restless due to hot,
sultry weather. Nagaindaháng siá sa lakás nga ínit. On account of
the excessive heat he is ill at ease, (feels languid).

_indakál_, To seethe, bubble, boil. Ang túbig nagaindakál na. The water
is boiling. Paindakalá ang túbig. Make the water boil. (cf. bukál,
akálakál, sindakál, alimbukád).

_índay_, Darling girl, sweetheart, dear child, little dear, little
girl. (cf. akáy; bábay).

_indáy_, The vocative of índay. Darling, dear, my sweet, honey.

_índì_, No, not, not so, do not, you shall not, you must not, don't;
to refuse, decline, prohibit, say "no". Mapailóngílong ikáw sa
buás?--Indì. Are you going to Iloilo to-morrow?--No (I am not going,
will not--, shall not--, refuse to--, go). Iní índì maáyo, kóndì
maláin. This is not good, but bad. Indì amó inâ. That's not so. That
isn't it. Indì ka magbúhat sinâ or Indì mo pagbuháton inâ. Don't do
that. Indì akó magbúhat sinâ. I will not (shall not) do that. I have
no intention of doing that. Nagíndì siá. He said "no", he refused,
he declined. Indión mo siá. Refuse him. Reject him. (cf. dílì,
dì; walâ. N.B. Indì and dílì are negative particles to be used in
connection with a refusal or non-intention, with a non-conformity,
with prohibitions and futures, whilst walâ (no, none, there is not,
does not exist) expresses either the lack, absence or non-existence
of something, or the fact that an action or event has not taken,
or is not taking, place).

_indî-índì_, To say "no" repeatedly; to seem to--, to seemingly--,
to apparently--, refuse. (cf. birgíbírgì, bisyó-bísyo).

_índis_, Competition, contest, match, tournament, drive; to
compete, contest, contend, vie with, play against. Mostly used with
pa--. Paindisí (Indisí) nínyo ang bísbol. Compete with each other at
baseball. Nagaindisánay (nagapaindisánay) silá. They are--vying with
each other,--competing with each other.

_indís-índis_, Dim. and Freq. of índis. Paindísindisán nínyo ang
relóh nga igaprémyo sa magadaúg. Compete for the watch to be given
as a prize to the winner. Ginhíwat níla ang isá ka paindísíndis sa
dúmug. They got up a wrestling contest.

_indulhénsya_, (Sp. indulgencia) Indulgence (a theological
term). Indulhénsya parsyál kag plenárya. A partial and plenary
indulgence. (Sp. indulgencia parcial y plenaria).

_íngà_, (B) To forbid, prohibit, interdict, disallow, not permit or
allow. Nagaíngà siá sa íya mga bátà sang mga búnga nga maáslum. He
does not allow his children to eat unripe fruit. Ginaingáan inâ. It
is forbidden. Ginaingáan sang tagíya ang pagkúhà sináng mga búnga. The
owner forbids the taking of that fruit. Ingái silá sa----. Forbid them
to----. Indì mo pagkuháon inâ, kay íngà sang tagíya. Don't take it,
because the owner does not permit it.

_ingâ_, The bellow, roar, bleat; to bellow, roar, bleat (of a
buffalo). Ginaingaán sang karabáw ang íya nga tínday. The buffalo is
bleating (roaring) for its calf.

_ingáw_, Mew, mewing; to mew, miaw, meaw, miaul. Ang kuríng
nagaingáw. The cat mews.

_ínggat_, To twinkle, glitter, sparkle, glimmer, etc. (cf. ígpat,
ídlak, sídlak, ídlab).

_ínggo_, A kind of resin used for medicinal purposes, especially as
a plaster for the scalp.

_ínghit_, To move, shift, shove, dislodge, shake loose, change
the posture or position of. Inghitá ang halígi kon makaínghit ka
sinâ. Move the post, if you are able (to move it). (cf. gíhit, gihít,
íngkà, ínkà).

_ingít_, To be angry, offended, discontent. (cf. ákig, pasingít,
súngon).

_íngkà_, To move, lift, shift, dislodge, remove from its place. Ingkaá
kon maíngkà mo yanáng bató. Shift (or move) that stone, if you
can. Naíngkà ang kinitáan sang tápì, kay nagkúpus ang káhoy. The
board seams opened, for the wood shrank. (cf. ínghit, etc.).

_íngkib_, To nibble, gnaw, bite off a little at a time. Nagaíngkib siá
sing maís nga binóog. He is nibbling roasted corn, popcorn. Ingkibí
lang ang maís. Just nibble the corn (on the cob). (cf. ikíb, kíbkib,
kítkit, ót-ot, áp-ap).

_íngkit_, See íngkib--to nibble, etc.

_inglés_, (Sp. inglés) English, Englishman, Anglo-Saxon, Briton,
Britisher. (cf. ininglés--referring to the English language, customs,
etc.).

_íngod_, To be alongside, side by side, at the side of, by the side
of, beside, adjoining, neighbouring, next, near each other. Nagaíngod
ang íla mga baláy. Their homes are near each other. Ingódi (ingóri)
siá. Go near him--or--Place yourself at his side. Kon magpatíndog ka
sing bág-o nga baláy iíngod mo sa ámon baláy. When you build a new
house, put it up alongside ours. (cf. íping, luyó).

_ingód_, Side, collateral line of. Sa ingód sang simbáhan, sang baláy,
etc. At the side of, next to, the Church, the house, etc.

_ingód-íngod_, Dim. and Freq. of íngod and ingód.

_íngol_, Scarcity, scarceness, rarity, dearth; to be scarce, rare,
difficult to encounter or obtain. Nagaíngol ang kwárta, ísdà, páhò,
etc. Money is scarce, fish is scarce, mangoes are difficult to obtain,
etc. (cf. íwat, hínà).

_íngos_, To ask insistently and importunately, by whining or
half-crying, as children when they wish to obtain something from their
parents and are not inclined to take a refusal. Ingósi lang si nánay
mo, básì pa lang nga makadángat ka sang ímo ginakaluyágan. Beg hard of
your mother, perhaps you may be able to get what you want. Ang idô kon
kaisá nagaíngos sa íya katulúgon. Dogs sometimes whine in their sleep.

_ingréso_, (Sp. ingreso) Income, receipts, revenue, returns, earnings,
fees, entry; to come in, be paid in, etc., pay by installments. Ang
kwárta nga natípon iingréso mo sa bánko. Pay the money collected
in to the Bank. Naingresohán kamí sing diótay lámang sang búlan nga
tinalíkdan. Last month our receipts amounted to little. Paingresohá
siá sang amó nga pílak sa ákon. Make him pay that money over to
me. (cf. pangítà, kinitáan, pílak nga nagasulúd).

_inhenyéro_, (Sp. ingeniero) Engineer; mechanic, mechanician,
machinist.

_inhényo_, (Sp. ingenio) Talent, ability, ingeniousness, ingenuity,
cleverness, genius, mind.

_inhustísya_, (Sp. injusticia) Injustice, want of equity, unfairness,
iniquity, wrong. (cf. dìmatárung).

_inhústo_, (Sp. injusto) Unjust, wrongful, wrong, iniquitous,
unrighteous, unfair, wicked, bad. (cf. dìmatárung).

_iní_, (H) This, it. Gen. Dat. and Acc. siní. Iní nga----, sini
nga----are frequently contracted into iníng and siníng. Iní
nga líbro--or--Iníng líbro. This book. Ang tagíya siní nga
baláy--or--siníng baláy. The owner of this house. (cf. diá, riá,
inâ--that; yádto, ádto, ató--that (referring to objects farther away
than inâ).

_iníhaw_, Slaughter; slaughtered, killed. (íhaw--to slaughter, kill).

_iníhaw_, (H) Roast. Iníhaw nga maís. Roasted corn,
popcorn. (íhaw--bóog--to roast; cf. binóog).

_inilóy_, (H) Motherly, maternal, tender, affectionate,
unselfish. (cf. ilóy; inamáy--fatherly; ilóynon).

_ín-in_ Diminution, lessening, deterioration, loss of quality or
quantity. Sing masúnsun gingámit mo inâ nga báyò, ápang túbtub karón
walâ gid sing ín-in; dáw bág-o gihápon. You have used that dress
quite often, but till now it is not the worse for wear, it is still
like new. Walâ gid sing ín-in ang kadalísay siníng lánggaw, bisán
nasimbugán na sing túbig. This vinegar has not lost its strength,
though it has been mixed with water. Ang humáy dirâ sa tabungós daw
walâ sing ín-in, gái nabuhínan ko sing duhá ka gántang. The rice
in the tabungós-basket seems to have been left intact, though as a
matter of fact I have taken two gantas from it. Also, but seldom,
used as a verb: Indì magín-in iníng salsálon, bató nga bantíling,
etc. This iron, solid stone, etc., will not wear out, will not rust,
crumble, lose strength or the like. (cf. búhin, íban).

_ininglés_, English, pertaining to English manners, customs or speech,
Anglo-Saxon, British; to speak English. Iníng tulún-an nga sinulát sa
Ininglés ginhuád níya sa Binisayâ. This book written in English has
been translated by him into the Visayan language. Indì siá kahibaló
maghámbal sang Ininglés. He cannot speak English. Indì siá magininglés,
kon waláy kabangdánan nga dakô. He will not speak English, unless
there is good reason for it. (inglés).

_iníngod_, Near each other; neighbour. Si Huán iníngod námon. John
is our neighbour. (íngod; cf. kaíping, kasilíngan).

_inínit_, Warmed, warm, hot, heated, boiling. Inínit nga túbig. Hot
or boiling water. (cf. ínit).

_inínsik_, Chinese, Chinese customs, manner, language, way of living,
etc.; to speak Chinese. Maálam ka balá maginínsik? Do you know how
to speak Chinese?--or--can you speak Chinese? (cf. ínsik).

_ínit_, Heat, sun-heat, heat of the day, warmth, fervour; to become
or make hot, fervid. Nagínit ang binángon sa ádlaw. The bolo became
hot in the sun. Iníta ang túbig. Heat the water. Iníti ang manók
sing túbig sa paghimúlbul. Boil some water to clean the chicken
of its feathers. Iínit mo iníng kaláyo sa salsálon. Heat the iron
in this fire. Ginakinahánglan sang áton láwas ang ínit sang sílak
sang ádlaw. Our body needs the heat of sunlight--or--of the sun's
rays. Nagántus siá sing alángay sang ínit kag ulán. He bore equally
well sunshine and rain. Nagaínit ang íya láwas sa kaákig. He is waxing
hot with anger. Iínit akó ánay siníng tinápay. Please warm this bread
for me. (cf. tagítì, tagíngting, salíit; bóhot, gín-ot).

_inítan_, Sunshine, the heat of the sun. Nagbatás siá sang ulánan
kag inítan. He bore (braved) the rain as well as the heat of the sun.

_inít-ínit_, Dim. and Freq. of ínit. Tepidity, slight heat, warmth;
to be or become warm, tepid, a little hot, etc. Sang nagainít-ínit na
ang paginawáy-áway sang mga bátà umabút ang íla magtotóon kag íya silá
tinambagán. When the fighting of the boys grew rather hot their teacher
arrived on the scene and stopped them. Luás na siá sa katalágman,
ápang ginainít-ínit pa gihápon ang íya láwas. He is now out of danger,
but he has still a rather high fever (temperature). Inít-iníta ang
tsa. Warm the tea a little. (cf. alabáab).

_initumán_, Black-striped, blackened, with patches of black
colour. Báyò nga initumán. A black-striped coat. (cf. itúm).

_ínkà_, To move, etc. See íngkà.

_inkáhi_, (Sp. encaje) Encasement; lace; to encase; to lace, make
laces. Inkahíha ang halígi. Encase the post. Inkahíhi ang útbong sang
mga pakô ko. Put lace round the edge of my sleeves. Makahibaló ikáw
maginkáhi? Do you know how to make lace?

_ínkib_, (H) To nibble; etc. See íngkib, ikíb.

_ínkit_, (H) To gnaw, nibble, etc. See íngkib.

_inkurusán, inkurúsan_, Cross-road, cross-roads, cross-way, cross-ways,
intersection of roads. (cf. krus, ginsáng-an).

_inód_, (B) To follow, imitate. Inodá (--orá) siá. Follow
him. Inodí (--orí) ang ginahímò níya. Imitate his deeds. Do as he
does. (cf. sunúd, ílog);

_inód-ínod_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of inód. Maginódínod ka lang sang
makítà mo nga ginabúhat sang ibán. Simply do what you see the
others do.

_inog-_, A verbal prefix related to and often identical with i-,
ig-, iga-, but preferably used in expressing circumstances of time
or instrumentality. Ang mga ádlaw nga inogpuása. Fast-days. Tión
na nga inoglakát. It is now time to set out, to go or walk. Adlaw
nga inogpangabúdlay. A work-day. Adlaw nga inogpahúay. A day of
rest. A holiday. Bató nga inoggalíng sang maís. A stone for grinding
corn. Papél nga inogsulát. Writing paper. Batakán nga inoglúlan
sang mga sakayán. A crane for loading ships. Inogbák-ong--a
shroud, sheet, cover. Inogbalítwà--a lever, bar for raising
heavy loads. Inogkaláham (inogpangaláham)--the sense of touch,
sensation through contact. Inogsagámsam--taste, the sense of
taste. Inoglaráwan--for use in painting, carving, photography,
etc. etc. (cf. inug--id.).

_inogbulungá_, The season of fruit-bearing. (cf. tigbulungá).

_inoghalángup_, Understanding, comprehension, discernment, developed
mental faculties. (cf. hangúp; buót, ihibaló).


_inoghúngit_, Spoon. (cf. húngit, hungít; kutsára).

_inogpamáhid_, Towel. (cf. páhid; tuálya, síbin).

_inogpasúka_, An emetic, anything made use of to excite
vomiting. (cf. súka).

_inogsúgpon_, Continuation, addition. Sang pagkabatî níya siní
nawád-an siá sing inogsúgpon. When he heard this, he did not know
how to continue the conversation--or--he lost the thread of his
ideas. (súgpon).

_inolípon_, (H) Slavish, pertaining or referring to slavery or
drudgery, menial, servile. Pangabúdlay nga inolípon. Servile or
menial work. Inolípon nga kahimtángan. The position of a slave or
menial servant. (cf. olípon, kahiolípnan, mangungulipón).

_inóm_, See inúm--to drink, etc.

_inómol_, A handful; by handfuls; the fist. Indì mo akó pagturâturáan
sang imo nga inómol. Don't shake your fist at me. (cf. ómol).

_ínot_, (H) To spend economically, live frugally, thriftily. Nagaínot
siá sang íya pangabúhì. He lives frugally. Inóta ang ímo
kinitáan. Spend your earnings economically.

_inót-ínot_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of ínot. Inótinóti sing mantékà
ang pagpríto sang manók. Use only a little lard in frying the
chicken. (cf. katákáta, kinîkínì).

_inpiérno_, (Sp. infierno) Hell, gehenna, pandemonium, Hades, place
of damnation, infernal regions.

_inpiernohánon_, The inhabitants of hell, damned, hell-born, hellish,
infernal, Stygian. (cf. tinagudilían).

_ínsa_, Why? Wherefore? On what account? How? (cf. ngáa, tungúd sa
anó, ándot).

_insáyo_, (Sp. ensayo) Practice, exercise, trial;
rehearsal. (cf. repáso).

_insensáryo_, (Sp. incensario) Thurible, censer. (cf. bagahán).

_ínsik_, Chinese, Chinaman.

_insulár_, (Sp. insular) Insular; Constabulary, Insular
Police. (cf. kostabuláryo).

_insyénso_, (Sp. incienso) Incense; to incense. Gininsyensohán níya
ang halarán. He incensed the Altar.

_intíndi_, (Sp. entender) To understand, comprehend, take, grasp, know,
make out, fathom, realize. Indì siá makaintíndi. He does not know
(understand, comprehend). Intindihón mo inâ sing maáyo. Understand
that well. Bear that well in mind. (cf. sáyod, hibaló, dúmdum, hántup,
hangúp, entiénde).

_íntò_, One who is fooled or tricked, an April-fool, one amenable to
flattery, to be wheedled or cajoled; to fool, befool, make a fool of,
bamboozle, blarney, beguile, trick, flatter, coax, wheedle, cajole,
inveigle, do, diddle. Magíntò ka sa íya. Play a trick on him. Sa
ádlaw sang mga Inoséntes nagapangíntò ang mga táo. People use to
play practical jokes on Holy Innocents' day. Intoá siá. Bamboozle
him. Flatter him. Indì ko siá pagintoón. I am not going--to fool
him,--to obtain from him a favour by flattery. (cf. hásò, odót,
unís, utís).

_intô-íntò_, Dim. and Freq. of ínto. Andamí silá, agúd dílì ka níla
pagintôintoón (pagintôintóon). Be on your guard that they do not--play
a trick on you,--play you a trick,--take you in. (cf. hasôhásò).

_íntok_, (B) Small, tiny, little, wee; consisting of small pieces
or particles; to be or become small, etc. (cf. diótay, dítay, gamáy,
gágmay, dítik, ikì, isót, tikî, kayót).

_íntus_, (H) The juice of the sugar cane. (cf. inutús).

_inug_--, See inog--.

_inúm_, To drink, imbibe, quaff, swig, swill, drain the cup,
bib, guzzle. Imna iní. Drink this. Imni iníng bíno bisán diótay
lang. Drink some of this wine, even if only a little. Take a little
of this wine. Ipainúm sa íya iníng túbig nga mabúgnaw nga isá ka
báso. Give him this glass of fresh water to drink. Paímna siá. Give
him a drink. Let him drink. Indì ka maginúm sing lakás nga tubâ,
kay básì mahubúg (mabalúng) ikáw. Don't drink too much toddy, you
may get drunk. (cf. káon--to eat).

_inumá_, Rural, rustic, of the country, pertaining to the country,
not urban. (cf. umá, umánhon).

_inúnlan_, The after-birth, placenta. (cf. ulún).


_inun-onán_, A dish of fish or meat mixed with vinegar, various spices
or ingredients, etc., but with little or no sauce; a dish of mixed
vegetables, salad. (cf. ón-on).

_inurároy_, Sighing, moaning, complaint, shouting with pain; to moan,
complain, etc. (cf. urároy, aragóy, pangaragóy).

_inurúy-úruy_, A chat, conversation; to converse
familiarly. (cf. odóy-ódoy).

_inusisaáy_, Investigation, examination, inquiry, inquisition,
research; to investigate; etc. (cf. usísà).

_inútsan_, Bagasse, crushed sugar cane. (cf. bagáso, siápò; íntus,
inutús).

_inútud_, Cut-off, broken-off, severed; a cut--or broken-off piece,
a fragment. Inútud nga káhoy. A broken-off piece of wood. Ginútdan
siá sang médiko sang íya batíis kag ang inútud nalubúng sa pátyo. The
physician cut off his leg and the severed limb was buried in the
cemetery. (cf. útud).

_inutús_, The expressed juice of the sugar-cane. Pabukalá ang
inutús. Boil the sugar-cane juice. (cf. utús, íntus).

_ínyam_, A kind of tree with sour, edible fruit.

_ínyo_, Of you (plural); your, yours. (cf. nínyo; ákon).

_íos, í-os_, (H) To move, stir, wriggle, etc. See híos, íwos,
húlag, etc.

_ipalanimáhò_, The sense of smell. (cf. báhò, bahô).

_ipalatugsíling_, (H) Conscience, heart,
consideration. (cf. patugsíling, konsyénsya).

_ipangaláham_, The sense of touch, feeling. (cf. ipalanimáhò,
idulúngug, itulúluk, idilímdim).

_ipanimáhò_, See ipalanimáhò--the sense of smell.

_ipíip, ipí-ip_, To jam--, press--, squeeze--, wedge--, crowd--,
pack--, together, be jammed, compressed or near together. Nagaipíip
ang íla paglíngkod sa bánkò. They are sitting squeezed together on the
bench. Ipi-ípa silá, agúd makapúngkò man ikáw dirá sa bánkò. Squeeze
them together so that you too may be able to sit on the bench. Naipíip
ang mga tulún-an sa estánte. The books in the book-case are closely
wedged together. Paipi-ípan mo ang aparadór sang mga líbro. Put the
books compactly into the case. (cf. ipít).

_ípil_, A kind of hardwood tree and its highly esteemed timber.

_íping_, (H) To adjoin, be next, be near by, adjacent, be at the
side of, by the side of, beside, neighbouring; condition of being
at the side of or adjoining something else. Nagaíping ang ámon mga
baláy. Our houses adjoin each other. Ipíngi siá. Join him--or--Go to
his side. Sa íping sang simbáhan, etc. Next the Church, adjoining the
Church, etc. Nagaipingáy silá sa lamésa. They are sitting near each
other at table. They are neighbours at table. (cf. íngod, ingód, luyó).

_ipisán_, A gin, a machine for separating the seeds from cotton,
cotton-gin.

_ipít_, To compress, press between, squeeze, jam. Ipitá ang tabákò
sa sánsoy mo. Press down the tobacco in your pipe. Magipít ka sing
pórmas (hostyás). Make some hosts or wafers. Naipít ang íya túdlò
sang gangháan. His finger got jammed in the door. Ginipít níya ang
tabákò. He compressed the tobacco-leaves. (cf. ipíip).

_ipitán_, Anything used to compress (as a hot-iron and the like);
a press. (cf. ilipitán, ipít; balhágan--printing press).

_íplok_, To withdraw one's head, dodge, duck, stoop down, step
quickly aside, hide or conceal one's head, etc. Iíplok ang úlo mo,
agúd índì ka maígò sang bató. Duck your head, lest you should be hit
by the stone. Iplokí siá kon magtánglà sa bintánà. If he looks up at
the window, step aside quickly. Giniplokán níya akó sang paglubás
ko sa íya baláy. When I passed his house, he hid from me, (dodged
me). (cf. óklò, óplok).

_ipô_, Plucked, picked, culled, broken off. Ipô nga búlak. A picked,
plucked flower.

_ípò_, To pick, pluck, cull, gather, break off, snap off. Ipóa yanáng
mga búlak. Pluck those flowers. Ipói akó sináng mga páhò. Gather those
mangoes for me. Iípò akó ánay sináng mga talóng sa pamulákan. Please
gather the ripe eggplants in the garden for me. Sín-o ang nagípò
siníng búnga? Who picked this fruit?


_ipóg_, (B) A small coconut-shell vessel, a small hungút,
money-box. (cf. alkansíya, kabô).

_ipô-ípò_, Dim. and Freq. of ípò--to pluck, etc.

_ipó-ipó_, Very poor, miserable, indigent. (cf. ímol, makaloló-oy).

_ípot_, (H) Faeces, excrement, dung, ordure. (cf. tái; ití--droppings
of birds, etc. Tái and ípot are used promiscuously for the faeces of
man and beast).

_ipotán_, Anus. (cf. kalipunát, kagalán, palamus-ónan, kilipután).

_ipótan_, Rest, pause, interruption, respite. Walâ siá sing ipótan
sang panghímos. She has no rest in her work. (cf. hinúlò, pahúay).

_ipót-ípot_, Fire-fly, fern-beetle, glow-worm. (cf. aninípot,
angingípot).

_ipóy_, A tuft of hair in the groove of the neck. (cf. tíngkoy).

_ipóyan_, One who has a tuft of hair in the groove of the
neck. (cf. tingkóyan).

_ipóy-ípoy_, Dim. of ipóy--a tuft of hair.

_ipóy-ipóyan_, Dim. of ipóyan.

_ipyós, ípyos_, Taper; to taper, make in a tapering form. Ipyosá ang
paláy. Taper the wooden bolt.

_ipyósan_, Tapering. (cf. payósan, piyósan).

_írab_, To scorch, etc. See ílab, sílab.

_iraháynon_, According to the language, customs and manners of people
living inland or away from the sea. Iraháynon nga panghámbal. The
mountain dialect. (cf. hinaráya, binukídnon, irayánhon).

_irás_, To annoy, jar--, grate--, get--, upon one's nerves, strike
painfully or annoyingly, be a nuisance. Ginairás akó sináng hámbal. I
am getting annoyed at that kind of talk. Nagapairás siá sa ákon. He
is getting on my nerves (with his refusals, pretexts, excuses, or the
like). Iníng babáe nagapairás sang íya nga panápton. It is trying to
see how this woman flaunts her clothes.

_irás_, A worm of the size of a centipede that causes a painful itch
when brought in contact with the skin. (cf. tíl-as, lupák).

_íraw_, To be full of light, show many lights, illuminate well or
with many lights. Abáw, kagáb-i nagíraw gid lang ang mga kandílà sa
prosesyón. My, last night there were ever so many lighted candles in
the procession.

_irayá_, (B) See ilayá--up-river, inland, up-country, towards the
mountains, away from the sea.

_iráya_, See iláya--up-river, etc. (cf. irayá, ilayá).

_irayánhon_, (B) Away from the coast-line, up-river, inland; people
living in the interior. (cf. iraháynon, iráya, iráynon, iláya).

_iráynon_, See irayánhon, hinaráya.

_irighámon_, See ilighámon--a sore throat with coughing.

_irigmáon_, Food for dinner. (cf. iligmáon, panyagahón).

_iríod, irí-od_, To rub against, press against and drag or pull
along. Ginairíod sang idô ang íya bulî sa bató. The dog is rubbing
his rump against the stone. (cf. aróod, oróod, núsnus).

_irín_, A young, small cat, kit, kitten, kitty. (cf. kuríng, kutî).

_iríng_, See irín--kitten.

_irirós_, A small primitive scoop or spoon made of coconut leaves,
or the like. (cf. irús).

_iríwan_, (B) See ináno id. Kanógon kon magiríwan kamó; índì akó
magabáy. It would be a pity, if something (any evil, accident, ill
luck, etc.) happened to you; I won't be one of the party.

_Irlánda_, (Sp. Irlanda) Ireland, Erin.

_Irlandahánon_, Irish, Irishman.

_Irlandánhon_, See Irlandahánon.

_irô_, A kind of squirrel.

_irô_, (B) To flatter, etc. See ilô.

_íro_, To stand, tolerate, brook, suffer, be able to bear. Indì akó
makaíro magkáon sang katúmbal. I cannot eat chili. Indì na maíro
inâ. That cannot be borne (tolerated) any longer. Kaíro ka magsínghot
sináng búlak? Can you stand the smell of that flower? Indì ko maídwan
(for mairóhan) iníng bahô. I cannot bear this stench. (cf. batás,
ántus).

_iróg-iróg_, To ape, imitate servilely. See ilógilóg, ilógilogán.

_iróhan_, From íro--to bear, stand. See ídwan id.

_irót_, To scorch, burn, bring fire, live coals or a flame in contact
with; to singe. Irotí sang kandílà ang papél. Scorch the paper with the
lighted candle. Ginirotán níya ang kamót ko sing pósporo. He touched my
hand with a burning match. Iirót sa tápì iníng piokós. Put this cigar
against the board. Nakibút siá, kay nairotán sang tabákò ni Fuláno
ang íya nga dulúnggan. He started (jumped) for N.N.'s cigar--came
against his ear,--singed his ear.

_irús_, Scoop, spoon. See irirós.

_ísa_, (Sp. izar) To haul up, hoist. Isáha ang hayáhay. Hoist
the flag. Isáhi ang lórtsa sang mga láyag. Hoist the lorcha's
sails. Nagaísa silá sang bandéra. They are putting up the
flag. (cf. bátak).

_isá_, (H) One, unit, single, solitary, alone, sole, all by oneself;
to be, take, make, etc. only one. Walâ níya akó paghatági bisán sing
isá ka dakô. He did not give me even a single centavo. Isá gid lang
ang magupúd sa ákon sa karón. Only one of you shall come with me this
time. Isahá lang ang pagkúhà sing lubí. Just take one coconut.

_isáhon_, One, one for one (centavo, pesos, etc.). Mabakál akó sing
posporó nga isáhon. I am going to buy a box of matches that costs
one centavo.

_isahón_, Alone; to be alone, be all by oneself. Nagaisahón gid lang
siá sa baláy. He is quite alone in the house. He is living all alone--,
he is all by himself--, in the house.

_isaymáda_, (Sp. ensaimada) Light coffee-cake, bun, roll.

_isáis, isá-is_, To rub oneself against. Ang karabáw nagaisáis
sang íya líog sa káhoy. The buffalo is rubbing its neck against the
tree. Ginisaísan sang kabáyo ang síklat sang ámon baláy. The horse
rubbed itself against the bamboo wall of our house.

_isá-ísa_, Dim. and Freq. of isá. Isá-ísa (nagaisáísa) lang siá
dirâ. He is there quite alone, all by himself. (cf. isahón).

_isará_, (B) Alone, only, solitary, sole, the only one. (cf. usará).

_ísdà_, Fish. (cf. pangísdà--to fish, angle, be a fisherman).

_ísdog, isdóg_, To step aside, shift, move away. (cf. idóg, ísol).

_isganán_, Strong, brave, robust, daring, bold, courageous, intrepid,
doughty, mighty, powerful, puissant, valiant. (cf. ísug, maísug).

_isig-_, A particle denoting equality of condition, but, unlike
isigka-, prefixed to the personal pronoun and not to the root,
e.g. Ang isigmokatáo--your neighbour. Ang isignilakamagtotóon--their
fellow-teacher. Ang isigninyokamananákay--your fellow-passenger, etc.

_isigka-_, A prefix denoting equality of condition. Isigkabanwahánon;
isigkatáo; isigkasologoón; isigkamamantálà, etc. A co-citizen;
a fellow-man, neighbour; a fellow-servant; a co-editor,
etc. (cf. isig--).

_isí-ísi_, (Sp. ese--the letter "S") In the form of the letter "S",
turning, winding; to stagger, reel, sway to and fro. (cf. tikô,
tipólon, líbut; panayódò, dulíngdúling).

_isilínghot_, The sense of smell. (cf. sínghot, ipalanimáhò).

_ísip_, Reckoning, counting, count, numbering, enumeration, tally,
tale, mind, reason, thinking, idea, thought, reasoning; to reckon,
count, carp, number, enumerate, compute, tell. Isípa sing maáyo
iníng mga kawáyan kon pilá ka nahót ang kúlang pa. Count well these
bamboos to find out how many are still short. Isípi siá sing limá
ka gatús nga maís nga binílog. Count him out five hundred full
corn-cobs. Iísip akó ánay siníng kwárta. Please count this money
for me. Ginaisípan níya ang íya mga útud. He is selfish or niggardly
in dealing with his brothers and sisters (i.e. counting and making
notes of everything they spend, constantly reminding them of what it
costs him to support them and the like). Maábtik siá magísip. He is
an expert at counting. Daw sa nawád-an siá sing ísip. He is, acts,
looks, as if he had lost his senses or reason. He is (was) puzzled
or bewildered. Dílì maáyo iní nga ísip. This is not a good idea or
thought. It is bad reasoning. (cf. hunâhúnà, painóíno).

_isipán_, Anything used for counting; a register, list, counter,
index. (cf. ísip).

_ís-is_, An exclamation used to urge on dogs. Is-is, ís-is. Seize
him. Is-isí ang báboy sing idô. Send a dog after the pig. Ginis-isán
níya akó sang íya idô. He set his dog on me. Is-isá ang idô. Urge on
the dog. (cf. país-is which is more in use).

_ísla_, (Sp. isla) Island, isle. (cf. pulô).

_íslan_, For ilísan from ílis.

_ísol_, To step back, retire, withdraw, give way, make room,
retreat, forsake, yield. Nagísol siá. He gave way, stepped back,
withdrew. Natalawán silá kag nagilísol. Their courage forsook them
and they retreated. Isóla siá. Put him back. Paisóla siá. Make him
give way. Order him to stand back. Isóli akó. Isóli siá. Step back
towards me. Retire towards him. Ginpaísol níla ang kodál. They moved
the fence back. (cf. idóg, isdóg).

_ísol_, The tail proper of birds. (cf. iwí).

_isót_, (B) Little, not much, a very small amount. (cf. tikî, diótay).

_ísrot_, To know. See másrot. Kon may naisrotán lang akó----. If I
only had some knowledge or education----. (cf. másngà).

_istí-ísti_, To decline or refuse, but only apparently. See indî-índì,
birôbírò, bisyóbísyo, birgîbírgì, kudískúdis, ánsyas).

_ísug_, Bravery, valour, courage, nerve, grit, hardihood, fortitude,
prowess, boldness, daring, intrepidity, doughtiness, fierceness,
violence; to be brave, courageous, doughty, plucky, manly, firm,
strict, valiant, fierce, unyielding. Nagísug siá sa pagbátok sa íya. He
was brave enough to resist him. Akó lang ang naísgan mo, kay akó man
lang daúg mo sa dúmug. You dared to fight me, because I am the only one
you can vanquish in wrestling. Isúgi siá. Brave him. Dare him. Stand up
to him. Ginpaísug níya ang idô sa paglagás sang talunón. He trained the
dog to be brave in pursuing wild pigs. Paisúga siá sa pakigáway. Urge
him on to fight. Stir him up for a fight. (cf. bákud, tútum, pág-on).

_isúk_, A kind of small bird.

_isulúk-ay_, (H) Anything used for digging, ploughing, etc.; a
plough. (cf. súk-ay).

_isulúlat_, (H) Writing materials; pen, pencil, chalk,
etc. Isulúlat-tuburán. A fountain pen. (cf. sulát).

_íswad_, To bend the body a little forward and push with
one's back. Indì ka magíswad sa ákon. Don't push me with your
back. Giniswarán (--adán) akó níya. He pushed me with his
back. (cf. iwád).

_íswag_, To extend, expand, make progress. (cf. úswag).

_italál-us_, (H) In place of, Vice--, acting, deputy, proxy. Italál-us
nga pangúlo-puód. Provincial Vice-governor. (See itál-us
id.). (cf. tál-us).

_itál-ítal_, Suspense, doubt, precariousness; dilemma, difficulty;
to be in suspense or doubt, be or keep in a precarious condition. Yárà
na siá sa dakô nga itál-ítal nga básì áyhan isúmbung siá sa hokóm. He
is in great suspense at present, for he may be accused before the
judge. (cf. duhádúha; paitálítal).

_itál-us_, Substitute, instead of, vice--, acting, deputy,
proxy. (cf. tálus). Italál-us id.

_ití_, The excrement, droppings, of birds, poultry, bats and
reptiles; to void excrement (of birds, etc.). Nagití ang manók sa
salúg--or--Inítyan (initihán) sang manók ang salúg. The chicken has
dirtied the floor. Dílì mo pagpaítyon ang mungâ dirâ. Don't let the
hen make a mess there. (cf. tái, ípot).

_ítik_, (H) To tickle. See ítok id.

_itín-ítin_, To hint at, allude to, intimate, insinuate, make
innuendos, make insinuations, give out obscure hints, speak in
parables or similitudes intelligible only to the initiated. Indì ka
magitínítin, kóndi maghámbal ka sing maáthag, kay makasaláklaw ang
pagitínítin. Don't make insinuations, but speak clearly, for malicious
hints are exasperating. Ginitinitínan (ginpaitinitínan) akó níya sang
malisúd nga pagbátì sang ákon nánay. N.N. gave me some hints as to the
serious illness of my mother. (cf. paitínítin which is more in use).

_itíp_, (B) Crust. Ang kán-on may itíp sa kólon. The rice left a
crust in the kettle--or--has stuck to the bottom of the kettle. Also:
A kind of skin-disease producing patches of calluses. (cf. dokót).

_ít-it_, To stand the bitterness of, be able to stand the bitter or
burning taste of. Indì ka makaítit sinâ. You cannot stand the bitter
taste of that. Daw sa índì maítit iníng katúmbal. The burning taste
of this chili is almost unbearable.

_ítlog_, Egg; testicle; to lay eggs. Nagítlog kaína iníng mungâ. This
hen laid an egg a short while ago. Nagapangítlog na ang damulága nga
manók. The young hen is now laying (eggs). Naitlogán ang ákon alóla
sang isá ka mungâ nga dílì ákon. My chicken-basket had an egg laid
in it by a hen that does not belong to me.

_ítok_, (B) To tickle, titillate. Itóka siá. Tickle him. Itóki siá
sa íya nga ílok. Tickle him under the arm. (cf. ítik).

_itók-ítok_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of ítok. Also: to flatter, wheedle,
cajole, coax, persuade.

_itós_, To burn, scorch, char, singe. Naitós ang maís sang kaláyo. The
corn has been burned by the fire. Indì mo pagitosón ang kárne. Don't
scorch the meat. (cf. ílab, sílab, irót).

_ítot_, See iyót.

_itsúra, itsúri_, Form, shape; nonsense, bosh; shame,
cheek. (cf. etsúra, hitsúra, hitsúri, tsúri, súri).

_itulúbuk_, (H) Anything used to prod with, as a needle, fork,
etc. (cf. tubók).

_itulúluk_, (H) The faculty of seeing, sight, vision,
eyesight. (cf. túluk).

_itúm_, Blackness, darkness; black, sable, dark; to be or become
black. Nagitúm ang íya guyá. His face has turned black. Ginaitumán
akó siníng báyò. This jacket is too dark (or black) for me. Itumá
ang sapín ko nga mapulá. Blacken my red boots.

_ítung_, At the side of, next, neighbouring, near by, placed alongside;
to put side by side, arrange alongside or near each other, to meet,
come together for a quiet conversation. (cf. ingod, ingód; itúngítung
which is more in use than the simple ítung).

_itúng-ítung_, Dim. and Freq. of ítung. (cf. ingódíngod). Also:
to whisper, talk in a low voice, converse very familiarly or
secretly. (cf. hutík, hudínghúding, hurínghúring).

_íwà_, Dagger; poniard, dirk, knife. (cf. dága, binángon, talibóng,
sandúkò, ginúnting, kotsílyo, súndang, garanás, urutúp, lansétas).

_iwád_, With a prominent haunch, bottom, posterior; one who has
conspicuously projecting buttocks or walks with the body inclined
forward. Iwád siá nga táo. His buttocks are prominent. Nagalakát siá
sing iwád. He sticks out his posterior when he walks.

_íwag_, Light, clearness, brightness, illumination; to light,
shed light upon, shine, give brightness or clearness, illuminate,
enlighten. Ang sugâ nagaíwag sang hulút. The lamp gives light to the
room. Iwági ang íya pagpanáug sing kandílà. Light him down with a
candle. Kabáy pa nga iwágan sang Mahál nga Diós ang áton madulúm nga
panumdúman. May God enlighten our dull understanding. Sa íwag sang
kínki. In the light (gleam, glow, glare) of the lamp. Sa íwag sang
Pagtóo----. By the light of Faith----. (cf. sánag).

_iwál-iwál_, To move the buttocks up and down
conspicuously. Nagaiwáliwál ang bulî níya kon maglakát. When he walks
his buttocks move up and down conspicuously. Indì ka magpaiwáliwál
sang bulî mo kon maglakát ikáw. Don't move your posterior up and down
in such a fashion, when you walk. (cf. iwád, íswad).

_iwán_, (B) To do or want "what". Maiwán kamó? What do you
want?--or--What have you come here for? Nagaiwán silá dirâ? What are
they doing there? Iwanón ko lang karón iníng túbo, kay nabúong? What
shall I do with this lamp-globe, for it is broken? Ngáa man nga
nabúong? Giniwán mo haw? How did it break? What, I ask, did you do
to it? (cf. anó).

_íwang_, To wipe off, clean; make one's toilet. (cf. ulí, úli,
pangulí).

_íwat_, Scarcity, rareness, want, dearth, scantiness; to be scarce,
rare, difficult to obtain, etc. Sa karón nga panahón nagaíwat ang
pílak. At the present time money is scarce. (cf. hínà, íngol).

_íway_, To go away, leave, go off, depart from. Iway ka dirí. Go away
from here. Nagíway na ang kalisúd. The trouble has passed--or--The
difficulty is over. Ipaíway mo ang maláin nga mga bátà. Drive off
the misbehaving (bad) boys. Ginpaíway níla ang mga apán. They drove
away the locusts. O Diós ko, ipaíway mo sa ámon ang maláut nga mga
hunâhúnà. Oh my God, drive away from us evil thoughts. (cf. halín).

_iwí_, (B) The tail (proper) of birds. Makaúyon ka sang iwí sang
manók? Do you like to eat the tail of a chicken? (cf. ísol).

_iwí-íwi_, The scorpion.

_iwík_, A squeal, squeak, shrill cry; to squeal, squeak, utter a
shrill cry. Ang báboy nagaiwík kon dákpon ukón dodó-on. The pig
squeals, if caught or stabbed with a knife. Paiwiká lang ang báboy,
ápang dákpon mo gid. Let the pig squeal, at any rate catch and secure
it. (cf. iyágak, taláwik).

_iwól-iwól_, (B) To shake or move up and down (of buttocks, etc. See
iwál-iwál id.).

_íwos_, (B) To move, stir, etc. See íos, íyos, húlag, híwos, etc.

_íya_, (H) Of him; his, her, hers, it, its. (cf. siá; ákon, níya, ána).

_iyágak_, Squawk, the cry of distress of poultry or the like; to
emit such a cry, to squawk. Ang manók nagaiyágak kon dákpon. Chickens
squawk when caught. Paiyagáka lang ang sulúg, ápang kuháon mo gid sa
íya nga ginahaponán (haponán). Let the cock squawk, but at all events
take him off his perch. (cf. tiyábaw, siagít, toráwik, iyagúrò).

_iyágud_, To drag or push one's body along a surface without the use
of the legs. See ígod id.

_iyagúrò_, To sigh, moan, complain, cry in distress. (cf. iyágak).

_íyak_, To squawk, etc. See íak, iyágak, iyagúrò.

_iyás_, A grain, kernel, especially a rice-grain separated from the
ear. (cf. iás, uyás).

_íyos_, (H) To move, stir, wriggle, writhe, show signs of life by
stirring or wriggling, etc. See íwos, híwos, húlag, íos, etc.

_iyós-íyos_, Dim. and Freq. of íyos. To wriggle, writhe, stir slightly.

_iyót_, A very obscene term expressive of the act of
copulation. (cf. ítot, áyod, ayódáyod).

_íyus_, See íyos--to move, etc.




J


_j_, The soft Visayan aspirate is best represented by the letter
"H" pronounced as in English. Therefore the letter "J" can be
dispensed with in writing Visayan, even when Spanish words occur, such
as:--Jesucristo, José, alhajas, etc., which are spelled:--Hesukrísto,
Hosé, aláhas, etc.




K


_k_, This letter has the same sound as the English "c" in "cat,
come, cut, fact, etc.", but is pronounced a little softer than "ck"
in "lack, pack, struck, etc.".
Modern writers almost exclusively employ "k", where formerly "c"
(before "a", "o", "u", all consonants and hyphens, and at the end of
words) and "qu" (before "e" and "i") were used. Bearing this in mind
it is easy to find in this dictionary expressions originally written
according to the old spelling, as acó, caácò, catacá, cácac, bác-hò,
bác-it, báquid, quíquic, etc., under akó, kaákò, kataká, kákak, bákhò,
bák-it, bákid, kíkik, etc.
The prefixes pan-, hi-, ha-, etc., if composed with words beginning
with the letter "k", become pang--, hing--, hang--, etc. and the "k"
drops out, e.g. karós--pangarós; kaláyo--hingaláyo; kuyús--hanguyús,
etc.

_ka_, A particle employed to connect a cardinal or ordinal
numeral with a noun or with another numeral. "Ka" is also used
after distributives, and after the indefinite "pilá", whenever the
latter has the meaning of "how many" or "few", e.g. Duhá ka púlò ka
líbo. Twenty thousand. Tátlo ka gatús ka líbo kà táo. Three hundred
thousand men. Limá ka karabáw. Five buffaloes. Amó iní ang ikapúlò
níla ka anák. This is their tenth child. Sa ikawaló ka (nga) ádlaw sa
búlan sa Enéro. On the eighth day of January. Pilá silá ka táo? How
many are they? Mga pilá lámang ka táo ang nagtalámbong. Only a few
men attended. Nakabáton silá sing tagnapúlò ka mángmang. They received
ten pesos each.

_ka_, (H) Personal pronoun, often used for ikáw--you (singular). Sín-o
ka balá? Who are you? Diín ka makádto? Where are you going
to? Ginbayáran ka na níya sang íya útang sa ímo? Has he paid you what
he owed you?

_ka-_, Short for maka- or naka-. Indì akó kakádto dídto. I cannot go
there. (kakádto--makakádto). Kaabút (nakaabút) na siá dirí? Has he
arrived? Has he come?

_ka-_, A prefix of very wide use in the formation of abstract and
collective nouns as well as of an exclamatory superlative which nearly
corresponds in meaning to the English "How----!" e.g. álam--kaálam
(wisdom, learning); písan--kapísan (diligence, application);
píntas--kapíntas (cruelty); ángot--kaangtánan (connection);
lábut--kalabtánan (participation, implication); uyáng--kahinguyángan
(outlay, expenditure); bátà--kabatáan (childhood; children);
baláy--kabalayán (houses, collection of houses); támad--katámad sa
ímo! How lazy you are! Dásig--kadásig siníng kabáyo! How swiftly this
horse runs! gáhud, galúng--kagáhud kag kagalúng sináng mga bátà! Oh,
the noisiness and boisterousness of those children! lisúd--ay,
kalisúd! Oh, what a heavy cross! After superlative adverbs
like lakás, lám-ag, dúro, masyádo, támà, túman, etc. "ka" is
either prefixed to the adjectives or takes the place of ma-,
e.g. Dalók--greedy. Lakás kadalók. Very greedy. Layâ--dry. Masyádo
kalayâ. Very dry. Maitúm--black. Lám-ag kaitúm. Very
black. Madálum--deep. Dúro kadálum. Very deep. Matámbok--fat. Támà
katámbok. Very fat. Dakô--large. Túman kadakô. Very large, etc.

_ka-_, In modern Visayan ka- is quite frequently used instead of
pagka- in the formation of abstract nouns from "ma-adjectives",
e.g. kamatinoóhon (pagkamatinoóhon)--faith, credulity; kamatinahóron
(pagkamatinahóron)--respectfulness, and many more.

_kaabakahán_, An abaca-field, hemp-plantation. (abaká).

_kaabáng_, (B) Greed, selfishness, covetousness. (cf. abáng; kahákug).

_kaabí-abíhon_, Friendliness, affability, amiableness, good-will,
sociability. (abí-ábi; cf. kaáblaw, kaablawán).

_kaabiánan_, Friends, friendships, all one's friends collectively,
one's circle of friends. (ábian).

_kaáblang, kaablangón_, (B) Width, breadth. (cf. áblang).

_kaáblaw_, Affability, amiability, amicability, (áblaw;
cf. kaabiabíhon, kaablawán).

_kaablawán_, See kaáblaw. Also: things that make social life agreeable.

_kaablawón_, See kaáblaw.

_kaábong, kaabongón_, Exposure to wind, state of being exposed to
the wind. (ábong).

_kaábtik_, Dexterity, adroitness, quickness, agility, expertness,
swiftness. (ábtik).

_kaabtikón_, See kaábtik.

_kaabyánan_, See kaabiánan.


_kaádat_, Pungency, acridity, acidity, sharpness of taste combined
with astringency. (ádat; cf. kakádat, kaárat, kakárat).

_kaadatón_, See kaádat.

_kaadláwan_, A number of days, period of time; a fixed day like a
birth-day, feast-day, a day of commemoration, etc. (ádlaw).

_kaadláwon_, (B) Day, day-light; late in the day, lateness, far
advanced (of day). (cf. ádlaw).

_kaagáhon_, Morning, the first part of the day. (ága:
cf. kasanágon--the morning before sunrise).

_kaágaw_, Attraction, charm, captivation, fascination. (ágaw:
cf. kailáan, kaáka).

_kaágday_, (B) Slowness, etc. (cf. ágday; kahínay, kakúlì, kalágway,
kabúndul).

_kaagdayón_, See kaágday.

_kaágrot_, Creakiness, grating, harshness of sound. (ágrot).

_kaagrót_, Boasting, bragging, exaggeration, boastfulness,
swaggering. (agrót).

_kaagrotón_, See kaagrót, kaágrot.

_kaágtà_, Blackness, blackishness, quality of being black. (ágtà;
cf. kaitúm).

_kaagtaón_, See kaágtà.

_kaagwása_, Cheerfulness, good humour, liveliness. (agwása).

_kaagwása_, Extravagance, prodigality. (agwása).

_kaaháng_, Audacity, temerity, intrepidity, impertinence, daring,
boldness, rashness. (aháng; cf. kakáhas).

_kaáka_, (B) The being much in demand or resorted to. (áka; cf. kaágaw,
kabákal).

_kaakahón_, See kaáka.

_kaákig_, (H) Anger, excitement, rage, fury. (cf. ákig, akíg).

_kaakigón_, (H) See kaákig.

_kaákò_, Capability, capacity, power, might, influence, sway. (ákò;
cf. palangakóan, gahúm, kagamhánan, ikasaráng).

_kaákup_, Hospitality, hospitableness. (cf. ákup).

_kaakupón_, See kaákup.

_kaalabáab_, Soft--, mild--, warmth (as of the rising sun);
lukewarmness, tepidity, insipidness, vapidity. (alabáab).

_kaalág-ag_, Hesitation, doubt, wavering; shyness,
bashfulness. (alág-ag).

_kaálam_, (H) Wisdom, learning, cleverness, intelligence. (cf. álam,
kinaálam, kinaádman).

_kaálan_, Rancidness, rancidity, rankness. (cf. álan).

_kaalándan_, Habit, custom, manner. (cf. ánad, kinaanáran).

_kaálang_, Untimeliness, unseasonableness, the being
inopportune. (cf. alángálang).

_kaaláng-álang_, Dim. of kaálang.

_kaalangón_, See kaálang, kaaláng-álang. Also: Childishness,
foolishness, silliness. (cf. kapayaón).

_kaálay_, Stiffness of limbs from being tired or overworked; toughness,
stubbornness, heedlessness. (cf. álay, kaúlul; pagkabatinggílan,
pagkadìmanínggol).

_kaalayohón_, (H) Things to be mended or needing repairs. (cf. kaáyo,
kalaayohón).

_kaaligótgot_, Ill-feeling, resentment, grudge, hatred. (cf. aligótgot,
dumút, kabáhot).

_kaaligúnong_, Confusion, worry. (cf. aligúnung, kalíngin).

_kaalikáya_, (H) Cheerfulness, good humour, gaiety, sprightliness,
mirth. (alikáya).

_kaalingág-ngag_, A slight deafness. (cf. alingágngag).

_kaalingása_, Disturbing noise, annoyance, nuisance. (alingása).

_kaalingáut_, See kaalingása. (alingáut--alingása).


_kaalingóg-ngog_, Dizziness, confusion. (cf. alingógngog).

_kaaliwána_, Width, spaciousness, extent, expanse. (cf. aliwána).

_kaaliwánay_, Wideness, openness; freedom. (cf. aliwánay, kaaliwána).

_kaáloy_, Pretence, sham, the feigning of sickness. (áloy;
cf. kaaloyán).

_kaaloyán_, See kaáloy.

_kaalugbatián_, (_kaalugbatíhan_), Collective of alugbáti--a vegetable
plant. Ináway sa kaalugbatián. Fighting in a field covered with
alugbáti plants i.e. serious or heavy fighting.

_kaálwan_, Generosity, liberality, nobility of mind. (álwan).

_kaalwanón_, See kaálwan.

_kaámbas_, Expensiveness, costliness. (ámbas).

_kaambasón_, See kaámbas.

_kaámbong_, Self-respect, formality, tact, modesty, propriety, fitness,
gracefulness, prettiness, beauty. (ámbong).

_kaambóngan_, Beauty; art. (cf. kaámbong).

_kaambongón_, See kaámbong.

_kaámion_, Good odour, nice smell, sweet scent, aroma. (ámion:
cf. kahumút).

_kaámlig_, Carefulness, circumspection, concern. (ámlig).

_kaamoán_, Monkeys, apes. (cf. amô).

_kaámyon_. See kaámion--good odour, etc.

_kaamyonón_, See kaámyon.

_kaánad_, Custom, habit, practice. (ánad; cf. kaanáran, kinaanáran).

_kaananáy_, Softness, gentleness. (cf. kananáy, ananáy, kainanáy).

_kaanáran_, (H) See kaánad. Also: Accustomed manner of living, things
that go to form a habit. (cf. kinaanáran, kaarándan).

_kaángay_, Similarity, fitness, appositeness; an equal, one in the
same condition. (ángay).

_kaangáyan_, See kaángay. Also: Conformity, propriety, things that
are suitable or fitting.

_kaangayán_, Agreeableness, beauty, fitness. (cf. angayán).

_kaánggid_, Similarity, likeness, resemblance. (ánggid).

_kaanggíd-ánggid_, Resemblance, somewhat like or similar.

_kaánghit_, The smell of a buck or goat. (ánghit).

_kaanghitón_, See kaánghit.

_kaángso_, (B) The smell of urine. (ángso; cf. kapángsot).

_kaángsod_, The smell of the armpit. (ángsod).

_kaangsodón, kaangsorón_, See kaángsod.

_kaangsohón_, See kaángso.

_kaangtánan_, Connection, inter-dependence, concatenation,
implication. (cf. ángot; kalabtánan).

_kaánta_, The smell of scorched or burning food-stuffs.

_kaantahón_, See kaánta.

_kaánting_, Good hearing, quality of hearing well. (ánting).

_kaantingón_, See kaánting.

_kaántud_, (H) See kaánta.

_kaántung_, (B) The smell of burning rags, bones, paper, etc. (ántung).

_kaantungón_, See kaántung.

_kaányag_, Beauty, niceness, prettiness, gracefulness. (ányag).

_kaapohán_, Grandchildren; descendants. (apó).

_kaaputánan_, Place to go to or live in; asylum, refuge, salvation;
advantage, benefit. (cf. apútan, alapután, dungkáan, dalángpan,
sáp-an, etc.).

_kaarándan_, (B) Custom, habit. (cf. kaanáran, kinaanáran,
kinabatásan).


_kaárat_, (H) See kaádat.

_kaaráydan_, (B) Benefits, favours, acts of kindness, anything
profitable or advantageous. (cf. ayád, ayádan, kaaráydon, kaayóhan,
kaayohán).

_kaaráydon_, (B) Wealth, riches, property, abundance, affluence,
opulence, fortune. (cf. kaayohán, mánggad).

_kaárhang_, Sharpness, pungency, bitterness, acridity (of
taste). (cf. kahárang).

_kaásab_, Voracity, voraciousness, quality of being voracious or
omnivorous; sluttishness, slatternliness, filthiness. (ásab).

_kaasabón_, See kaásab.

_kaáslum_, Sourness, acidity. (áslum).

_kaaslumón_, See kaáslum.

_kaáthag_, Distinctness, clearness of pronunciation, lucidity of a
discourse or argument, etc. (cf. áthag, kasánag).

_kaathagón_, See kaáthag.

_kaathágan_, See kaáthag.

_kaatrasádo_, Lateness, tardiness; too late. Kaatrasádo sa ímo! How
late you are! (cf. atrasádo, kaolíhi, kahudyánan).

_kaatúbang_, One who is in front of, or facing, another; confronter,
confronting. (atúbang).

_kaáwà_, Mercy, compassion, sympathy. (áwà; cf. kalóoy).

_kaawátan_, Occupation, business, detention, engagements. (cf. awát,
kalibángan).

_kaáway_, Enemy. (áway: cf. kóntra, kasúmpung).

_kaawáyan_, Enmity, opposition: enemies. (cf. áway, kasuáyan).

_kaawayón_, Cause or origin of a fight or quarrel; enmity,
war. (cf. áway, alawayón).

_kaáwot_, (B) Hardness, toughness, firmness, quality of being difficult
to move. (cf. áwot, katíg-a).

_kaayá-ay_, Scarcity, dearth, lack, want, need. (cf. ayá-ay).

_kaayád_, (B) See kaáyo id.

_kaayád-áyad_, (B) Beauty, prettiness. See kaayóáyo id.

_kaayadón_, (B) See kaayád, kaáyo.

_kaáyo_, (H) Goodness; well-being. (áyo; cf. kaayád).

_kaayó-áyo_, (H) Beauty, attractiveness, prettiness. (ayóáyo;
cf. kaayád-áyad).

_kaayóhan, kaayohán_, (H) Benefaction, benefit, favour, good deeds,
acts of kindness. (cf. kaaráydan id.).

_kaayohán_, (H) To go on well, to prosper, make good
progress. Nagkaayohán na ang íya kahimtángan. His affairs have
prospered or improved. He has thrived--or--has made good progress in
his position in life.

_kába_, A kind of coarse thick cloth as often used by farmers for
shirts; a farmer's shirt.

_kababaén-an_, Women, females, womankind, womanhood,
women-folk. (cf. babáe; cf. kababayén-an id.).

_kababálngon_, (B) Drunkenness, intoxication, insobriety. (cf. balúng;
kahulúbgon).

_kababás-an_, Watery soil, swamp, marsh, fen, wet place. (basâ).

_kababayén-an_, Women, females. (babáye; cf. kababaén-an id.).

_kabádang_, Habit, stability, strength, firmness, solidity. (bádang).

_kabág-o_, Newness, novelty, etc. See kabag-óhan.

_kabag-óhan, kabag-ohán_, New things, novelty, modernity,
new-fangledness, latest fashions. (cf. bág-o).

_kabag-ohón_, See kabág-o, kabag-óhan.

_kabagók_, Rottenness; oldness, uselessness; dulness,
stupidity. (cf. bagók, kagabúk, kagarók, kapákok).

_kabahandián_, Treasures, precious things. (bahándì).

_kabáhaw_, Staleness, vapidity, insipidness, quality of food that
has been left standing for some time. (báhaw; cf. kakápog). (Also:
religious coldness or indifference, tepidity).


_kabáhò_, Smell, odour, scent. (cf. báhò, kabahô, kabahoán).

_kabahô_, Stench, stink, bad smell, effluvium, noxious
exhalation. (bahô).

_kabahoán_, Stench, etc. See kabahô.

_kabahô-bahoán_, Place where many bahôbahô plants grow. (cf. bahôbahô).

_kabahoón_, See kabahô.

_kabahól_, Plumpness, thickness, stoutness, quality of being large
in circumference. (bahól).

_kabaholán_, Thickness, coarseness, stoutness, largeness (in bulk or
circumference); meanness, boorishness. (cf. kabahól, bahól, kabástos,
kabastosán).

_kabáhot_, Angry or hot feeling, excitement, aversion, antipathy,
hatred. (báhot).

_kabâ-kábà_, To be excited, frightened, disturbed, uneasy; to talk or
speak excitedly, be noisy, shout, clamour, vociferate. Nagakabâkábà
ang mga táo, kay may bálò. The people are uneasy, for there is an
alarming report. Nagkinabâkábà ang mga táo sang pagkasúnug sang baláy
ni Fuláno. The people were frightened or excited, when N.N.'s house
burned down.

_kabakáhan_, Cattle, cows, kine. (báka).

_kabákal_, Quality of being much sought after, much in demand or much
resorted to, selling well. (bákal).

_kabákas_, Energetic application, zeal, earnestness, industry,
industriousness, activity, energy. (bákas).

_kabakasón_, See kabákas.

_kabakolódan_, (B) Hills, etc. See kabakolóran.

_kabakolóran_, (H) Hills, broken up country, hilly countryside,
(bakólod).

_kabaksiwáan_, Awkwardness, clumsiness, incongruity,
foolishness. (cf. baksiwâ).

_kabákud_, Strength, firmness, stability, robustness. (bákud).

_kabakúran, kabakurán_, (H) Strength, solidity, steadfastness,
firmness; fortification, fortress. (cf. kabákud).

_kabaláan_, Blessedness, bliss, happiness. (baláan; cf. kabulahánan).

_kabaláka_, Concern, care, attention, watchful interest,
zeal. (baláka).

_kabalán_, Tough, thick-skinned, unfeeling, having a dulled sense
of pain.

_kabaláslan_, Recompense, returns, compensation, gratitude,
reward. (bálus).

_kabalayán_, A collection, group or compound of houses; houses in
general. (baláy).

_kabalhínan_, Changes, transformations; amendments; clause. (bálhin).

_kabálhot_, Respect, regard, reverence, consideration. (bálhot).

_kabalíkan_, Return. Ang mga minatáy nagulúna sa áton sa dálan nga
walâ sing kabalíkan. The dead have gone before us on the road that
knows no return. (cf. bálik).

_kabaloán_, Alarm, apprehension of danger, notice of some
calamity. (bálò),

_kabalóhan_, Widowhood; widows and widowers in general. (bálo).

_kabaludán_, (B) See kabalurán.

_kabalurán_, (H) Waves, billows; stormy weather. (cf. balúd, húmbak).

_kabalyéro_, (Sp. caballero) Gentleman, cavalier; a kind of tree with
bright red flowers; fire-tree. (Sp. arbol de fuego)

_kabalyéte_, (Sp. caballete) The top or ridge of a roof; roof-tree,
ridge-beam, ridge-piece.

_kabán_, (Sp. cavan) A bushel (of rice, etc.); a box, case, trunk: to
put inside, shut up, surround; occupy all the bases in baseball. Kabaná
nínyo ang mga manugdalágan. Surround the runners. Ginkabán námon
silá. We surrounded them.

_kában_, To encroach upon, usurp, appropriate, seize, take possession
of. Indì mo pagkabánon ang ákon dútà. Don't encroach upon my
ground. Ginkában níya ang ákon dútà sa pagísol níya sang kodál
sing isá ka dupá. He seized my land by setting the fence back two
yards. (cf. sabán, sakám, sáklam, lámlam, hámham).


_káb-ang_, To ensnare, entrap, entangle. (cf. kabán).

_kabáng-aw_, See kabang-awán.

_kabang-awán_, Rottenness, insipidness, staleness; failure, fiasco,
defeat. (cf. báng-aw).

_kabangdánan_, Motive, reason, cause, inducement, object determining
choice of will or action. (bangúd).

_kabangíg-bángig_, Quarrel, fight, altercation. (cf. bangíg-bángig).

_kabangís_, Fierceness, ferocity, fury, hot temper. (bangís).

_kabangisán_, Fierceness, etc. See kabangís.

_kabanháwan, kabanhawán_, Resurrection; restoration, revival,
recovery, return. Walá na sing kabanhawán ang íya sádto nga
hándum. His long-cherished hopes were--never to return,--gone for
ever. (cf. bánhaw).

_kabantâ-bantáan_, Guess, opinion, calculation. Kabantâbantáan
sang kahinguyángan. Estimate or calculation of
expenses. Budget. (cf. bántà).

_kabántug_, Renown, etc. See kabantúgan.

_kabantúgan_, Renown, fame, notoriety, celebrity, publicity,
reputation. (cf. bántug).

_kabantugón_, See kabántug, kabantúgan.

_kabanwaánan_, Townships; towns in general. (bánwa).

_kabanwahánan_, See kabanwaánan id.

_kabanwahánon_, Citizen of a town; pl. townsfolk, townspeople.

_kabariríhan_, Place containing plenty of "baríri".

_kabarís_, Violence, vehemence, fierceness, wild or hot temper. (barís;
cf. kabangís).

_kabasâ_, Wetness, humidity, dampness, state of being wet or
soaked. (cf. basâ).

_kabásì_, A small fish with a sharp-pointed head. (cf. kinabasî).

_kabáskug_, Strength; stiffness, rigidity. (cf. báskug; kabákud,
katískug).

_kabaskugón_, See kabáskug.

_kabástos_, Rudeness, coarseness, meanness, boorishness,
etc. (cf. bástos).

_kabastosán_, See kabástos.

_kabasulánan_, Blame, censure, reproach, correction. (básol).

_kabatáan_, Children; childhood. (bátà).

_kabataón_, Youth, youthfulness, boyishness, juvenility. (cf. bátà).

_kabatasánan_, Customs, habits, character, manners, usage,
observance. (batás; cf. batásan).

_kabatî_, To hear. See batî.

_kabatíd_, Adroitness, skill, cleverness, expertness, quality of
being well versed in. (batíd).

_kabatinggílan_, Stubbornness, disobedience, disregard of orders or
admonitions. (batinggílan).

_kabatoán_, Stones, rocks. (bató).

_kabatohán_, See kabatoán.

_kabául_, Roughness, coarseness, state of a thing not being well made
or done. (cf. bául; kabástos).

_kabaúlan_, See kabául.

_kabaulán_, Boxes, baggage, luggage. (cf. baúl).

_kabáy_, The Visayan name for the month of June. (cf. húnyo).

_kabáy_, An exclamation denoting a wish or longing. Would to God! Oh,
that it were so! Kabáy pa, nga kaloóyan kitá sang Mahál nga Diós! May
God have mercy on us! Básì pa lang nga maumpawán ang masakít; kabáy
pa! Perhaps the sick person may yet recover; may it be so! Kabáy
pa! Amen! Pangabáy--to wish, desire. N.B. "kabáy" at times also
has the meaning of "perhaps, perchance, may be" e.g. Indì kabáy siá
magabút? Perhaps he will not come?

_kabáyo_, (Sp. caballo) Horse; part of a plough called the beam,
the wooden beam to which the "kalíng" (plough-handle) is attached.


_kabayó_, To mount a horse, ride on horseback.

_kabélyo_, (Sp. cabello) Hair. Kabélyo del Anhel. (Sp. cabello del
angel). A kind of beautiful flowering plant.

_kabésa_, (Sp. cabeza) Head; chief, lieutenant; intellect,
understanding. (cf. úlo, pangólo).

_kabeséra_, (Sp. cabecera) Capital, metropolis (town); provincial or
national capital, (cf. úlo-bánwa).

_kabesílya_, (Sp. cabecilla) A petty chieftain or leader, ringleader;
the principal person or recognized leader in a small village.

_kábi_, (Sp. caber) To win and take the stake, be entitled to get,
grasp. Kabíha lang ang tanán. Just take all. Ginkábi níya ang isá
ka tungâ sang patád. He won and took half the stake. Kabíhi siá sing
duhá ka dakô sang patád. Two centavos from the stake go to him. Ikábi
akó ánay sing tátlo ka sentimós. Hand over to me three centavos from
the stake. (cf. kúhà, buúl, káka, bútong).

_kabí_, Pigeon-toed, one whose toes are turned inward; to get one's
toes twisted or turned inward. Napásmo siá kag nagkabí. He caught a
cold and became pigeon-toed.

_kábig_, To consider, hold or take for, look upon as----. Kabígon mo
lang nga duhá iníng ápat ka páhò, kay magamáy. Just count these four
mangoes as if they were only two, for they are so small. Sa madámò nga
mga salákyan ginakábig ang duhá ka bátà nga isá lang ka pasahéro. On
many vehicles two children are reckoned as only one passenger. Ang
napúlò ka sógò sang Diós ginakábig (nakábig) nga duhá nga amó iní:
"Higugmaón mo ang Diós labí sa ngatanán kag ang ímo isigkatáo súbung
sa ímo nga kaugalíngon". The ten commandments of God are contained
in (or are equal to) these two: "Love God above all things, and thy
neighbour as thyself". (cf. bílang).

_kabihágan_, Captivity, captives. (cf. bíhag).

_kabíi_, (B) Last night. (cf. kagáb-i id.).

_kabikáhan_, Tribe, clan, family relations, race, progenitors and
progeny.

_kabilár_, (Sp. cavilar) To cavil, find fault with; to cheat, intrigue,
scheme. Kabilahí lang siá sing butíg. Plot against him by telling
lies. Indí mo akó pagkabilahón. Don't cheat me. Ikabilár mo sa íya
ang amó nga mga hámbal. Find fault with him by using those words.

_kabiláw_, A kind of large bat, fruit bat, flying fox. (cf. kabúg).

_kabiliánan_, Price, worth, cost. (bilí; kabilihánan id.).

_kabilihánan_, See kabiliánan.

_kabilínggan_, Impediment, hindrance, inconvenience, obstacle.

_kabíl-kabíl_, To dangle, etc. See kabítkábit id.

_kabilogán_, The whole, all, total, entirety, ensemble, including
everything. (bilóg).

_kabilóso_, (Sp. caviloso) Cavilling, carping, captious; plotting,
intriguing, scheming, cheating.

_kabinitán_, (B) Edge, rim, side, border, environs,
surroundings. (binít).

_kábis_, Payment in full, settlement; to pay in full, settle, square
accounts. Kabísa ang útang mo. Settle your debt in full. (cf. túmbas,
ímpas).

_kabisáda_, (Sp. cabezada) A horse's head-gear, head-stall of a bridle,
halter, collar.

_Kabisayaán_, The Visayan Islands, the Visayans, the Visayan
people. (Bisayâ).

_Kabisáy-an_, See Kabisayaán id.

_kábit_, To hang, dangle, be suspended. Ang bátà nagakábit sa sangá
sang káhoy--or--ang sangá sang káhoy ginakabítan sang bátà. The boy
is hanging from the branch of the tree.

_kabít-kábit_, Dim. of kábit. To hang loosely, dangle, shake or
swing in suspension. Ang mga kalubáy nagakabítkábit sa palápála. The
calubay-fruit dangles from the trellice-work.

_kábkab_, To eat away piece by piece, to undermine, wash away,
take off, especially said of water. Ginkábkab sang subâ ang ámon
dútà. The river washed away our land. May katalágman nga kabkabón
sang subâ iníng umá kon magabút ang bahâ. There is danger of this
field being undermined and carried off by the river, when the flood
comes. (cf. áb-ab).

_káble_, (Sp. cable) Cable, large rope.

_káblit_, To touch lightly, nudge, poke. Kablitá siá. Nudge
him. Kablití siá sa likód. Nudge him in the back. Indì ka magkáblit
(magkolokáblit) sa íya. Don't touch or nudge him. (cf. kúhit, tándog).

_kablít-káblit_, Dim. and Freq. of káblit.

_kábo_, (Sp. cabo) Chief, head, boss, overseer; chief of police.

_kabóhot_, (B) Great (close) heat, sultriness, stuffiness. (bóhot).

_kabó-kábo_, Dim. of kábo. A petty chief.

_kabón_, (B) Tribe, troop, drove, bunch, crowd, band. (cf. búnghay).

_kaboráta_, A kind of cestus, iron ring or slung
shot. (cf. pitsokwérno).

_káb-ot_, (H) To reach, make a long arm, stretch one's arm to get
hold of something. Kab-otá ang kálò sa salabítan. Take down the hat
from the peg. Walâ siá makakáb-ot sang estámpa, kay matáas. He could
not reach and take down the picture, for it was too high. Ikáb-ot
akó ánay sang ákon báyò sa lánsang sang díngding. Please reach me
down my jacket from the nail in the partition. (cf. dáb-ot, dáwhat).

_kábra_, (Sp. cabra) Goat; engine for throwing stones, catapult,
battering ram; ghost; to batter down, force an entrance. Kabrahá ang
ganháan. Break down the door. Smash the door in. (cf. bíngkal).

_kabrá-kábra_, (Sp. cabra) A kind of grass much liked by goats,
hence the name.

_kabritílya_, (Sp. cabritilla) Dressed lambskin, kid leather.

_kabríto_, (Sp. cabrito) Kid, kidling, young buck. (cf. kánding).

_kabtángan_, Position, station, condition, circumstances. (butáng;
cf. kahimtángan).

_kabô_, (H) A primitive kind of bowl made from the shell of the
coconut; money box. (cf. hungút; ipóg, alkansíya).

_kabúang_, Madness, folly, craziness, lunacy, idiocy, insanity,
dementia. (cf. búang).

_kabuangán_, Foolish acts, nonsensical or even wicked behaviour, folly.

_kabuangón_, See kabúang.

_kabubúsgan_, Fulness, repletion, satiety, satisfaction from having
eaten and (or) drunk enough. (cf. busúg, kabulúsgon).

_kabubúsgon_, Fulness of stomach, satiety. (cf. busúg, kabulúsgon).

_kabubút-on_, Will, wish, intention, mind, resolve, plan,
scheme. (buút).

_kabúd_, To cling to, encircle, twine round, twist around, depend
upon. Ang bátà nagakabúd sa íya nga ilóy. The child clings to
its mother. Ang mán-og nagakabúd sa káhoy. The snake is coiled
(is coiling itself) around the tree. Pakábdi (pakaburí) ang atóp
sing kalabása. Let some squash-plants cover the roof. Ang kodál
nakaburán sing madámò nga balágon. The fence is entwined with many
creepers. Ang atubángan sang íla baláy ginpakábdan (ginpakaburán)
níla sing kadénadeamór. The front of their house (Their porch) they
had covered with cadena de amor-vines. (cf. kápkap, pangalápkap,
sabúd, kámbad, kámbid, kámbod, sálbid).

_kabúdhaw_, Lacklustre, want of freshness or brightness, condition of
being faded. Kabúdhaw siníng báyò! How faded this jacket is! (búdhaw).

_kabúdhì_, Treason, treachery, betrayal. (búdhì).

_kabúdlay_, Fatigue, hard work, labour, toil, tiredness. (búdlay).

_kabudláyan_, See kabúdlay. Also: Things that exact great labour.

_kabudlayón_, See kabúdlay.

_kabúg_, (H) A large bat. (cf. kabiláw).

_kabugánà_, Plenty, abundance, copiousness, ampleness, amplitude,
plenitude, plenteousness, more than enough. (bugánà).

_kabuganáan_, Plenty; opulence. (cf. kabugánà).

_kabúg-at_, Weight, heaviness, ponderousness. (búg-at).


_kabug-atón_, See kabúg-at.

_kabúgaw_, Pomelo, shaddock, pompelmoose, a large fruit, akin to the
orange.

_kabúgnaw_, Freshness, coldness, coolness, frigidity. (cf. búgnaw,
katúgnaw).

_kabúg-os_, Wholeness, completeness, entirety. (búg-os).

_kabug-osán_, See kabúg-os. Also: The whole, all, everything included.

_kabugtoán_, (B) Brothers and sisters, brethren. (cf. búgtò; kautúran).

_kabugtóan_, Break, snap, rupture, fracture, sunderance,
separation. (cf. búgtò).

_kabugwasón_, The morning star, Venus.

_kabuhahâ_, Wastefulness, prodigality, dissipation. (buhahâ).

_kabúhay_, (B) A long time, long duration. (búhay; cf. kadúgay).

_kabuháyan_, (B) See kabúhay. Also: Things that last long or take a
long time. (cf. kadugáyan).

_kabuhayón_, (B) See kabúhay. (cf. kadugayón).

_kabúhì_, Life, animation, period from birth to death, vitality;
biography; a person's condition or affairs in the world. (búhì, buhî).

_kabuhían, kabuhián_, Livelihood, means of life, life, living,
necessaries of life. (cf. kabúhì, pangabuhián).

_kabuísit_, Ill-luck, evil fate, misfortune. (buísit).

_kabuisitán_, See kabuísit. Also: Things that make life hard and
miserable.

_kabuisitón_, See kabuísit.

_kabukíran_, (H) Mountains, mountain-range. (búkid).

_kabuláhan_, Bliss, blessedness, happiness. (buláhan).

_kabulahánan_, See kabuláhan. Also: Things that give happiness.

_kabulákan_, Flowers, blossoms, blooms; flora. (búlak).

_kabuláy_, A kind of soft, viscous wax; wax of the líbug-wasp.

_kabúlig_, Helpmate, help, helper, assistant, assistance,
partner. (búlig).

_kabúlong_, Wonder, astonishment, amazement, surprise,
admiration. (búlung).

_kabulóngan_, See kabúlong. Also: Wonderful things, wonders, marvels,
prodigies, objects to be admired.

_kabulúk_, Dulness, slowness, backwardness, stupidity. (cf. bulúk).

_kabulúk-an_, Rent, fissure, crack, rift, split, breaking. Pínggan
nga walâ sing kabulúk-an. An unbreakable plate. (cf. bukâ).

_kabulukán_, See kabulúk. Also: Dull, slow, stupid or backward (pupils,
students, etc.).

_kabulúsgan_, (H) See kabubúsgan.

_kabulúsgon_, (H) See kabubúsgon.

_kabulúyhan_, (H) Custom, habit, practice. (cf. buyó; batásan,
kinaanáran, kaburúywan).

_kabulúyhon_, See kabulúyhan. (cf. kaburúywan).

_kabunáyag_, Simplicity, guilelessness, honesty, candour,
openheartedness. (bunáyag).

_kabúndul_, Slowness, etc. (cf. búndul).

_kabungáhan_, Fruits. (cf. búnga).

_kabungúl_, Deafness; stubbornness, heedlessness. (bungúl).

_kabungyudán_, Hills, plateau, high ground; islands. (cf. búngyud).

_kabungyurán_, See kabungyudán.

_kabúot_, Prudence, intelligence, good behaviour, docility. (buút).

_kaburíghul_, Noise, commotion, row. (cf. buríghul, gamó).

_kabúr-it_, Boasting, bragging, etc. See hádak, wákal, búrà, hámbug,
etc.


_kaburúdngan_, (B) Wonder, marvel, astonishment, amazement, surprise,
admiration. (cf. kabulóngan).

_kaburúywan_, (B) Custom, inveterate habit, practice. (cf. buyó;
kabulúyhan).

_kábus_, To pass, go by, be over. Mapaúlì na kitá kay nakábus na ang
prosesyón. Let us go home for the procession is over.

_kabús_, Too short, not reaching far enough, below requirements. Ang
kabús kag labáw nga batásan áton tadlungón. We should make
normal, habits that fall below the standard as well as those that
exceed. (cf. kulábus, kúlang, higúshigús).

_kabusísì_, Curiousness, curiosity, inquisitiveness. (busísì).

_kabusúg_, Fulness, repletion, satiety, condition of one who has
eaten or drunk enough. (busúg). Also: cramps in the stomach, acute
stomach-ache; indigestion, dyspepsia.

_kabúsug_, A smarting pain. Kabúsug sang kinádtan sang iwííwi! Oh,
the pain of the scorpion's sting!

_kabutigán_, Lies, cheating, false doctrines, invented stories,
falsehoods. (butíg).

_kabutigón_, Falsity, falseness, mendacity, quality of being a
liar. (butíg).

_kabúyaw_, A serious skin disease manifesting itself by white spots
surrounded by a reddish inflammation that soon gives rise to pustules
and scabs. It spreads rapidly and is difficult to cure. "Kabúyaw"
is much worse than "katúl"; scurvy.

_kabuyáwon_, Pertaining to or afflicted with "kabúyaw".

_kabúylog_, Companion; company. (búylog).

_kabuyó_, Habit, long practice, experience, custom. (buyó).

_kabúyok_, Inclination, bent, liking, propensity, bias, trend,
partiality for. (búyok).

_káda_, (Sp. cada) Each. Káda isá. Each one. (cf. tágsa, tagsátágsa).

_kadáan_, See kadaanón.

_kadaanón_, Oldness, age, antiquity, state of things that are old and
worn out, but as a rule not applied to persons. (cf. katigulangón--old
age).

_kadadálman_, Depth, abyss. See kaidadálman.

_kadagátan_, Ocean, seas. (dágat).

_kadagáyà_, Abundance, plenty, copiousness, etc. (dagáyà;
cf. kabugánà).

_kadágil_, (B) Companion, comrade, associate, intimate friend, chum,
confidant. (dágil; cf. kahámbal).

_kadágmit_, Quickness, swiftness, haste, (especially applied to
speaking); emphasis, pronunciation, accentuation. (dágmit).

_kadahák_, Daring, boldness, recklessness, audacity, impertinence,
intrepidity, hardihood, courage. Kadahák siní nga bátà! How impertinent
(daring) this boy is! (cf. kadahás, kakáhas).

_kadahál_, Overbearing, boasting, bragging, insolence,
haughtiness. (dahál; cf. bugál).

_kadák-an_, (H) Size, etc. See kadakuán. Also: the largest of a kind,
as the largest room (visitors' room, reception room), etc.

_kadákmol_, Thickness of sheets, boards, leaves, etc. (dákmol;
cf. kadámol).

_kadák-on_, (H) Size, etc. See kadakuón.

_kadakô_, (H) Greatness, largeness, bigness, size. (dakô).

_kadakuán_, (H) Greatness; great folks, exalted personages, the great,
rich and influential people; the largest, biggest among a number of
fruits, or the like. (cf. kadakô).

_kadakuón_, (H) See kadakô.

_kadalág_, (H) Yellowness, quality of being dark yellow. (dalág).

_kadalagáhan_, (H) Girls, young ladies, maidens, maids,
damsels. (cf. dalága).

_kadalág-an_, (H) Victory, triumph, gain, conquest; chance of winning
in a fight. Ang mga manggaránon nga madámò sing pílak amó ang may
dakô nga kadalág-an sa pagpiniliáy. The rich with plenty of money
have the best chance of winning in the elections. (daúg).

_kadalagánhan_, See kadalagáhan.

_kadalágkò_, (H) Greatness, largeness, bigness, size, quality of
being large in size, dignity, position, etc. (dalágkò).

_kadalagkuán_, (H) Greatness; great folks, prominent people, the
great and wealthy. (dalágkò; cf. kadakuán).

_kadalánan_, Roads, streets, ways; order, method. Nagláin ang
íya solóksolók, kay waláy kadalánan ang íya pagkáon. He has got
stomach-ache, because he has no regularity in taking meals--or--because
he eats at random, anything, at any time. (dálan).

_kadalás_, Impulsiveness, haste, thoughtlessness, impetuosity,
recklessness. (dalás).

_kadalhánan_, (H) What one takes along, provisions, clothes, equipment,
etc. (cf. dalá).

_kadalî_, Quickness, haste, hurry, promptness, speed, swiftness,
dispatch without delay. (cf. dalî).

_kadalipían_, Rocks, cliffs, reefs. (cf. dalípì).

_kadalísay_, Strength, force, power, vigour. (dalísay).

_kadál-kadál_, Clatter, rattle, clattering, rattling; to clatter,
rattle as a cart over stones, etc. Ang káro nagakadálkadál sa dálan
nga batohón. The cart is clattering over the stony road. Indì mo
pagkadálkadalón ang káro. Don't let (or make) the cart rattle so
much. (cf. kadólkadól).

_kadalók_, Greediness, voracity, gluttony. (dalók).

_kadálum_, Depth, deepness, profoundness, profundity. (dálum).

_kadamák_, Slovenliness, filthiness, dirtiness, nastiness. (cf. damák).

_kadám-an_, (H) Multitude, many; majority. (dámò).

_kadamíg_, Stiffness, coldness. (damíg).

_kadamílmil_, Thickness (of dirt or the like). (damílmil).

_kadamílot_, See kadamílmil. (damílot--damílmil).

_kadámpig_, Partner, associate, party-man, helper, assistant. (dámpig).

_kadámò_, (H) Great number, multitude, many; much. (dámò).

_kadamuán_, (H) See kadám-an id.

_kadámul_, Thickness. (dámul; cf. kadákmol).

_kadamulón_, See kadámul.

_kadamuón_, (H) See kadámò.

_kádang_, To walk on stilts; stilt-walking. Nagakádang silá. Nagalakát
silá sa kádang. They are walking on stilts. Ang mga bátà malúyag
magkádang. Boys like to walk on stilts.

_kadáng-kádang_, A small sled used by farmers on rough
roads. (cf. karósa).

_kadapâ_, Snub-nosedness, quality of one who is flat-nosed or
snub-nosed.

_kadapátan_, Outfit, equipment, utensils, furniture, gear, tools;
use, usefulness, utility, adaptability. (cf. galamitón, kasangkápan).

_kadápig_, See kadámpig. (cf. dápig--dámpig).

_kadaragkulán_, (B) See kadalagkuán.

_kadarámhak_, Impoliteness, rudeness, incivility, discourtesy;
naughtiness, meanness. (cf. darámhak).

_kadásà_, Quality of being much in demand. (cf. dásà; kaáka, kabákal).

_kadásig_, Speed, rapidity, swiftness, velocity, quickness,
celerity. (cf. dásig).

_kadasók_, Quality of being crammed or stuffed close
together. (cf. dasók).

_kádat_, Pungency, acidity, acridity; to be or become pungent or
acrid. Nakadátan akó sang kabúgaw, naranhíta, etc. The pomelo, native
orange, etc., set my teeth on edge. (cf. ádat, árat).

_kadátà_, Frequency, oftentimes, ofttimes, great number of
instances. (cf. dátà).

_kadatóan_, Chieftains, headmen, especially among the
Moros. (cf. dátò).


_kadáut_, Injury, harm, hurt, ill, wrong. (dáut; cf. kaláut).

_kadaútan_, Wrongdoing, injuries, evils. (cf. kalaútan, kalalát-an).

_kadáyà_, Cheating, deception, dishonesty, fraud, trick. (cf. dáyà).

_kadayaán_, Dishonest practice, fraudulent actions, mean trickery,
deception. (cf. dáyà).

_kadayáw_, Vain glory, vaunting, ostentation, vanity, showing
off. (cf. dayáw).

_kadayáwan_, Glory, praise, fame, honour; vanities, exterior pomp
and ostentation, pomposity, display. (cf. dáyaw, dayáw).

_kadáygan_, The nap, the right side or outside of cloth; the part or
side of an object exposed or open to view; surface. (cf. dayág).

_kadayón_, For makadayón, nakadayón. See dayón.

_kadayonán_, To continue, endure, last. Ang gúgma nga nagakadayonán
amó ang gúgma nga hímpit kag túnay. Love that endures is love perfect
and pure. Also noun: Endurance, permanence, stability. (cf. dáyon).

_kadéna_, (Sp. cadena) Chain. (cf. talikalâ).

_kadéna de amór_, (Sp. cadena de amor) A climbing plant with a
beautiful flower.

_kadiá_, (B) The Genitive of diá--this, that. (cf. siní, sinâ).

_kadimát_, Inclination, liking, attraction, partiality. (cf. dimát).

_kadiós_, A kind of peas much cultivated for their nourishing
qualities. The kadiós-peas are called "matámáta sang kágang", when
they are just young and very tender, "kalánsan or nagakalánsan na",
when they are full and ripe, "láyo", when they are very hard and dry
and difficult to boil.

_kadiótay_, (H) Smallness, littleness. (cf. diótay).

_kadiotayón_, (H) See kadiótay.

_kadísnon_, A kind of banana.

_kádkad_, To erode, undermine, take off piece after piece, eat away
(of water); to dredge, excavate. Ginkádkad (kinádkad) sang subâ ang
pángpang. The river undermined and carried off its bank. Kinadkarán
ang bató sang túbig. The stone was undermined by the water. (cf. áb-ab,
kábkab).

_kádlas_, To tear slightly open, scratch. Nakadlasán akó sang
dógi, símsim, etc. I was scratched by the thorns, bamboo-branches,
etc. (cf. balíkas, páklis, báklis, kádlis).

_kádlaw_, Laughter, giggle, titter, snigger, chuckle; to laugh. Indì ka
magkádlaw. Don't laugh. Ginkadlawán níya akó. He laughed at me. Dakô
ang íya nga kádlaw. He roared with laughter. He guffawed. (cf. yúhum,
lámhò, talángkaw, halákhak, arík-ik, hîhî).

_kádlis_, See kádlas, báklis, etc.

_kádlit_, To cut or incise with a sharp instrument, circumcise,
scratch. Nakadlitán akó sang binángon, tigíb, lánsang, dógi, etc. I was
scratched by the bolo, the chisel, the nail, thorns, etc. (cf. kádlas,
páklis, etc.).

_kádlum_, A kind of odoriferous plant.

_kadô_, (B) Bad, ugly, etc. See kadô id.

_kadógian, kadogíhan, kadógyan_, (B) See kadologíhan--thorns, etc.

_kadól_, To knuckle, strike with the knuckles, especially on the
head. Kadolá siá. Knuckle him. Indì ka magkadól sa íya. Don't strike
him with your knuckles. (cf. ómol, súmbag, patók).

_kadól-kadól_, To clatter, rattle. (cf. kadálkadál).

_kadologíhan_, Thorns, briars; place where thorns or briars
grow. (cf. dógi, kadógian).

_kádtan, kádton_, Passive forms of kagát.

_kadtánay_, To bite each other, from kagát.

_kádto_, (H) To go there, go somewhere not quite near. Diín ka
makádto? Where are you going? Diín ka magkádto? Where did you go
to?--or--Where have you been? May kadtoán balá ikáw? Perhaps you
have to go somewhere? Kadtoí siá. Go to him. N.B. The particle "pa"
is often prefixed to "kádto" without additional meaning. Ang pagpakádto
kag pagpakarí. The journey to and fro--or--there and back.

_kadtoán_, (H) Place to go to or to arrive at. (cf. kádto).

_kadô_, (B) Bad, wicked, evil, no good, ugly, nasty, foul, not nice;
to be or become bad, ugly, etc. Kaayóáyo siníng bátà sang úna, ápang
karón, kay nagdakô (naghánggud), nagkadô (nagláw-ay)! How beautiful
this child was formerly! But now, it has grown up plain! Indì ka
magbúhat sin_à, kay kadô (maláw-ay, maláin). Don't do that, for
it is wicked or bad. Indì ka magsúgpon sa mga sugilánon nga kadô
(maláw-ay). Don't take part in foul talk. Waláy sapayán nga ginadáyaw
siá sang ibán, akó sing ákon ginakaduán (ginalaínan, ginalaw-ayán) sa
íya. Notwithstanding that others praise him, I for my part consider him
a bad (ugly) man. Indì mo pagkaduón (paglaw-ayón) ang pagsulát. Don't
write badly, i.e. illegibly, indistinctly, obscenely. (cf. láin,
láw-ay, hígkò, maláin, maláw-ay, mahígkò, kadô).

_kadudláan_, Wariness, watchfulness, carefulness, guardedness, caution,
alertness, suspicion. Kon may kadudláan na ang mga pumulúyò, salâ inâ
sang mga punóan nga nagbúhat sing mga kalaínan sa bánwa. If the people
are now cautious (or suspicious) the fault lies with those officials
who did harm to the town (the state or commonwealth). (cf. dúdlà).

_kadudúlman_, Darkness, obscurity, gloom; physical, intellectual or
moral blindness; night. (cf. dulúm, kadulmánan).

_kadudúlmon_, Darkness, quality of being dark or obscure. (cf. dulúm,
kadudúlman).

_kadudúnglon_, Extreme poverty, misery, wretchedness. (dungúl).

_kadúgay_, (H) Duration, extended period of time. (dúgay; cf. kabúhay
id.).

_kadugáyan_, (H) See kabuháyan.

_kadugayón_, (H) See kabuhayón.

_kadúgò_, Blood relationship, consanguinity, condition of belonging
to the same stock. Kadúgò silá. They are of the same stock (or
family). Ang áton mga kadúgò. Those of our own kin. Our own kith and
kin. (dugô; cf. himatâ; kahimataán, kakilíran, kasimánwa).

_kaduhá-duháan_, Doubt, indecision, hesitation, wavering, misgiving,
suspense. Sa walâ sing (sa waláy) kaduháduháan ----. Without doubt
----. Doubtless ----. (cf. duhádúha).

_kaduhô_, Unsteadiness, want of steadfastness, state of being about
to fall down, weakness, tumble-down state. (cf. duhô).

_kadulaán_, (H) Loss, disappearance, ruin, destruction, perdition,
waste. (cf. dúlà).

_kadúlman_, Darkness. See kadudúlman.

_kadulmánan_, Darkness, etc. (cf. kadudúlman, kadulumánan).

_kadulúm_, Darkness, obscurity, dimness, gloom. (cf. dulúm).

_kadulumánan_, See kadudúlman id.

_kadulúnan_, Limit, boundary, bounds, confine,
restriction. (cf. dúlun).

_kadulús_, Force, violence, roughness, impetuosity, velocity (of
wind). (cf. dulús).

_kadúmut_, Hatred, grudge, spite, ill-will. (cf. dumút).

_kadúngan_, Contemporaneousness, state of being together or of
happening at the same time, or of being a contemporary. Also: Tutelary
spirit, genius, believed in by the superstitious. (cf. dúngan, dungán).

_kadunggánan_, Honour, esteem, dignity, high rank or
position. (dungúg).

_kadúnut_, Rottenness, decay, corruption, decomposition, putrefaction,
putrescence, putridity. (dúnut).

_kadunután_, See kadúnut. Also: Things that are rotten, corrupt,
decayed, decomposed, putrid, putrified. (cf. dúnut, dunút).

_kadunutón_, See kadúnut.

_kadupág_, (B) Distraction, preoccupation, engagement. (cf. dúpag,
dupág; awát).


_kadúpdup_, A kind of small mushroom growing mostly on rotten wood,
and used for food.

_kadutáan_, (H) Countries, fields, grounds. (dútà).

_kadúyug_, Inclination, bent, leaning towards, propensity for. (dúyug;
cf. kabúyok, kinaanáran).

_kaduyugán_, See kadúyug. Also: Habits; likings, leanings, instinct.

_kádwas_, To grasp or snatch greedily, with out-stretched arm and
clawing hand, seize precipitately, catch unceremoniously. Indì ka
magkádwas sang súd-an. Indì mo pagkadwasón ang súd-an. Don't snatch
at the side-dishes so greedily. (cf. búklas, ágaw).

_kag_, The conjunctive particle: And. Si nánay kag si tátay. Father
and mother. Ang kánding kag ang idô. The goat and the dog. Nagdalágan
siá kag dinakúp níya ang makáwat. He ran and caught the thief.

_kagáb-i_, (H) Last night, last evening. (cf. gáb-i).

_kagab-íhon_, (H) Deep night, night-time.

_kagabíi_, (B) Last night, last evening. (cf. kagáb-i, kagab-íhon).

_kagabiíhon_, (B) See kagab-íhon.

_kagabúk_, Rottenness, decay. (cf. gabúk; kadúnut).

_kagabukán_, See kagabúk. Also: Rotten state of affairs, corruption,
graft, etc.

_kagabukón_, See kagabúk.

_kágad_, To agree, be aligned, be well matched or equal, especially
applied to threads from two different hanks being wound on the same
bobbin. If one of the threads is loose and the other tight or taut,
it is said: Walâ pagkágad (pagkagadáy, pagkagaráy) ang baladbarón. The
threads to be wound (on the bobbin) are not--in alignment,--well
matched.

_kagagmayán_, (H) The little (as opposed to the great), the lower
classes of people, the poor or uninfluential members of a community;
the least or smallest (of a kind). (cf. gágmay; kadalagkuán--the great,
rich or prominent people).

_kagáhud_, Noise, boisterousness, racket, row. (gáhud).

_kagalán_, Anus. (Perhaps from the Sp. cagar; cf. áno, kalipunát,
ipotán).

_kagalán_, (Sp. galan) Vaunting, ostentation, display;
conspicuousness of bright colours, state of being dressed in bright
colours. (cf. kakánang).

_kagalátud_, (H) A forceful expression used in anger or
passion. Kagalátud (iníng) siníng táo! Curse the man! Damn the
man! (gátud).

_kagalúng_, (B) Disturbance, noise, disorder,
boisterousness. (cf. galúng; kagáhud).

_kagamhánan_, Might, power, strength, authority; powers, ruling
persons or nations. (cf. gahúm).

_kagamhónan_, Weeds, shrubs, brushwood. (cf. gámhon).

_kagamó_, Trouble, disturbance, excitement, disorder,
quarrel. (cf. gamó).

_kaganás_, Insipidity, wateriness, tastelessness (of fruits, tubers,
etc.; cf. ganás).

_kagáng_, To be short of--, to want--, to lack--, rain, to dry up
or wither. Maláin ang patubás sa karón nga túig, kay nagkagáng ang
mga talámnan. The harvest was bad this year, for the fields lacked
rain. (cf. láyà, malá, layóng, kusúg).

_kágang_, A fresh-water crab, river-crab.

_kagánsal_, Boisterousness, noise, uproar. (cf. gánsal; kagáhud,
kagalúng).

_kaganyátan, kaganyatán_, Attraction, allurement, enticement,
temptation. (cf. gányat).

_kagarányon_, Wildness, state of being untamed or
untrained. (cf. garányon).

_kagarás_, Roughness, asperity; rudeness (of speech). (cf. garás).

_kagarís_, Fierceness, ferocity, violence, vehemence; naughtiness,
boisterousness (of children). (cf. garís; kabarís).

_kagaró-garó_, Hustling, hurry, speed, quickness, swiftness (of speech,
etc.). (cf. garógaró, kakarókaró, kadásig).


_kagarók_, Commotion, trouble, disturbance, disorder, excitement;
rottenness, foulness, (garók; (cf. kagamó).

_kagarokán_, See kagarók. Also: Things that give or cause trouble, etc.

_kagarót_, Closeness, juxtaposition, state of being in near
proximity or only a little apart, volubility, prolixity (of speech),
(garót). Also: noise, row, tumult, disturbance. (cf. kagamó, kagarók).

_kág-as_, To waste, wear out, grow lean or weak, lose strength or
vigour. Nagakág-as siá sa kalisúd. She is wasting away under a load
of troubles. (cf. hágas).

_kagáskas_, Dry, brittle, friable, fragile; to be or become dry,
etc. Iníng mga dáhon sang tabákò nagkagáskas. These tobacco-leaves
have become dry or brittle. Ang tabákò mo kagáskas. Your tobacco is
dry. (cf. matískug, matapúk, kagíng, kigás).

_kagáspang_, Roughness, coarseness, hardness (of skin,
etc.). (cf. gáspang).

_kagastóhan_, Expenditure, outlay, cost. (cf. gásto).

_kagastohánan_, Things requiring expenditure;
expenditure. (cf. kagastóhan).

_kagát_, The shears of a lobster, shrimp or the like; to bite, snap,
nip, grip, seize with the teeth or with the equivalent of teeth;
to catch hold (of inanimate things). Ang mga idô nagakadtánay (for
nagakagatánay). The dogs are biting each other. Ang lánsang nagakagát
na. The nail has now a firm grip or hold. Ginkagát (kinagát) ang bátà
sang báboy. The child was bitten by the pig. Ang ginkádtan (kinádtan)
sang idô naghubág. The place bitten by the dog swelled up.

_kágaw_, Microbe, germ, bacillus, bacterium.

_kagawián_, Habits, custom, manner of acting or behaving, behaviour,
moral character. (cf. gáwì, ginawî, batásan, kabatasánan, kabuyó,
kinaanáran, kostúmbre).

_kagáwon_, Full of germs or microbes. (cf. kágaw).

_kágay_, A kind of vine. "Balágon pa ang kágay"--"The kágay is still
a vine" i.e. it will never develop into a tree: hence this saying is
used to express impossibility.

_kagáykay_, A kind of small clam.

_kagayón_, Beauty, handsomeness, fairness, loveliness, good looks,
attractiveness, prettiness. (gayón; cf. kaayó-áyo, kaányag, katahúm,
kaámbong).

_kagayonán_, See kagayón. Also: Things that are beautiful or
attractive.

_kághà_, Grief, sorrow, mourning, sadness, desolation, anguish,
pain; to grieve, etc. Nagakághà siá. She is grieving. Ginakaghaán
níya ang kamatáyon sang íya ilóy. He is mourning the death of his
mother. Indì ka magpakághà sa ímo mga ginikánan. Don't sadden your
parents. Indì mo pagsóndon ang mga batásan nga maláut nga igkakághà
sang ímo mga ginikánan. Don't imitate bad conduct that will grieve
your parents. Sa dakô nga kághà kag kasubô ----. In great grief and
sorrow ----. (cf. subô, lisúd, sákit).

_kagí_, To strip or tear asunder, strip the bark off a tree, bark a
tree. Kagihá ang lánot. Strip the hemp. (cf. lúknit, kigí).

_kagídkid_, A skin-disease similar to "arikís".

_kagidkirón_, (H) Pertaining to or affected with the skin-disease
"kagídkid".

_kagím-ang_, Wet and sticky dirt; stickiness. (gím-ang).

_kagíng_, Very dry, dried up, hard, brittle, exsiccated, destitute
of moisture. (cf. káging, layâ, layóng, malá, kusúg).

_káging, kagíng_, To be, make or become dry, hard through heat,
etc. Nagkagíng ang tinápay sa ínit sang ádlaw. The bread has become
very dry (hard) through the heat of the sun. Indì mo pagpakagingón
ang maís kon bóg-on mo. Don't allow the corn to become too hard when
you roast it. Kagingá ang pagbóog sang kárne, ísdà, maís, etc. Roast
the meat, fish, corn, etc., till it becomes quite dry. Kinagingán kamí
níla sing maís nga binóog. They made some very crisp roast corn for us.

_káging_, To arrange, order, etc. See kaláging.

_kagíngking_, A small branch or twig (of bamboo, etc.). (cf. símsim,
gáwgaw).


_kaginhawáan_, Anything that supports life, or that gives relief. Ang
swéldo siníng maéstro amó ang kaginhawáan sang íya nga ginikánan. This
teacher's salary goes to support his parent. (cf. ginháwa).

_kaginoóhan_, Gentlemen, masters, lords, Sirs, Messrs. (cf. ginóo).

_kagín-ot_, Sultriness, stuffiness, close heat. (cf. gín-ot, kabóhot).

_kagírang_, A kind of tree. The juice of its leaves is used as a
remedy for decaying teeth.

_kagirihim-után_, Peacefulness, tranquillity, quiet, repose,
calmness; joy, pleasure. Walâ sing kagirihim-után ang kalibútan, kon
daláyon gid lang magtalibóbò ang ulán. There is no pleasure in life
(in the world), when it always rains. Walâ sing kagirihim-után ang
íya guyá, panumdúman, etc. He looks worried, his mind is troubled,
etc. (cf. buót, hamúot).

_kagirim-után_, See kagirihim-után.

_kagís_, To scrape with an edged instrument. Kagisí ang kawáyan,
káhoy, lamésa, etc. Scrape the bamboo, wood, table, etc. (cf. kagús,
águs, kískis).

_kágit_, Close together, spaced near together. (cf. íkit).

_kágit_, To penetrate, enter, pierce, affect deeply, touch. Nagakágit
inâ sa ákon tagiposóon. That touches me deeply--or--That pierces
my heart. Kinagítan ang íya kasíngkásing sináng mga sinúgid. He was
touched to the quick by these reports. (cf. látum, túduk, panalúgsug,
panalúpsup).

_kágkag_, Dishevelled, rumpled, tousled, in a tangle; to be
dishevelled, etc. Nagakágkag ang íya nga bohók. His hair is
rumpled. Indì mo pagkagkagón (or pagpakagkagón) ang íya nga
bohók. Don't tousle his hair. (cf. búkag, bukágkag, bungáyngay,
burungáyngay).

_kagomón_, Entanglement, mess, complication, disarray,
disorder. (cf. gomón).

_kágon_, To ask, request the hand of the bride on behalf of the
bridegroom, to woo for, procure a wife for a prospective husband,
make a match, be a matchmaker or go-between. Ang tiglalakí nagakágon
sa tigbabaé. The father of the man is arranging the marriage with
the father of the woman. Kagáb-i ginkagónan si Mariá sang amáy ni
Pédro. Last night Peter's father asked for the hand of Maria (on
behalf of Peter). Ikágon mo akó ánay sa kay Fulána. Kindly speak for
me to N.N. and ask her to become my wife.

_kagóom_, Cloudiness, darkness, obscurity, dimness. (cf. góom).

_kágot_, To scrape, scratch, scoop out with a sharp instrument. Kagóta
iní. Scrape this. Kagóti ang kapáyas sing líso. Scoop the pips out
of the papaw. (cf. kódkod).

_kagót_, A rasp, scraper for the operation of "kágot". (cf. kalagót).

_kágtan, kágton_, See kádtan, kádton. (All verbal forms of kagát--to
bite).

_kagúbut_, Commotion, war, revolution, alarming condition, confusion,
exciting state (of affairs). Salín sang kagúbut. Revolutionary
veteran. War-veteran. (cf. gúbut).

_kágud_, Voracity, greediness, gluttony; to be or become voracious,
greedy, gluttonous. Indì ka magkágud. Don't be greedy. Ginakagúran
akó siníng bátà. This boy seems to me to be very greedy. (cf. dalók,
hákug, abáng).

_kagúd_, To shell, scoop or scrape out. Kagurá (kagudá) ang lubí,
ang kapáyas, etc. Shell the coconut, scoop out the inside or the
seeds of the papaw, etc. (cf. kágot).

_kagúlà_, Noise, racket, row, commotion, excitement, alarm. (gúla;
cf. kagamó, kagarokán, kagáhud, kagalúng).

_kagulángan_, (H) Jungle, virgin forest.

_kagulángan_, The eldest brother or sister. (cf. pangánay, kagurángan,
kamagulangán).

_kagulangón_, Age, oldness. Pilá ka túig ang kagulangón mo? What is
your age? How old are you? (cf. katigulangón--senility, old age).

_kagulútman_, Famine, hunger, starvation. (gutúm, gútum).

_kagúnda_, Shaking, jerking, up-and-down motion. (gúnda; cf. kaúndag).

_kagúng_, Hollow, void, empty; brainless, inane, vacuous. (cf. búngaw,
kalóng).

_kagúphal_, Roughness, harshness, dryness (of skin, etc.); condition
of being difficult to swallow. Kagúphal siníng kalán-on! How dry this
food is and how difficult to swallow! Kagúphal sang íya pánit! Oh,
the roughness of his skin! (cf. gúphal).

_kágus, kagús_, To clean, scrape, scratch with an edged
instrument. Kagusá ang lamésa. Scrape the table, (the whole
table). Kagusí ang lamésa. Scrape the table, (in places where scraping
is needed). Ikágus iníng kotsílyo sa bánkò. Use this knife to scrape
the bench with. Kinagusán mo na ang síya? Have you cleaned the chair
by scraping it? Have you scraped the chair clean? (cf. kagís, kískis,
águs).

_kagutúk_, Tightness, state of being crammed or pressed close
together. (cf. gutúk).

_kagútum_, Hunger, famine, starvation, quality of being
hungry. (cf. gutúm, gútum).

_kagúum_, See kagóom--cloudiness, etc.

_káha_, (Sp. caja) Box, safe, case. (cf. sulúdlan).

_kahábul_, Bluntness, dulness. (hábul).

_kahádluk_, Fear, fright, terror, scare, alarm, apprehension,
panic. (hádluk).

_kahadlukán_, See kahádluk. Also: Fearful, dreadful, horrible,
frightful; origin of fear, things that inspire terror or
apprehension. (cf. kalahadlukán).

_kahágnup_, State of being haunted, feeling of fear in a lonely place,
ghostliness. (hágnup).

_kahágpis_, Thinness, slenderness, spareness, skinniness, emaciation,
lankness, leanness. (cf. hágpis, kakanít, kaníwang).

_kahagúgma_, Lover, beloved, love. (gúgma).

_kahagúp_, Tameness, domesticity, mildness, gentleness,
meekness. (cf. hagúp).

_kahákug_, Voracity, greediness, gluttony, extravagance, expensiveness,
quality of needing or wanting much. (cf. hákug).

_kahakúnyag_, (H) Sudden emotion, excitement, surprise, start, shock,
astonishment. (cf. kúnyag).

_kahaladlukán_, (H) See kahadlukán, kalahadlukán.

_kahalam-útan, kahalam-után_, Glee, cheer, pleasure, fun; laughable,
comic, gleeful, cheerful, cheery, pleasant, funny; motive or cause
of complacency, things exciting great fun or laughter. (cf. hám-ut).

_kahalam-útan_, Complacency, pleasure in, delight,
satisfaction. (cf. hamúot, kahám-ut).

_kahalangáw-an_, (H) Fear, apprehension, uneasiness; dreadful,
fearful, awful; things that are dangerous or that cause uneasiness
of mind. (hangáwà).

_kahalángdon_, High dignity, exaltedness, quality of being looked up
to with respect and reverence. (cf. hangád).

_kahalayoón_, (H) Remoteness, distance, farness. (cf. layô).

_kahalimbáwà_, Example, instance, similitude, parable,
illustration. (halimbáwà).

_kahalús_, (H) Weakness, etc. See kahálwos.

_kahálwos_, (B) Weakness, feebleness, languor, debility, exhaustion
through lack of food. (cf. hálwos).

_káham_, To touch, feel. (cf. ipangaláham). The simple káham seems
to be out of use.

_kahámbal_, Confidant, intimate friend. Kahámbal níya siá. She (He)
is her (his) confidant. (cf. hámbal, kadágil, hahírup).

_kahambugán_, Idle talk, gossip, useless chatting, boasting,
bragging. (cf. hámbug).

_kahamilí_, Preciousness, costliness, dearness, high value. (cf. bilí,
hamilí).

_kahamílì_, Preciousness, dearness, affection, tenderness. (cf. pílì,
hamílì).

_kahamtángan_, Position, condition, state, station,
circumstances. (butáng; cf. kabtángan, kahimtángan).

_kahamungayáan_, Peacefulness, happiness, prosperity,
affluence. (hamungáyà).

_kahamúok_, Depth, deepness, soundness, profoundness, profundity
(of sleep). (hamúok).

_kahamút_, Agreeable odour, pleasant smell, perfume, scent,
aroma. (hamút; cf. kahumút).

_kahám-ut_, (H) Fun, pleasure, enjoyment, gaiety, cheerfulness,
pleasantry that excites laughter. Dakô gid ang íla kahám-ut sádto nga
hámbal. They heartily enjoyed that remark. They laughed very much at
that (witty) expression or saying. (cf. hám-ut).

_kaham-útan_, (H) Pleasure, enjoyment, things pleasing or funny.

_kaham-utánan_, (H) See kahalam-útan, kaham-útan.

_káhan_, See káhang.

_kahanabô_, An incident, event, happening. (cf. tabô).

_kahanayákan_, Desert, waste land, solitude; large extent of open
country. (cf. hanáyak; kahanayápan id.).

_kahanayápan_, See kahanayákan. (cf. hanáyap--hanáyak).

_káhang_, Pungency, acerbity; to be or become pungent, acrid,
acerb. Nakahángan ang dílà ko sang katúmbal nga kinagát ko. My tongue
was made sore (was burnt) by the chili which I bit. (cf. káhan id.).

_kahangaláw-an_, (H) See kahalangáw-an.

_kahangáwà_, Fear, shyness, apprehension, scare, alarm. (hangáwà).

_kahangínan_, Wind; air, atmosphere, climate. (hángin).

_kahangúl_, Closefistedness, stinginess, niggardliness, sordidness,
selfishness, meanness, greed. (hangúl). (cf. kahákug, kaísip, kaabáng,
kakágud, kaímot).

_kahanguyús_, Shock, wonder, surprise mixed with apprehension of
danger or evil. (hanguyús, kuyús).

_kahanóklog_, Sympathy, compassion, pity, tenderness, gentleness,
mildness. (cf. hanóklog, kalóoy, kaáwà).

_kahanúsbò_, Sorrowfulness, sadness, sorrow, pity, grief, compassion,
sympathy. (subô; cf. kasubô).

_kahápdì_, Smart, ache, pain. (cf. hápdì).

_kahápdus_, Smart, pain, ache, chafing, fretting. (cf. hápdus,
kahápdì).

_kahápon_, Yesterday. (cf. hápon).

_kahaponánon_, Even-tide, evening. (cf. hápon).

_kahapónon_, Evening. (cf. hápon).

_kahapús_, Ease, easiness, facility. (hapús; cf. kahulás).

_kahapusán_, See kahapús. Also: things that are easy, the easiest
of a kind. Amó iní ang kahapusán sa tanán nga tulún-an. That is the
easiest of all the (text) books.

_kaháran_, Sharpness, pungency, acidity, acridity. (cf. hárang,
kaárhang).

_káhas_, To hazard, dare, venture, be audacious, reckless,
intrepid, impertinent, insolent, daring, bold, high-spirited,
dauntless. Kinahásan níya ang paghinguyáng sang pílak nga ginpatágò
ko sa íya. He dared to spend the money I had entrusted to him for
safe keeping. Indì mo pagkahásan ang pagbukás sang ganháan kon walâ
ka sing túgut sa pagsulúd. Don't dare to open the door, unless you
have permission to enter. (cf. aháng, ahás).

_kahátì_, The fourth part of a peso, twenty five
centavos. (cf. manghátì, manghatión).

_kahaulipónan_, (H) Slavery, peonage, bondage, peonism, serfdom,
villeinage, villenage, complete subjection. (cf. ulípon).

_kahaurungán_, Amazement, awe, astonishment, surprise, wonder,
admiration; things that amaze or astound, marvellous, amazing,
astonishing, astounding, wonderful, wondrous, admirable,
awful. (cf. urúng).

_kahawáan_, Desert, waste, wilderness, territory destitute of trees
and shrubs; a lonely or isolated place. (cf. háwà).

_kaháwan_, State of being clear of encumbrance or obstruction,
openness, clearness, freedom from impediments. (cf. háwan).

_kahawánan_, See kaháwan. Also: things that are free, unencumbered,
unobstructed.


_kaháyag, kahayág_, Clearness, plainness, distinctness, perspicuity,
clarity, lucidity, brightness. Ang kaháyag sang kapáwà. The clearness
or brightness of light. Ang kahayág sang íya nga katarúngan----. The
lucidity of his argument (reasoning)----. (cf. háyag, hayág).

_kahayágan_, Clearness, lucidity, etc. See kaháyag. Also: What is
clearly shown or easily understood, intelligible, comprehensible,
visible, manifest. Sa siníng dibúho makítà nínyo ang kahayágan sang
ákon nga ginsilíng. You can see from this drawing what I mean to
say. (cf. háyag, hayág, kaháyag).

_kahayópan_, Live stock, cattle, domestic or farm animals. (cf. háyop).

_kahéro_, (Sp. cajero) Cashier, treasurer, cash-keeper. (cf. kúymi,
kwími, tesoréro).

_kahidálman_, Depth, deepness, profoundness, profundity, deep or
mysterious things. (cf. dálum, kadálum, kaidadálman).

_kahídlaw_, Desire, longing, yearning, hankering, aspiration, craving,
wish (to see absent friends, etc.). (cf. hídlaw).

_kahíg_, (B) Foot. (cf. tiíl).

_káhig_, To scratch with the feet as a chicken. Ang manók nagakáhig
sang dútà. The chicken is scratching the ground. Ginakahígan sang manók
ang dútà. The ground is being scratched by the chicken. (cf. pangáhig).

_káhig_, To remove, push or kick off as with the feet. Kahíga sang
sílhig ang ití sang manók. Remove the chicken's excrement with
the broom.

_kahigarán_, (H) Corners, nooks, out-of-the-way places. (higád;
cf. binít, bá-id, duók, suók, hilít).

_kahigayónan_, Occasion, opportunity.

_kahígkò_, Dirt, filth, muck; dirtiness, filthiness, foulness,
uncleanness, impurity, obscenity. (hígkò; cf. kaláw-ay).

_kahigkoán_, See kahígkò. Also: depravity, immorality, moral filth,
abomination, lechery, lewdness.

_kahíkaw_, Envy, spite, grudge. (híkaw; cf. kahísà).

_kahíl_, (Sp. cajel) A small orange indigenous to the Philippines.

_kahílab_, Hunger, exhaustion through lack of food. (hílab).

_kahilábtan_, Connection, relation, interest, concern. (lábut).

_kahilabtánan_, See kahilábtan.

_kahiláda_, A refreshing drink made of water and sugar and mixed with
the juice of the "kahíl" (Sp. cajel).

_kahílak_, Longing, regret, fretting over past or lost things. (hílak;
cf. kangílin).

_kahil-ánan_, Straits, hardship, weariness, misery. (hi-ól).

_kahilapít_, (H) Neighbour; vicinity, proximity, region near,
neighbourhood.

_kahilás_, Nervous excitement, nervousness, nervosity; vexation,
molestation, bother; uneasiness. (cf. hilás).

_kahilinoklogán_, Rueful, woeful, piteous, pitiful, objects to be
treated tenderly or to be sympathized with. (cf. hinóklog, hanóklog,
makahanóklog).

_kahilinoklógon_, Tenderness, sympathy, pity, mildness. (cf. hinóklog,
kahinoklógon).

_kahilít_, Seclusion, solitude, isolation, solitariness, retirement,
state of being separate or far away from others. (cf. hilít).

_kahílway_, Condition of being untrammelled or unobstructed, freedom,
liberty.

_kahilwáyan_, Freedom, independence, liberty. (cf. kahílway).

_kahimataán_, Relations, relatives, kindred, kin, kith and kin,
kinsfolk, kinship, offspring, progeny. (bátà, himatâ).

_kahimayáan_, Bliss, blessedness, glory, happiness, felicity; blissful,
felicitous; objects whose possession gives happiness. (cf. himáyà).

_kahimoán, kahimóan_, Deed, action, performance, doings; result,
effect, issue, event; possibility of performance. Inâ walâ gid man
sing kahimoán. That comes (came) to nothing,--cannot (could not)
be done,--is (was) of no effect. (cf. hímò).


_kahímpit_, Perfection, completion, excellence,
consummation. (cf. hímpit, kalántip).

_kahimpitán_, See kahímpit. Also: Perfections, virtues, habits or
actions that are perfect or praiseworthy. (cf. kalantipán).

_kahimtángan_, Position, rank, state, station, condition,
circumstances. (butáng; cf. kabtángan, kahamtángan).

_kahínà_, Scarcity, rareness, rarity, fewness, dearth. (hínà; kaíwat).

_kahinablúsan_, Nephews and nieces. (cf. hináblus).

_kahinakítan_, Pain, suffering, ache; feeling,
sentiment. (cf. hinakít).

_kahínay_, Slowness, deliberateness, dilatoriness, tardiness,
sluggishness, gentleness, want of haste, lack of precipitation,
quality of doing something without undue haste, slow and careful
performance. (cf. hínay).

_kahinayón_, Slowness, etc. See kahínay.

_kahinguyángan_, Expenditure, outlay, waste; squandering, extravagance,
wastefulness, prodigality. (cf. uyáng).

_kahíning_, (H) Gloss, lustre, polish, shine, brilliance, brilliancy,
brightness, sheen. (cf. híning, kasilíng, kasílì).

_kahínlò_, Cleanness, smoothness, neatness. (cf. hínlò, katínlò).

_kahinóklog_, Kindliness, tenderness, mildness, pity, sympathy,
commiseration. (cf. hinóklog, kahilinoklogán, kahanóklog).

_kahinoklógon_, See kahinóklog.

_kahi-ól_, Straits, difficulties, want, misery. (hi-ól;
cf. kahil-ánan).

_kahiolán_, See kahi-ól, kahil-ánan.

_kahiolípnan_, (H) Slavery, etc. See kahaulipónan id.

_kahiolipónan_, (H) See kahiolípnan, kahaulipónan.

_kahípid_, (H) Trimness, neatness, nattiness, dapperness,
tidiness, state of being dressed or kept in becoming order and
cleanliness. (cf. hípid).

_kahípig_, (B) Neatness, trimness, cleanliness. (cf. kahípid id.).

_kahípus_, Silence, stillness, muteness, reserve, reticence,
taciturnity, quietness, noiselessness, absence of sound or
noise. (cf. hípus).

_kahírup_, Intimacy; intimate friend, crony, confidant. Kahírup ko
siá. He is my intimate friend. (hírup; cf. kahámbal, kadágil).

_kahísà_, Envy, spite, grudge, malice, resentment, rancour,
venom. (hísà; cf. kahíkaw).

_kahíta_, (Sp. cajeta) A little box; cash-box, jewel-case.

_kahitaásan_, Height, exaltedness, loftiness, high position or
dignity. (cf. táas).

_kahitás-an_, See kahitaásan.

_kahitílya_, (Sp. cajetilla) Package, box, (as of cigarettes,
matches, etc.).

_kahómok_, Softness, pliability, plasticity, amenability to physical
or moral impressions, impressionability. (hómok).

_kahón_, (Sp. cajon) Box, trunk, case; dam, dyke, ditch, bank,
particularly applied to banks that inclose rice-fields. Also verb:
Kahoní ang ímo talámnan. Put a bank around your field. (cf. sulúdlan).

_káhoy_, Tree; wood.

_kahóyhoy_, Drooping, limpness, hanging down loosely, dangling,
the hang of wet clothes, etc. (cf. hóyhoy).

_kahóy-kahóy_, Dim. of káhoy. Bush, shrub, undergrowth, scrub,
brushwood, underwood, coppice, copse.

_kahubúg_, (H) Drunkenness, intoxication, inebriation, inebriety,
state of being drunk. (hubúg).

_kahudyánan_, Tardiness, lateness, backwardness (of ripening, etc.;
cf. kaatrasádo).

_kahúgud_, Diligence, zeal, application, ardour, industry, assiduity,
assiduousness, earnestness. (húgud; cf. kapísan, kaúkud, katándus).

_kahugút_, Tightness, tautness, tension, tenseness, tensity,
closeness, compression, lack of freedom to breathe or act; fervour,
sincerity. (hugút).


_kahukmánan_, Justice, jurisprudence, court of justice. Tiglikúm sang
báhin sa kahukmánan. Secretary of Justice. (cf. hokóm, holokmánan).

_kahulág_, Unsteadiness, restlessness, instability, unstableness,
fickleness, shakiness, lack of stability or firmness. (cf. húlag).

_kahulagán_, See kahulág. Also: Fidgetiness; unsettled manner of life.

_kahul-ánan_, See kahil-ánan. (hu-ól--hi-ól; cf. kalisdánan,
kapipít-an, kalalát-an).

_kahulás_, Facility, ease. (hulás; cf. kahapús, kahapusán).

_kahulúbgon_, (H) Drunkenness. See kahubúg.

_kahulúbsan_, (H) Evaporation, loss of moisture, drying up,
exsiccation. (cf. hubás).

_kahulúgan, kahulugán_, Meaning, tenour, connotation, implication,
sense, application, signification, significance, import, purport,
interpretation, drift. Anó ang íya sinâ nga kahulúgan? What does that
mean? (húlug).

_kahulúgbon_, (H) See kahulúbgon.

_kahulúng_, Shadow, shade, shadiness, umbrageousness, condition of
plants, etc., that receive little sunlight. (hulúng).

_kahulúy-an_, (H) Shame, disgrace, disrepute, debasement, degradation,
ignominy, humiliation; things or actions that are shameful,
disreputable or disgraceful. (huyâ).

_kahumanán_, Completion, execution, fulfilment,
accomplishment. (cf. humán).

_kahúmoy_, Mildness, softness, tenderness, even temper, quiet,
condition of one who says little and quietly goes his way. (húmoy).

_kahumút_, Fragrance, perfume, aroma, bouquet, scent, sweet odour,
pleasant smell, etc. See kahamút id.

_kahunápit_, Neatness, closeness of weaving, etc.; tidiness. (hunápit;
cf. kahúpit; kahípid).

_kahúnit_, Toughness, resistance, durability. (cf. húnit).

_kahúnlit_, See kahúnit.

_kahún-og_, Dampness, moisture, moistness, humidity, dankness. (húnog).

_kahu-ól_, See kahi-ól id.

_kahúpit_, See kahunápit id. (húpit--hunápit).

_kahúsay_, Order, disposition, regulation, settlement, agreement,
proper arrangement. (húsay).

_kahusáyan, kahusayán_, See kahúsay. Also: A clearing up, a settling
or adjustment of a dispute, quarrel, debt, etc.

_kahustóhan_, Propriety, appositeness, correctness, accordance,
aptness, rightness, conformity, suitability, fitness. Walâ sing
kahustóhan ang ginsúgid níya. What he told was not correct (not in
keeping with the facts). (hústo).

_kahuyâ_, Shame, confusion, mortification, abashment, sense of
shame. (cf. huyâ, mahulúy-on, makahuhúyà).

_kahuy-ánan_, Shame, disgrace, debasement, degradation; remorse
mingled with shame. (cf. kahuyâ, kahulúy-an).

_kahuyúgan, kahuyugán_, Bent, inclination, leaning. (cf. húyug, huyúg).

_kaíbug_, Desire, longing, yearning, hankering, passion, craving,
particularly with regard to material goods and pleasures,
covetousness. (cf. íbug, kailíbgon).

_kaidadálman_, Depth, etc. See kahidálman.

_kaídan_, (B) To mend, repair, restore, do up. Sín-o ang nagkaídan sang
baláy? Who repaired the house? Kaidána (kidána) ang ímo baláy. Repair
your house. Kilidanón, kiridanón--things to be mended or needing
repairs. May kilidanón kamó? Have you anything to mend? (cf. kaáyo,
kaalayohón).

_kaíd-id_, Exactness, precision, preciseness, diligence, zeal,
application, punctuality. (cf. íd-id).

_kaígò_, Fitness, aptness, suitability, propriety. (cf. ígò).

_kaigoán_, See kaígò. Also: things that are fit, proper or right.

_kaihâ, ka-ihâ_, (B) Shame; to be ashamed, etc. See huyâ. Naihâ
(nagkaihâ) siá. He was ashamed. Ginkaihaán ko siá. I am ashamed
of him. Indì ka maihâ (magkaihâ). Don't be ashamed. Don't be shy
or bashful.

_kaíkit_, (H) Closeness, state of being close together or spaced only
a little apart. (cf. íkit).

_kaílà_, (H) Liking, longing, craving, fondness, desire. (cf. ílà).

_kailá_, Wildness, condition of an untamed animal; shyness,
bashfulness, coyness. (ilá).

_kailáan_, (H) Attraction, attractiveness, allurement,
enticement. (cf. ílà).

_kailíbgon_, Desire, instinct, passion, lust, appetite, prurience,
cupidity, concupiscence, especially with regard to carnal
emotions. (cf. íbug).

_kailígbon_, See kailíbgon id.

_kaílo, kailó_, Wretched, miserable, poor, pitiable, woeful,
unfortunate.

_kailóm_, Darkness, blackness, brownishness, dun-colour. (ilóm).

_kaíma_, (B) Liking, longing, craving, fondness, particularly for
pleasant food, drink, etc. From íma. (cf. kaílà, kaíbug).

_kaimíto_, A kind of fruit tree.

_kaímol_, Poverty, penury, want, destitution, deficiency,
indigence. (ímol).

_kaimolán_, See kaímol. Also: Things that make life hard and poor,
beggary, pauperism, impecuniousness.

_kaimolón_, See kaímol. (cf. kaimolán).

_kaímon_, Jealousy, apprehension of rivalry, fear of being supplanted
or superseded in love, esteem or rank. (ímon).

_kaímot_, Stinginess, miserliness, closefistedness, meanness,
niggardliness, parsimoniousness. (ímot).

_kaín_, (H) To go somewhere; to do, be, fare, come to, amount to, end,
result. Makaín gid balá inâ? Where will it end? What will it finally
come to or amount to? Makaín ka? Where are you going to? Ginkaín mo
ang ákon lápis? Where did you put my pencil? (cf. anó).

_kaína_, A short while ago, some time since, a moment or a few
hours ago (within the same day); formerly, previously. Kaína sang
ága----. This morning----. Kaína lang siníng hápon naghalín siá. He
left this afternoon. (cf. kunína--after some time).

_kainabláwon_, Affability, amiableness, sociableness,
sociability. (áblaw; cf. kaabiabíhon).

_kainanáy_, Tenderness, gentleness, softness, slowness, condition
of anything done gently, quietly, softly, noiselessly or
peacefully. (nanáy; cf. kananáy, kaananáy).

_kaingín_, Practice and result of jungle-burning, burned clearing,
clearing; to burn or fire a piece of grass-land, jungle or
mountainside. Nagakaingín silá dídto sa bakólod. They are burning
(or firing) the grass there on the hill. Kaíngna (kainginá) iníng
talónan. Set fire to this jungle. (cf. tútud, súnug).

_kaíngod_, Nearness, proximity, neighbourhood, adjacency, state of
being placed at the side of or near by; neighbour. Sa kaíngod sang
ámon baláy. At the side of our house or near our house. Kaíngod námon
siá. He is our neighbour. From íngod. (cf. kahilapít, kaíping).

_kaíngol_, Scarceness, scarcity, want, rareness, paucity, fewness,
dearth. (íngol; cf. kaíwat, kahínà).

_kaínit_, Heat, warmth, glow, fervour, ardour. (cf. ínit).

_kainitán_, See kaínit. Also: The thick of a fight, heavy work during
the heat of the day, etc. (cf. inítan).

_kainitón_, Heat, especially the heat of the sun. See kaínit.

_kaínot_, Economy, frugality, parsimony, niggardliness, thriftiness,
meanness, closeness, miserliness. (ínot; cf. kakínot, kakinótan,
kaímot).

_kainotón_, See kaínot. (cf. kaímot).

_Kainsikán_, China, the Chinese, Chinamen, the Chinese
nation. (cf. ínsik).

_kaíntok_, (B) Smallness, littleness, diminutiveness. (cf. íntok;
kagamáy, kadiótay, kaisót, katikî).

_kaíping_, Neighbourhood, adjacency, proximity, nearness, state
of being attached to the side of; neighbour. (cf. íping; kaíngod,
kahilapít, kasilíngan).

_kairél_, (Sp. cairel) Appendage, fringe, silk-band, watch-chain.

_kairír_, See kairél id.

_kaisá_, Once; sometimes. Kon kaisá----. Now and then,
sometimes----. (cf. makaisá; kís-a).

_kaisáhan_, Oneness, union, unity, unification. (cf. isá).

_kaísip_, Counting, reckoning, enumeration, telling, selfishness that
counts up every little thing; fault-finding, carping. (cf. ísip).

_kaisipán_, Reckonings, thoughts, desires, plans, projects, designs,
purposes, proposals, intentions. Ang Diós nagamándò sang áton mga
hunâhúnà kag kaisipán. God directs our thoughts and intentions.

_kaisót_, (B) Smallness, littleness, a small amount, especially of
liquids. For solids "katikî" is more often used. (cf. isót).

_kaísug_, Violence, vehemence, bravery, courage, hardihood, force,
strength, severeness, severity, strictness. (cf. ísug).

_kaitúm_, Blackness, darkness, swarthiness, state of being dark
coloured. (cf. itúm).

_kaíwat_, Scarcity, rarity. (íwat; cf. kahínà, kaíngol).

_káka_, To collect, gather, scrape or rake together with the hand,
as things lying on a table, earth from a hole, etc. Kakáha ang
dútà. Scrape the earth together. Kakáhi ang tabungós sing humáy. Take
some rice from the tabungos-basket (with your hands). Ikáka akó ánay
siníng maís. Gather, please, these maize-seeds (maize-cobs) with your
hand. Diín akó makakáka sing pílak? Where can I scrape together some
money? (cf. típon, tingúb).

_kâkâ_, Full, stuffed, crammed, brimful, chockfull, chokefull, bulging;
to be or become full, etc. Abáw, balíkda ináng bátà nga nagakâkâ ang
íya bólsa sang kamúnsil. My! look back at that boy whose pockets
are stuffed with camunsel-fruit. Kâkâ ang íya púyo. His purse is
full. (cf. bát-al, punô, báknal).

_kakáak_, Cackle, cackling; to cackle; to talk or shout
much. (cf. kákak).

_kakabalán_, Toughness, insensibility to pain. (cf. kabalán).

_kakádat_, Pungency, sharpness, hotness, acidity, acridity, (kádat;
cf. kaádat).

_kakágud_, Greediness, gluttony, voraciousness, voracity; desire for
honour or excellence, ambition. (kágud).

_kakáhang_, Pungency, acerbity, sharpness, hotness, piquancy of
taste. (káhang).

_kakáhas_, Audacity, boldness, hardihood, temerity, insolence,
venturesomeness, rashness, cheek, impertinence, daring,
intrepidity. (cf. káhas).

_kakahúyan_, Forest, wood, coppice, copse; collection of trees, wood,
timber, lumber. (cf. káhoy).

_kákak_, Cackling; to cackle. Ang mungâ nagakákak. The hen
cackles. (cf. kakáak; kurukutúk--to cluck).

_kakalám_, Ticklishness, sensation produced by tickling. (cf. kalám).

_kakánang_, Brightness of colours, conspicuousness, condition of one
dressed up in bright colours. (cf. kánang).

_kakánat_, Slowness, retardation, a slow, tedious process. Ang
pagkakúlang sang kasangkápan amó ang nanginkabangdánan sang kakánat
sang íla pagpangabúdlay. Lack of tools was the cause of the slowness
of their work. (cf. kánat).

_kakánaw_, Brightness, shine, lustre, polish. (cf. kánaw).

_kakandínggal_, Leanness, thinness, meagreness. (cf. kandínggal,
kaníwang, kahágpis, kakanít).

_kakanít_, (B) Leanness, thinness, skinniness, emaciation, lankness,
gauntness. (cf. kanít, kaníwang, kakandínggal).

_kakápog_, (B) Staleness, insipidity, insipidness, tastelessness,
mawkishness, condition of cold cooked food, especially applied to
rice. (cf. kápog, kabáhaw).

_kakápoy_, Exhaustion, tiredness, weakness, fatigue, languor,
lassitude. (cf. kápoy, kabúdlay, kaálay, kapául, kalúyò, kalúya,
kakúlì).

_kakárat_, (H) See kaádat, kakádat.

_kakaró-karó_, Hustling, speeding-up, haste, despatch, dispatch,
expedition, hurry; volubility (of speech). (cf. karókaró, kadásig,
kadalî, kagarógaró).

_kakás_, To wash away--, take out--, dissolve--, a stain, or the
like. Butangí sing agás, agúd makakás ang pínta. Apply some kerosene
to remove the stain of paint. Anó balá ang maáyo nga ikakás ko sa
siní nga bulíng? What is the best for removing--, taking out--,
this stain? Kakasá ang mga dágtà nga tínta sa ímo kamót. Wash the
ink-stains off your hand. Indì akó makakakás siníng bulíng (índì
ko makakás iníng bulíng) sa túbig. I cannot get this stain out with
water. Kakasí akó sináng mga dágtà sa ákon delárgo. Wash those stains
out of my trousers. Ikakás akó sináng hígkò sa ákon báyò. Please wash
that dirt off my jacket.

_kakaság_, Leanness, meagreness, thinness, condition of one who is
as lean as a casag-crab. (kaság; cf. kaníwang, kakanít).

_Kakatsiláan_, Spain; Spaniards; the Spanish Nation. (cf. Katsílà).

_kakatúl_, Itchiness. (katúl).

_kakáw_, (Sp. cacao) The cacao-tree and its fruit; cocoa.

_kakawayánan_, Clumps of bamboos; bamboo in general. (cf. kawáyan,
kawayánan).

_kákay_, Sneak, trickster, tricksy, sly, wily, clever, cunning
(used only--and mostly humorously--of females). Ay, si tíyà kákay
man----! Oh that wily aunty----! Oh that tricky (cunning, sly, clever)
good soul----! (cf. kákoy).

_káki_, Khaki.

_kakíd-ol_, Savouriness, tastiness, toothsomeness (of eatables that
are neither too soft nor too hard, but just right). (cf. kíd-ol).

_kakilíran_, (H) Relations, relatives, family connections,
friends. (cf. kílid).

_kakínot_, Economy, retrenchment, thrift, etc. See kaínot,
kakinotón. (kínot--ínot).

_kakinotán_, See kakínot, kaínot. Also: Collective of all things that
bring about economy or frugal living.

_kakinotón_, See kakínot.

_kakisáy_, Quick movement, agility, litheness; sudden jerk. (kisáy;
cf. kapágsik, kalígsi).

_kakítà_, Often stands for makakítà, nakakítà from kítà--to see.

_kakitidón_, (B) Narrowness, tightness, little breadth or
width. (cf. kitíd).

_kakitirón_, (H) See kakitidón.

_kakógnan_, Place where much cogon-grass grows; mountain side or
field covered with cogon-grass. (cf. kógon, kakogonán).

_kakogonán, kakogónan_, See kakógnan.

_kakóg-ong_, Nearness, proximity (of time); narrowness (of
mind); tightness (of clothes, belts, etc.). Kakóg-ong na sang
Simána Sánta! How near Holy Week is! Kakóg-ong sang íya ísip! How
narrow-minded he is! Kakóg-ong sang ákon wáklos; laboyán ko. My belt
is too tight; I am going to loosen it. (cf. kógong; lapít; gutúk).

_kakolónan_, (H) Pottery, pots and jars. (cf. kólon).

_kákoy_, A sneak, trickster, cheat; fool; to fool, cheat,
trick. Ginakákoy lang níya siá. He is just fooling him. Indì mo akó
pagkakóyon. Don't fool, trick or cheat me. (cf. búang, hásò, lágit,
agóng, etc.).

_kakúgi_, Diligence, assiduousness, assiduity, industry, application,
care. (cf. kúgi).

_kakúgmat_, Fright, alarm, fear, terror, panic, dread. (cf. kúgmat).

_kakulábson_, Want, need, lack, insufficiency. (cf. kulábus).

_kakulángan_, Shortcomings, lack, want, insufficiency. (cf. kúlang).

_kakúlbà_, Shyness, fear, trepidation, apprehension, nervousness,
nervous excitement, trembling. (cf. kúlbà).

_kakúlì_, (H) Slowness, arduousness, hardness, laboriousness,
irksomeness, toilsomeness, condition of something that is achieved
only step by step with hard work or great patience, (kúlì; cf. kahínay,
kabúdlay, kakánat).

_kakulián_, (H) See kakúlì. Also: Difficulties, hardships, things
requiring hard work or great patience.

_kakulión_, (H) Laboriousness, etc. See kakúlì.

_kakumbúya_, Partner, associate, fellow-member, stockholder,
shareholder (of a firm or company). (cf. kumbúya, kumbuyahán).

_kakúpus_, Shrinkage, contraction, dwindling. (cf. kúpus, kupús).

_kakúsug_, Strength, force, power, vigour. (cf. kúsug, kusúg).

_kakuyúg_, Shakiness, unsteadiness, weakness, feebleness,
debility. (cf. kuyúg, kalúya, kalúyò, kakúlì).

_kála_, Shell, tortoise shell; made of tortoise shell (or an imitation
of it); comb (of tortoise shell). Ang íya husáy kála. Her comb is
made of tortoise shell.

_kálà_, A croak, the hoarse, harsh cry of a frog; to croak (as a
frog). Ang mga pakâ (pánkà) nagakálà. Frogs croak. N.B. The Dim. and
Freq. kalâkalâ is more in use.

_kalaánan_, (H) A field planted one year which without additional
planting yields its produce the following year also, (especially
applied to sugar-cane fields). (cf. dáan).

_kalaayohón_, (H) Things to be mended or standing in need of
repair. (áyo, kaáyo; cf. kilidanón, kiridanón).

_kalábà_, (H) Length of objects, extent from end to end. (lábà;
cf. kalabaón, kalábug, kalabugón; kadúgay, kabúhay--length of time).

_kalabahón_, (H) Cloth to be worked up, or fit to be worked up,
into farmers' shirts called "kába".

_kalabánan, kalabanán_, The greater part or number, majority. (labán;
cf. kadám-an).

_kalabántos_, (Sp. garbanzo) A kind of chick-peas.

_kalabaón_, (H) Length. See kalábà.

_kalabása_, (Sp. calabaza) Squash, pumpkin, gourd; failure,
mess, fiasco; to make a mess of, meet with failure, commit a great
blunder. Nakalabása (Nagkalabása) ang íla tábad. Their banquet was a
failure. Ginkalabása lang akó níya. He left me in the lurch, tricked
or cheated me, made a fool of me, caused my plans or intentions
to miscarry.

_kalabátan_, Common or joint property. (cf. karabátan).

_kalabáw_, Excess, haughtiness, great ambition to exceed
others. (cf. labáw).

_kalabawán_, The larger or greater share, more than others, or more
than is left; excess, superfluity, superabundance, redundancy, what
is beyond due limits. (cf. labáw).

_kalabéra_, (Sp. calavera) Skull. (cf. bagól).

_kalabihán_, Preference, preponderance, excellence, privilege, value
or esteem set upon one thing rather than another. Ang mga kalabihán
sang Mahál nga Bírhen. The excellences or glories of the Blessed
Virgin. (cf. labí).

_kalabkában_, Anything liable or exposed to being undermined or having
its foundations sapped by the action of water; hen-nest. (cf. kábkab).

_kalabkábon_, Eggs to be hatched. (cf. kalabkában).

_kalablíton_, That is to be, or can be, touched;
tangible. (cf. káblit).

_kalabó_, Tastiness, savouriness (of squashes, tubers, etc.; cf. labó).

_kalabóso_, (Sp. calabozo) Prison, jail, dungeon,
calaboose. (cf. bilanggóan).

_kalabtánan_, Relations, connection, interest, implication,
participation, share, interference, meddling. (cf. lábut, kalabútan).

_kalábug_, (B) See kalábà.

_kalabugón_, (B) See kalabaón.

_kalabulúngan_, (H) Astonishment, amazement, wonder, surprise;
wonderful, astounding, amazing. (búlung). (cf. kahaurungán).

_kalabús_, Prison, gaol. (cf. kalabóso, karsíl, bilanggóan).


_kalabútan_, Connection with, relation, etc. See kalabtánan.

_kalábwak_, Tallness, large size (when age is
considered). (cf. lábwak).

_kaládì_, A kind of "dágmay". (cf. gládì).

_kaladláwan_, (H) Fun, funniness, drollery, ludicrousness,
laughableness, ridiculousness, pleasantry, anything that excites
laughter (with or without contempt); ridiculous, funny, droll,
etc. (cf. kádlaw, kalaham-után).

_kaladláwon_, (H) Laughter, act of laughter, inclination to
laugh. Ginkagát níya ang íya bibíg sa pagpugúng sang íya kaladláwon. He
bit his lips to check (restrain) his laughter.

_kaládo_, (Sp. calado) Draught of a vessel; fretwork. (cf. dágpak).

_kaládo_, (Sp. cuadrado) Square. (cf. kasílo).

_kaladtoán_, (H) Place to go to or arrive at. (kádto; cf. kadtoán).

_kalág_, Soul, spirit, moral and spiritual nature of man; a disembodied
spirit; vitality, moving spirit. (cf. kálag; láwas--body, matter).

_kálag_, (B) Intelligence, sensibility, sensibleness, sense,
reasonableness, judiciousness, understanding, prudence, common sense,
wisdom, sagacity, sagaciousness. (cf. ísip, ihibaló, kalibútan).

_kalágan_, (B) Sensible, intelligent, prudent, reasonable, wise,
docile, sagacious, judicious, obedient. (cf. kálag, kalág, but-ánan).

_kalágday_, Slowness; gentleness, tenderness. (cf. lágday, kalágway).

_kalagháan, kalaghaán_, (H) Mourning, grief, sorrow; what is to be
mourned over or grieved at, lamentable. (cf. kághà, makakalághà).

_kaláging_, To arrange, dispose, marshal, array, regulate, put
in order; prepare well, drill, make ship-shape. Kalagínga ang mga
tulún-an, bánkò, láta, botílya, etc. Set in order the books, benches,
tins, bottles, etc. Kinalagíngan akó níya sang mga galamitón sang
ákon balatonán. He arranged for me the furniture of my reception
room. Ginkaláging sang mananábang sing maáyo ang mga sáksi. The
lawyer drilled (prepared) the witnesses well. (cf. káging, húsay,
hímos, áman, híwat).

_kalág-it_, Cunning, craftiness, knavery, double-dealing, trickiness,
cheating, artfulness. (cf. lág-it).

_kalág-kalág_, (B) Dim. of kálag. Sense, wit, understanding,
intelligence.

_kalaglágan_, Destruction, perdition, ruin. (cf. láglag).

_kalágnon_, Of, or pertaining to, the soul or spirit, spiritual,
immaterial. (cf. kalág, espirituhánon).

_kalagô_, (B) Dirt, dirtiness, filthiness, condition of being
dirtied, foul, soiled, tarnished, particularly applied to soiled
clothes. (cf. lagô, lagôlagô).

_kalagót_, (H) A rasp, a kind of coarse file. (cf. kagót, kágot).

_kalágtom_, Freshness, vigour, vigorousness, floridness (of
plants). (lágtom).

_kalaguláan, kalagulaán_, (H) Noise, commotion, stir, excitement,
disturbance, riot, sensation; making a stir, causing or exciting a
commotion, etc. Kalagulaán iníng mga balítà sa dílì madúgay. These
reports will soon cause a sensation. (cf. makagulúlà, gúlà, gamó).

_kalágway_, Slowness, etc. See kalágday (lágway--lágday).

_kalágyan_, To deteriorate, degenerate, become less
productive. Nagakalágyan ang mga ságing, kapáyas, etc. sa ámon
hardín. The bananas, papaws, etc. in our garden are deteriorating,
are giving less fruit than formerly.

_kaláhà_, (H) Pan, frying pan.

_kaláhà_, (H) Black spots on the skin.

_kalahadlukán_, (H) Things that excite fear or terror; fearsome,
fearful, terrible, awful, horrible, dreadful, frightful, alarming,
appalling. (cf. hádluk, kahadlukán).

_kaláham_, To touch, feel. (cf. káham, láham, ipangaláham).

_kalaham-után_, (H) Merriment, pleasure, pleasantry, fun,
mirth, drollery, buffoonery, things that excite laughter and
merriment. (cf. hám-u, kahám-ut, kaham-útan, kaham-utánan,
makahalám-ut).


_kalaham-utánan_, (H) See kalaham-után.

_kalahangáw-an_, (H) Fear, apprehension, etc. See kahalangáw-an,
kahangaláw-an, kahangáwà.

_kalahanusboán_, (H) Grief, sorrow, pity, commiseration, sympathy;
things that excite pity or compassion, pitiable, woeful, lamentable,
sad, distressful, deplorable, pathetic, touching, affecting. (cf. subô,
hanúsbò).

_kalahíg_, Rake, anything that is used for raking. (cf. káhig, kahíg).

_kalahilákan, kalahilakán_, (H) Things to
be--cherished,--desired,--regretted (when lost); desirable, lovely,
highly praised or esteemed; regrettable. (cf. hílak, makahihílak,
makahilílak).

_kalahílo, kalahílò_, Poisonous, venomous, baneful, noisome,
noxious. (cf. hilô, makahihílo, karahílo).

_kalahós_, The liquid obtained from the tapican-fruit and used to
spite others by spirting it on them by means of a tube, the liquid
causing great itch and pain, more even than "nípay"; to use or apply
"kalahós". Kalahosón níya ikáw, konó. They say, he will treat you to
a dose of "kalahós". Ginkalahós níya siá. He was treated by him with
"kalahós". (cf. nípay).

_kalailáan_, (H) Attraction, attractiveness, fascination, winsomeness,
allurement, enticement, charm; attractive, seductive, winning,
captivating, charming, fascinating, bewitching. (cf. ílà, makailílà).

_kalaímnan_, (B) Disagreeable to sight or taste, distasteful,
revolting, noisome, disgusting, repelling, ugly, bad; quality that
excites disgust or aversion. (cf. límnan, laímnan).

_kaláin_, (H) Badness, maliciousness, malignity, malevolence,
hurtfulness, harmfulness, perniciousness, noxiousness, wickedness,
noisomeness. (cf. láin).

_kalaín_, Difference, diversity, dissimilarity. (cf. laín,
kalaínlaínan).

_kalaínan_, Badness, etc. See kaláin. Also: evil, harm, hurt, mischief,
prejudice, drawback, disadvantage.

_kalaíngnon_, (H) Jungle or grass to be burned or fired. Siá amó
ang tagíya sang madámò nga kalaíngnon. He is the owner of many
parcels of land that can be cleared by fire and made fit for the
plough. (cf. kaingín).

_kalaín-láin_, To be different, dissimilar, diverse, unlike; to differ
one from another. Nagakalaínláin silá sing duág. They are different
in colour--or--of different colours.

_kalaín-laínan_, Difference, diversity, variety, unlikeness,
dissimilarity.

_kalaínman_, (B) See kalaímnan.

_kalâ-kalâ_, Dim. of kálà--croaking; to croak.

_kalakasán_, Excess, extreme, radicalism, extravagance,
intemperance. (lakás).

_kalakatád_, To throw about one's arms and legs in gaiety and
merriment, to jump, frolic and play like children, to be full
of mirth and hilarity. Ang mga bátà nagakalakatád. The boys are
frolicking. (cf. karakatád; tiríktirík).

_kalála_, Treacherousness, insidiousness (of diseases,
etc.). (cf. lála, malála).

_kalalángan_, Means, ways, device, contrivance, appliance, resource
that is employed to bring about something. (cf. laláng).

_kalalakín-an_, Men, males, menfolk. (cf. laláki).

_kalalát-an_, Evils, harm, injury, affliction, disaster,
misfortune. (cf. láut).

_kalálaw_, (H) A flat-bottomed sieve or low-brimmed basket mainly
used to separate freshly pounded rice from the chaff. (cf. karáraw).

_kalaláwdan_, (B) Sea, ocean. (cf. lawód, kalaláwran, kadagátan).

_kalalaworán_, (H) See kalaláwdan.

_kalaláwran_, (H) See kalaláwdan.

_kalalbangán, kalalbángan_, Road, line, limit, boundary; to lie
athwart, lie across, be in the passage of. (cf. lábang, labangán,
kalbangán).

_kalalím_, (H) Taste, flavour; tastiness, savouriness, toothsomeness;
ingredient, admixture; element. (cf. lalím).

_kalalingyáson_, What is to be wound on a bobbin, as a thread,
etc. (kalíngyas).


_kalalipayán_, (H) Pleasure, things that give joy or pleasure;
pleasant, pleasurable, enjoyable, gratifying. (cf. lípay, kalípay,
makalilípay, malipáyon, malipayón).

_kalalíson_, (H) Superfluous, redundant, exaggeration, what is to
be or should be removed, taken away or left out, or, "taken with a
grain of salt" (not to be fully believed). Kalalíson na gid ang amó
nga mga punípúni. Those flourishes (or little decorations) should be
removed or left out. Ang íya nga pagpakigsúmpung sa kay Fuláno may
katarúngan nga dakô, ápang kalalíson gid man ang ibán nga ginsilíng
níya. His opposition to N.N. is perfectly justified, but some of the
things he said must be taken with a grain of salt. (cf. kalís).

_kalalitán_, (H) Promptness, despatch, expedition, first
opportunity; anything that does not suffer delay or should be done
quickly. (cf. kalít).

_kalalo-oyán_, (H) Pitiableness, anything that excites pity or
compassion. (cf. kalalóy-an, makaloló-oy).

_kalalót_, (H) Nail, claw or anything else used for scratching,
scraping, digging out earth, etc. (kálot; cf. karalót id.).

_kalalóton_, Things to be scratched or dug out, as roots, tubers,
etc. (kálot; cf. talangkónon).

_kalalotón_, What is to be scratched, rubbed or soothed, as an itch;
trial, hardship, difficulty; hard to bear or suffer. (cf. kálot,
kalalóton).

_kalalóy-an_, See kalalo-oyán id.

_kalaluyagán_, Loveliness, attraction, charm; likeable, lovely,
charming, pleasing, captivating, anything that excites a liking,
affection or passion for. (cf. lúyag, makalulúyag, maluyagón,
pangaluyág).

_kalályan_, Place where digging is done, a mine, or the
like. (cf. káli).

_kalám_, To tickle, itch, irritate, titillate. Ginakalamán akó. I
have a tickling feeling.

_kalamag-ohán_, (H) Novelty, modernity, novel or new-fangled
things. (cf. bág-o, kamág-o, kamag-ohán).

_kalamá-lamahán_, Doubt, suspense of judgment, uncertainty, indecision,
hesitation. (cf. lamá-lamá, kaduháduháan).

_kalamáng-kamáng_, Anything that crawls or creeps, as snails, crabs,
shrimps, etc. (cf. kámang).

_kalamanít_, Lean, thin, emaciated, gaunt, spare, skinny; to
become lean, etc. Iníng báboy kalamanít kaáyo. This pig is very
lean. Nagkalamanít ang karabáw kay nabugtasán sa pangabúdlay. The
buffalo became lean, because it was overworked. (cf. kanít, maníwang,
níwang).

_kalamátay_, To die (of many). (cf. kamátay, patáy).

_kalamatáyan_, (H) Deadly, fatal, mortiferous; a fatal spot. Awát na
lang ang pagbulúng sa íya, kay ang íya pilás sa kalamatáyan gid. He
was past cure, for his wound was mortal, for he was wounded in a
vital spot. (cf. patáy; kalamátyan id.).

_kalamátyan_, (H) See kalamatáyan id.

_kalámay_, Sugar.

_kalamáy_, To sugar, to flatter, to "soft soap". Indì mo siá
pagkalamayón. Don't flatter him. Ginkalamáy níla siá. They flattered
him--or--They "soft-soaped" him. (cf. unís, utís, odót, paayónáyon).

_kalámayháti, kalámayhátì_, A sweet dish of crushed or pulverised
rice mixed with sugar and the juice of coconut-meat.

_kalamáyo_, To get bad, fester, mortify, gangrene (applied especially
to wounds becoming worse through the influence of heat). Kinalamáyo
ang íya nga pilás. His wound got bad (through exposure to heat). Also:
erysipelas, St. Anthony's fire.

_kalámbò_, Healthy growth, quality of--growing
well,--thriving,--flourishing. Ang mga tanúm nga waláy kalámbò dápat
nga bunyagán kag sagurón. Plants that do not grow well or thrive
should be watered and taken care of. (cf. lámbò).

_kalambúgas_, A guard-ring, made as a rule thinner than the ring
it guards.

_kalambúsay_, See awóáwo id.

_kalámpay_, A kind of river-crab. (cf. kaság, kágang; pangalámpay).


_kalán_, Tripod, especially a small iron one for use in the kitchen.

_kalán-an_, (H) Dining table, dining room, refectory, restaurant,
eating place. (cf. káon).

_kalánaw_, (H) To shine, glisten; fill (with tears). (See kánaw,
kanáwkanáw).

_kalanáy_, A kind of very sticky, viscous rice; it is particularly
used for making "íbus" and "alopí". (cf. arabón, pilít).

_kalandrákas_, Unsymmetrical, awry, unequal, lop-sided,
disproportioned, queer, odd, strange. Ang íya bísti kalandrákas. Her
dress is unsymmetrical. She is dressed in an odd style.

_kalándus_, (H) Ladle, scoop, shovel for dry or liquid
things. (cf. kándus, luág, garaló).

_kálang_, A covering or protection for wounds. Also verb: Kalángi
ang pilás--or--butangí sing kálang ang pilás. Put a covering over
the wound.

_kalangán_, Braided straw, twigs, mat, or the like used to place
pots upon to prevent them from coming into contact with the
floor. (cf. likín).

_kalangás_, Jocoseness, jocosity, jocularity, waggery. (cf. langás).

_kalángkag_, Impatience, uneasiness, weariness, worry; longing,
expectancy, desire. (cf. lángkag).

_kalángkang_, (H) To stretch out one's hand with fingers apart,
as when catching a ball, etc. Kalangkangá ang kamót mo, ang túdlò
mo. Stretch out your hand, spread your fingers.

_kalangil-arán_, (H) Abomination, frightfulness, repulsiveness,
something shocking or terrifying, things awful to look upon, filthy
stench. (cf. ngíl-ad, kangíl-ad).

_kalangís_, The disagreeable sensation produced by strident sounds,
as by a saw encountering a nail or stone, etc. (langís).

_kalangís_, Rottenness, rancidness, condition of being spoilt (of
coconut-meat, copra, etc.). (langís).

_kalangítan_, Heaven; the heavens, firmament, welkin
(poetical). (cf. lángit).

_kalángking_, Ripeness, fulness (of grains, nuts,
etc.). (cf. lángking).

_kalángnan_, Stop, pause, interval, rest. (cf. langán).

_kalángsa_, A strong fishy taste or smell (said of fish in a raw as
well as in a cooked state). (lángsa).

_kalángto_, A bad, vapid, insipid nauseating taste, disagreeable
flavour, particularly applied to raw or half-raw or green peas and
beans. (cf. lángto).

_kalán-on_, (H) Food, especially rice. (cf. káon).

_kalanóng_, State of being over-ripe, rotten-ripeness. (cf. lanóng,
katanáng).

_kalan-ónon_, (H) Sweets, sweetmeat, pastry, cakes, biscuits, bread,
etc. (Almost any side-dish may be called "kalan-ónon", except rice,
meat, fish and vegetables). (cf. káon).

_kalánsan_, Hardness, fulness, ripeness; to be full and ripe,
applied especially to kadiós-beans. Nagaamátamát na ang kadiós
sang kalánsan. The kadiós-beans are beginning to get full and
hard. Nagkalánsan na ang kadiós. The kadiós beans have become full
and ripe. (See kadiós).

_kalantáhon_, (H) A song, lay, ballad, ditty, what is to be sung,
a hymn, chant, canticle. (kánta; cf. ambahánon, ambáhan).

_kalántip_, Perfection, excellence. (cf. lántip).

_kalantipán_, Perfection, quality of the highest worth, excellence,
first class, supreme, things of the highest standard. (lántip;
cf. kahimpitán).

_kalantubíg_, To fill with water, mortify, get infected or purulent
through the action of water, said of wounds, etc. Kinalantubíg ang
ákon pilás. My wound mortified (through contact with water).

_kalanúpad_, Associate, companion, cooperator, collaborator; at the
side of, near-by, adjacent. (cf. tupád).

_kalápad_, Breadth, width, extensiveness, wideness, extent. (lápad).

_kalapadón_, See kalápad.

_kalaparón_, (H) See kalápad.


_kalapáta_, A tick, a kind of mite (very small insect). (cf. galapáta).

_kalapáti_, To caulk (a boat, ship); to knead, mix; to besmear,
plaster. Kalapatíhon mo ang lúnang kag iháplas sa kólon, agúd índì
magtúlò. Knead the mud and plaster the rice-kettle with it, that it
may not leak.

_kalapít_, (H) Nearness, proximity, short distance. (cf. lapít).

_kalápkap_, Tendril of a vine, etc.; to encircle, wind around,
cling to, entwine. Ang búyò nagakalápkap sa búgsok. The "búyò" is
winding itself around the post. Iníng mga bató ginakalapkapán sang
kadenadeamór. These stones are entwined with the vine called "cadena
de amor". Pakalapkapá ang kalubáy sa palápála. Make the "calubay"
cling to the trellis or lattice work. (cf. kápkap, kabúd).

_kalapól_, Plaster, any kind of sticky or viscous material. (kápol).

_kalaponón, kalapónon_, (H) To be--castrated,--gelded, fit to be
made--a "capon",--a eunuch (especially said of cocks). (cf. kapón).

_kaláptan_, (H) Handle, haft, grip; anything to be grasped or
held. (cf. kapút).

_kalapúnan_, (H) Place where animals are castrated. (cf. kapón).

_kaláput_, To adhere to, stick together. (cf. kápot, dokót, pilít).

_kalapút_, (H) Anything used for grasping or holding. (kapút).

_kalapúyut_, (H) Thickness, consistence, coherence, density,
condensation, inspissation (of liquids). (cf. lapúyut).

_kalápyò_, Tiredness, fatigue, exhaustion, feebleness,
weakness. (cf. lápyò; kabúdlay, kalúyà).

_kalapyótan_, Handle, grip, grasp, hold, haft; influence, power,
sway. (cf. kápyot).

_kálas_, To rustle (as dry leaves in the wind). Nagakálas ang
lukáy. The dry coconut-leaves are rustling. Ang mga dáhon nga kigás
ginapakálas sang hángin. The dry leaves are being rustled by the
wind--or--are rustling in the wind.

_kalásag_, Shield, cover, protection, defense; escutcheon.

_kalasálon_, (H) Bride, bridegroom, a couple to be
married. (cf. kasál).

_kalásang_, Foolishness, folly, stupidity, silliness, shallowness,
stolidity, fatuity, nonsense, condition of one who talks foolishly
or has silly ideas. (cf. lásang).

_kalasángan_, Folly, stupidity, twaddle, silly talk. (cf. kalásang).

_kalás-ay_, Tastelessness, mawkishness, insipidness,
vapidity. (lás-ay).

_kalas-ayán_, See kalás-ay. Also: Things that are insipid or cause
nausea or aversion.

_kaláslon_, (H) See kalasálon.

_kalát_, Rope, thick string, line, cord. (cf. lúbid, písì).

_kalatâ_, Condition or state of food cooked overmuch or
overdone. (cf. latâ).

_kalatían_, Snare, trap, net; difficulty, trial. (cf. káti, katián).

_kalatipúnan_, (H) Meeting, assembly, club, club-house,
society. (cf. típon).

_kalatsótse_, A kind of cactus-tree with beautiful white flowers.

_kaláut_, Evil, badness, wickedness, malice, malignity, maliciousness,
malevolence, banefulness, balefulness, perniciousness, noxiousness;
misery, wretchedness, misfortune. (cf. láut; kaláin).

_kalaútan_, See kaláut. Also: Harm, injury, bad things, wicked deeds.

_kalawág_, A kind of plant. It is used as a remedy for painful or
decaying teeth.

_kalawásan_, Body, materiality. (cf. láwas).

_kalawasán_, Body, the main or principal part of a dress, the contents
of a letter (as distinct from the address), etc. (cf. lawás, ináng).

_kaláwat_, To receive Holy Communion, communicate. Nakakaláwat na
ikáw? Have you been to Holy Communion? Sín-o ang ginakaláwat? Who is
received in Holy Communion? Buás magakaláwat akó. To-morrow I will
receive Holy Communion. Mangaláwat akó karón. I am going-to receive
Holy Communion now. Ang masakít nga táo ginpakaláwat sang Párì. The
sick man had Holy Communion administered to him by the Priest. The
Priest gave the sick man Holy Communion.

_kaláw-ay_, (H) Ugliness, hideousness, unsightliness, unseemliness,
nastiness, unbecomingness, impropriety, indecency. (cf. láw-ay).

_kalaw-áyan_, (H) See kaláw-ay. Also: Things that are ugly, unbecoming,
dishonest, indecent, filthy, improper.

_kalawháton_, Such as to be reached or grasped; within reach, near,
easy to obtain, obtainable. (cf. káwhat).

_kaláwid_, (B) Length, duration of time. (cf. kaláwig id.).

_kaláwig_, (H) Length, duration of time. (cf. láwig).

_kalawigón_, Length; distance. (cf. kaláwig; kalayoón).

_kalawilián_, (H) Pleasure, enjoyment, delight, satisfaction. (wíli;
cf. kalawilihán, kawilihán).

_kalawilihán_, (H) See kalawilián, kawilihán id.

_kalawít_, (H) Anything used as a hook, as a stick or pole with a
hook attached to it and the like. (kawít; cf. síngit, singít).

_kalawóg_, (B) Bigness, hugeness, condition or quality of
being--very tall,--of more than ordinary size, especially applied to
animals. (lawóg).

_kálay_, To jingle, chink, tingle, tinkle (of coins, iron chains,
etc.). Nagakálay ang kwárta sa íya bólsa. The money is jingling in
his pocket. Indì mo pagpakaláyon ang pílak mo. Don't jingle your
money. (cf. kálas, lágting).

_kalayâ_, Dryness, exsiccation. (cf. láyà, layâ).

_kalayaán_, Exsiccation, withering, fading, drying up. Búlak nga walâ
sing kalayaán. A flower that never withers. (cf. kalayâ).

_kalayáng_, (B) Looseness, bagginess, wideness (of clothes that are
too large and the like). (cf. layáng, kasángkad).

_kaláyngan_, Aridity, dryness; dry or arid soil. (cf. layóng).

_kalayó_, (H) To be on fire, to flame or flare up (of fire;
cf. hingaláyo, kaláyo).

_kaláyo_, Fire; flame.

_kalayô_, (H) Farness, distance, remoteness, far away. Anó ang kalayô
sinâ? How far is it?

_kalayóngan, kalayongán_, See kaláyngan--aridity, etc.

_kalayoón_, (H) See kalayô.

_kalbása_, See kalabása. Ang kalbása kon malabó maáyo nga utánon. The
squash, if just right (i.e. neither too hard nor too soft), is a
nice vegetable.

_kalbangán_, (B) Main road, principal way or passage.

_kálbo_, (Sp. calvo) Bald, hairless. (cf. bungád, upáw).

_kaldéra_, (Sp. caldera) Kettle, cooking pot (of metal).

_kaldéro_, (Sp. caldero) A large kettle, bucket or tub (of metal).

_káldo_, (Sp. caldo) Broth, beef-tea, bouillon, sauce, gravy, a
stew, a mixture of meat, potatoes, onions, sausages, etc. Also verb:
Kaldohán mo akó sing kárne. Make me a dish of "káldo" from meat. Also:
A large bowl or cup; saucepan. (cf. kaldóhan).

_kaldóhan_, Pot or kettle for making "káldo". (cf. káldo, tasón).

_kalendáryo_, (Sp. calendario) Calendar, almanac. (cf. almanáki).

_kalentúra_, (Sp. calentura) A cold, fever. (cf. lágnat, hilánat).

_kalésa_, (Sp. calesa) A kind of two-wheeled vehicle, covered--in
buggy or gig.

_kalesín_, (Sp. calesin) A small kalésa.

_káli_, To dig. Kalíha (kálya) ang dútà. Dig up the ground. Kalíhi
(kályi) ang halígi. Dig up the ground around the post. Ikáli akó ánay
sing kamóti. Please dig up for me some sweet potatoes.

_kalibágon_, Discordance, dissonance, flatness (of sounds, voices,
music, etc.). (libágon).


_kalibángan_, Occupation, task, business, work, preoccupation
preventing one from attending to something else. May kalibángan
pa akó. I have still some work to do--or--I am still occupied or
busy. (cf. libáng).

_kalibát_, Squinting, squint, condition of one who is
cross-eyed. (cf. libát).

_kalibáynan_, (B) The youngest (a younger) brother or sister; the
last or youngest child of a family. Si Pédro amó ang íya anák nga
kalibáynan. Peter is her youngest child. (cf. libáyon, kamanghóran,
mánghud).

_kalibúg_, Confusion, dizziness, perplexity, giddiness,
vertigo. (libúg).

_kalibugán_, See kalibúg. Also: Mixture as between Visayans
and Negritos, Visayans and Europeans, etc.; Mestizo, half-breed,
hybrid. Ang mga bumulúthò nga tumándok nagpakigáway sa mga bumulúthò
nga katsílà kag kalibugán. The native students fought against the
Spanish and half-caste students.

_kalibútan_, World, earth, visible creation, universe; the world as
opposed to moral and spiritual forces; reason, intelligence. Walâ na
siá sing kalibútan. He is unconscious. (Literally: "There is no world
for him"). Walâ siá sing kalibútan. He knows nothing. May kalibútan
pa siá. He is still conscious. Ang lángit kag ang kalibútan. Heaven
and earth. Dirí sa ibábaw siníng kalibútan----. Here on the face of
the earth----. Ang kalibútan kag ang íya sinâ nga kadayáwan umalági
man lang. The world and its vanities are but passing. (líbut).

_kalibutáni_, How is it possible to know, etc. See pamál-i,
panghimál-i.

_kalibutánon_, Worldly, earthly, materialistic, sensuous,
sensual. Ang mga táo nga kalibutánon. The worldly minded. Kalípay
nga kalibutánon. Worldly or sensual pleasures.

_kalígà_, (B) Forgetfulness, carelessness, negligence, disregard,
slight, unmindfulness, heedlessness. (cf. lígà, kalipát, kalipátan).

_kaligáan_, (B) See kalígà. (cf. kalipátan).

_kalígdong_, Modesty, propriety, correctness of conduct,
self-respect. (lígdong; cf. kaúgdang).

_kalíg-on_, Firmness, stability, security, durability. (cf. líg-on).

_kalig-onán_, See kalíg-on. Also: Security, bond, bail, anything that
makes for stability or freedom from danger and apprehension.

_kaligóy_, Laziness, indolence, idleness, sloth, inaction. (ligóy).

_kaligoyán_, Laziness. (cf. kaligóy, ligóy, katámad).

_kalígsi_, Swiftness, speediness, celerity, rapidity, fleetness,
nimbleness, agility, quickness of movement. (lígsi; cf. kalíksi).

_kalíkad_, (H) To stir, loosen up earth, rice in a kettle,
etc. Kalikáda (kalikára) ang tiníg-ang. Loosen up the cooked
rice. (cf. hakíd, súkad).

_kalikóg_, Anything used for cleaning out liquid waste matter
from narrow tubes or holes, as from the ear, the nose, a wound,
etc. (cf. kilikóg).

_kalíkog_, To clean out with a feather, cotton, stick, etc. a
narrow aperture, wound, hole, etc. Kalikóga sang búlbul ang ímo
dulúnggan. Clean your ear with a feather. Kalikógi ang ilóng sang
bátà. Wipe the baby's nose. Ikalíkog akó ánay sang ákon pilás. Please
cleanse my wound. (cf. kilíkog).

_kalíksi_, See kalígsi. (cf. líksi--lígsi).

_kalilíbgan_, (H) Preoccupation, distraction, state or condition of
being much upset or distracted by cares, etc.; things that make one's
head swim, perplexity. (libúg; cf. kalibúg).

_kalilígban_, (H) See kalilíbgan.

_kalilísdan_, Hardships, troubles, difficulties, stress,
straits. (cf. lisúd).

_kalím-an_, Fifty. (cf. limá).

_kalimóg_, For makalimóg, nakalimóg. (cf. limóg; katingúg).

_kalímot_, (H) Forgetfulness, oblivion. (límot; cf. kalígà).

_kalimutáw_, The eyeball, the apple of the eye; the pupil of the
eye. (cf. taótáo).

_kalínaw_, Calm, quiet, tranquillity, calmness, stillness, smoothness,
quietness, state or condition of being unruffled. (cf. línaw).


_kalináwan_, See kalínaw. Also: Things that insure peace and
tranquillity.

_kalíng_, Plough-handle, plough-tail.

_kalingág_, Folly, foolishness, stupidity; a stupid fellow.

_kalingáw_, Distraction, diversion, inattention, condition or state
of being distracted. Támà gid ang íya kalingáw (pagkalingáw) nga walâ
siá makabatî sang lágpok sang íya bátà nga nahúlug sa hágdan. She
was so distracted that she did not even hear the noise made by her
child when it fell down the stairs. (cf. lingáw).

_kalingáwan_, Distraction, diversion, amusement, pastime, relaxation,
recreation. (cf. lingáw, kalingáw, kalingáw-lingáwan).

_kalingáw-lingáwan_, Distraction, diversion, relaxation, entertainment,
things apt to distract the mind and provide amusement. (cf. lingáw).

_kalíngin_, Confusion, perturbation, embarrassment, distraction,
worry. Dakô ang kalíngin sang íya ólo. His mind is greatly perturbed,
worried, upset. (cf. língin, lingín).

_kalingó-lingó_, Doubt, hesitation, questioning,
incertitude, misgiving, distrust, suspense, indecision,
vacillation. (cf. lingólingó, kalamalamahán).

_kalingó-lingohán_, Apprehension of danger, hesitation, wavering.

_kalinóng_, Peace, order, quiet, quietude, tranquillity,
calm. (cf. linóng).

_kalínyas_, Bobbin; to wind on a bobbin. Ang bunáng ginakalínyas. Yarn
is wound on a bobbin. Kalinyasá iníng isá ka labág nga kósta. Wind
this hank of yarn on bobbins.

_kalipát_, (H) Oblivion, forgetfulness. (lipát; cf. kalímot, kalígà).

_kalipátan_, (H) Forgetfulness, etc. Ang kalipátan unáy sa
láwas. Forgetfulness is a common failing of man. (cf. kalipát,
kalígà, kaligáan).

_kalípay_, Joy, gaiety, pleasure, cheer, entertainment, gladness,
delight, glee, cheerfulness, mirth, merriment, hilarity,
bliss. (cf. lípay).

_kalipáyan_, See kalípay. Also: Things that give pleasure, happiness
or enjoyment.

_kalipóng_, Swoon, faint, fainting-fit, syncope, fit,
unconsciousness. (cf. lipóng).

_kalíp-ot_, (H) Shortness, briefness, brevity, small extension from
end to end. (líp-ot).

_kalipunát_, (H) Anus. (cf. áno, kagalán, ipotán).

_kalíro_, (Sp. calero, calera) Lime-kiln, lime-burner; faggots or wood
used in burning people at the stake; to burn at the stake. Ginkalíro
níla ang buyóng. They burned the robber at the stake. Ang maáyo sa
íya kaliróhon. It would be best to burn him at the stake. (A saying
used in anger and passion).

_kalirohán_, Lime-kiln; furnace. Ginbutáng siá níla sa kalirohán. They
put him into the furnace (lime-kiln). (cf. kalíro).

_kális_, (Sp. cris) The Malayan dagger, creese or cris, a sword as
used by the Moros.

_kális_, (Sp. caliz) Chalice.

_kalís_, To even out, strike or level off what is above measure
or superfluous, especially in measuring out grain. Kalisá ang
gantángan. Strike off the heap on top of the gantángan-measure. Ikalís
akó ánay siníng paníga. Please level off this fanega. (paníga;
(Sp. fanega)--half a pásong (bushel)).

_kalísang_, Horror, terror, fear, panic, fright,
frightfulness. (cf. lísang).

_kalísaw_, Tastelessness, insipidness, unsavouriness, usually applied
to stale tubers like "úbi", "banáyan", "kamóti", etc. (cf. lísaw).

_kalisdánan_, Difficulties, distress, etc. See kalilísdan, lisúd,
kalisúd.

_kalísding_, Tilt, slant, leaning, inclination. (cf. lísding).

_kalisdingán_, See kalísding. Also: liability to tilt, possibility
of tilting. Dílì ka mahádluk sináng bayóng, kay walâ gid inâ sing
kalisdingán. Have no fear about that bamboo water-tube, for it cannot
tilt over.

_kalisngád_, Backwardness, dulness, stupidity, condition of a person
whose mental faculties are below normal. (cf. pungág, tampuháw,
pákok, búngaw).

_kalísto_, (From the Sp. listo) Cleverness, sharpness, intelligence,
quickness, capacity, sagacity, brightness, resourcefulness, gumption,
capableness; trickiness.

_kalisúd_, Hardship, trouble, cross, adversity, affliction, visitation,
bad--, ill--, fortune or luck. (cf. kalisdánan, kalilísdan, lisúd).

_kalít_, To anticipate, do promptly, take the first
opportunity. Ginakalitán sang mga buyúng ang kadudúlmon sa
pagpangatí. The brigands are prompt in making use of the darkness
for their depredations. Kalití ang ímo pagpaúlì, kay básì maulanán
ikáw. Go home quickly, or the rain may overtake you.

_kalítgit_, A kind of binding or fastening together with spaces
between the pieces fastened together, as in the making of a "lág-i",
of split-bamboo flooring, etc.; to tie, fasten or bind together after
the manner of "kalítgit".

_kaliwâ_, Clumsy, awkward, ungainly. (cf. baksiwâ, bikwálon).

_kaliwát_, See kaliwâ.

_kalíwat_, Stock, family, inheritance, heredity. Nagasándig gid siá
sa kalíwat. He is a chip off the old block. (cf. liwát).

_kaliwátan_, Generation, progeny, offspring,
descendants. (cf. kalíwat).

_kalíya_, A non-liquid enema, an introduction into the rectum of
kalawág-roots or the like in order to relieve constipation. Kaliyáhi
siá sing upús kag sibúyas. Give him an enema of the remnants of a
smoked cigar and of onions. (cf. ayúda, labatíba).

_kálkag_, Dried hipon-fish; to become as dry as dried
hipon-fish. Nagkálkag na ang bagáso. The bagasse has become as dry
as dried hipon-fish, i.e. is quite exsiccated and brittle or friable.

_kálkal_, To remove, get or take out, as bones from a mortuary
niche, to dig out, look--, hunt--, up, data from a register or the
like. Kalkalá ang linubúng. Disinter the buried corpse. Ginkálkal
sang piskál ang sertipíko nga kinahánglan ko. The parish-clerk dug
out from the register the certificate I needed. Kalkalí akó sang
ákon sertipíko sang bautísmo. Look up and copy for me my baptismal
certificate. Ikálkal akó ánay siníng panteón nga dáan. Please open
and clean out this mortuary niche for me.

_kálò_, Hat, cap, head-dress; anything in the form of a hat.

_kálò_, (B) To stir, turn about. Kalóa ang túbig. Stir the water. Sín-o
ang nagkálò sang áwang, kay malubúg ang túbig? Who stirred up the well,
for the water is dirty (turbid)?

_kalóg_, Ditch, channel, trench, gutter.

_kalóg-og_, (B) To slide, glide, slither, slip down. Nagkalóg-og siá
sa bintánà. He slipped down from the window. (cf. alóg-og).

_kaló-kálo_, Cold rice warmed up and stirred in a pan either with
or without lard; to warm up rice in the manner described. Kalókalóha
ang kán-on. Warm the rice and stir it in the pan. Kalókalóhi akó sing
kápog. Make me a dish of "kalókálo" from cold rice. Ikalókálo akó ánay
siníng báhaw. Kindly prepare me a dish of kalókálo from this cold rice.

_kalókus_, (H) To tuck or turn up (trousers and the like). Kalokúsa
ang delárgo mo. Tuck up your trousers. Nagalakát silá nga kinalókus
ang íla mga delárgo. They are walking with their trousers tucked
up. Pangalókus ka, kay matabók kitá sa subâ. Tuck up (your trousers),
for we are going to cross the river. (cf. baláking--to tuck up skirts,
sotanas, and the like).

_kalolô_, (H) Tenderness, affection, mildness, amiability, gentleness,
affability, mansuetude. (lolô; cf. kalólot).

_kalólot_, See kalolô. Also: A lover, paramour.

_kalólot_, To apply any sticky, viscous material. Ginakalólot sa ápal
sang binángon ang tagók sang kamánsi. The juice of the bread-fruit
is used for fastening the handle of a bolo.

_kalolót_, Any sticky, viscous juice.

_kalomó_, Softness, flaccidness, flaccidity, pliability, limpness,
flabbiness, floppiness, condition of wet clothes, etc. (lomó;
cf. kahómok, kalúm-ok).

_kalómò_, (B) To compress, press together, squeeze between the
hands. Angay gid nga kalomóon ni nánay ang úlo mo, kay nagsinutíl
ikáw. It is quite right for mother to squeeze your head, for you have
been naughty. Ginkalómò níya siá. He squeezed his head. (cf. kulámò).

_kalóng_, Dry, exsiccated, empty, applied particularly to pods and
husks; to be or become dry. (cf. kagúng).

_kalóng_, One, one piece (of dry fruit enclosed in a pod or
husk). Hatági akó sing isá ka kalóng nga kamúnsil. Give me a pod
of camunsel-fruit.

_kalónggo_, Wart, wart-like excrescence.

_kalóng-kálong_, Dim. of kalóng. Ripe and dry (of fruit enclosed in
a pod or husk).

_kalóngkong_, To carry in one's arms. Kalongkongá ang bátà. Carry
the baby in your arms. Ikalóngkong akó ánay siníng bátà. Please carry
this baby in your arms. (cf. kúgus, kólkol).

_kaló-oy_, Mercy, pity, compassion, clemency, forbearance, lenity,
lenience, leniency, indulgence, pardon, sympathy, complaisance,
toleration. (cf. lóoy).

_kalós_, To scratch (with the nails, claws, etc.). Kalosá siá. Scratch
him. Ginsúmbag ko siá, kay kinalós níya akó. I struck him, because
he had scratched me. (cf. karós id.).

_kalós-os_, To glide, slide, slither, slip down, as down a pole,
rope and the like. Nagkalós-os siá sa lapgósan. He slid down the
maypole. (cf. alóg-og, dalús-us).

_kálot_, To scratch softly (to ease an itchy feeling). Indì mo
pagkalóton ang arikís mo, kay básì magadúgang. Don't scratch your
rash, for it may become worse. Nagdágsang ang íya katúl, kay kinálot
níya. His skin-disease "katúl" began to fester, for he scratched
it. Ikálot akó ánay sang ákon likód, kay indi akó makadáb-ot. Please
scratch my back for I cannot reach it.

_kalsáda_, (Sp. calzada) Road, highway, street, causeway, row,
walk. (cf. dálan).

_kalsónes_, (Sp. calzon) Drawers, pants, underwear, short trousers.

_kalsonsílyo_, (Sp. calzoncillo) Drawers, pants, underwear.

_kaluásan_, Freedom, independence, liberty, delivery,
escape. (cf. luás).

_kalúbad_, A kind of rice. (cf. arabón).

_kalubáy_, A kind of elongated gourd, white squash.

_kalubihán_, (H) Coconut-grove, coconut-plantation; self-praise,
boastful language, bragging about one's accomplishment, etc. Nagasúgid
siá sang íya nga kalubihán. He is boasting of his accomplishments,
etc. (cf. lubí, kaniogán; agrót).

_kalúbkub_, To scratch in the meaning of "kálot" but with this
difference that "kalúbkub" indicates a swifter motion to and fro
of the hands and fingers. Kalubkubá ang ímo katúl. Scratch your
itch. Kalubkubí siá. Scratch him. Ikalúbkub akó sa ákon likód. Kindly
scratch me on the back. (karúbkub, id.).

_kalubúg_, Turbidness, turbidity, muddiness, dirtiness, uncleanness
(of liquids). (cf. lubúg).

_kalúbung_, A wicker-basket with lid, often used for carrying food
to workmen in the fields, etc.

_kalugáw-an_, Fiasco, failure, frustrated efforts, baffled
hopes. (cf. lugáw-an).

_kalúgdang_, Sinking. (cf. kalugdángan).

_kalugdángan_, Sinking, foundering, going down, submersion,
drowning. (cf. lúgdang, kalúgdang).

_kalúgmò_, To cover or enwrap oneself, put a blanket, etc., round
one's body. (cf. kalúmbut, pangulúmbut, panimúlon).

_kaluíb_, Treason, treachery, perfidy, perfidiousness,
betrayal. (cf. luíb, kabúdhì).

_kaluibán_, See kaluíb. Also: Treacherous deeds, treasonable
proceedings, traitorous actions, cheating.

_kalulúbdan_, Solution, act or process of solving;
explanation. (cf. lubád).

_kalulúmsan_, Drowning, death by drowning. (cf. lumús).

_kalumbítà_, To swing, hang, dangle by the hands, with the feet
off the ground. Ang mga amô nagakalumbítà sa sangá sang káhoy. The
monkeys are hanging by their hands from the branch of the tree. Ang
káhoy ginakalumbitá-an sang mga amô. The monkeys are dangling from
the tree. (cf. kábit, kabítkábit).

_kalúmbut_, (H) Cloak, coat, cover, wrapper; to cover or protect
oneself against the cold, against blows and thrusts, etc., by
wrapping a blanket, or the like, around one's body. Magkalúmbut
ka sing hábul. Wrap a blanket around you. Ginkalúmbut níya ang
hábul. He protected himself with a blanket. Ginkalumbután siá níla
sing hábul. They wrapped a blanket around him. (cf. pangulúmbut which
is more in use as a verb).

_kalumíng_, Weakness, debility, feebleness. (lumíng; cf. kalúya).

_kalúm-ok_, Softness, pliability, plasticity, compressibility,
impressibility. (lúm-ok; cf. kalomó, kahómok).

_kalúmon_, Lodger, guest, boarder, fellow-lodger. (cf. lúmon).

_kalumpágan_, (H) Withering; destruction, ruin,
perdition. (cf. lúmpag).

_kalúmpit_, A kind of rice. (cf. arabón).

_kalumsánan_, Drowning. See kalulúmsan id.

_kalunák_, (H) Vulgarity, commonness, condition of being common,
vulgar or used by many. (cf. lunák).

_kalunángan_, Mud, mire. (cf. lúnang).

_kalúnay_, Softness, compressibility, impressionableness,
impressibility, plasticity, pliability; tenderness. (cf. lúnay).

_kalúndong_, (B) Fool, ass, idiot; foolish, half-witted, not quite
normal. (cf. pángug, pángog).

_kalúnud_, The sinking, foundering, going down or disappearance beneath
the waves of a vessel, etc.; fellow-passenger in a shipwreck. Sín-o
ang áton sumaláon sang pagkalúnud sang sakayán? Who is responsible
for the sinking of the boat? (cf. lúnud, katugdángan, katúgdang).

_kalupáan_, (B) Grounds, fields, lands. (lúpà--dútà; cf. kadutáan).

_kalútò_, Ripeness, maturity, particularly applied to fruits. (lútò).

_kalúyà_, Tiredness, exhaustion, weariness, fatigue. (cf. lúyà).

_kalúya_, Weakness, debility, frailty, feebleness. (cf. lúya).

_kaluyáan_, See kalúyà. Also: Things that are tiresome, exhausting
or wearying.

_kalúyag_, Liking, love, fancy, leaning, partiality, relish,
inclination, desire, passion. (cf. lúyag).

_kaluyahán_, See kalúya. Also: Things that cause weakness or that
are debilitating.

_kaluyahón_, Weakness. See kalúya.

_kalúyò_, Slowness, condition of one who loiters or jogs along slowly
due ta exhaustion, natural debility, old age, etc. (cf. lúyò).

_kalúyo_, Neighbour, friend, partner. (cf. kaluyó, kaíping,
kasilíngan).

_kaluyó_, Companion, associate, comrade; condition of being at the
side of, or near, another. (cf. luyó, kalúyo).

_kalwágan_, Pan, frying pan. (cf. kaláhà, karuágan, karwágan).

_kálwit_, A little, small amount, trifle, bagatelle, insignificant,
of little moment, of no importance. (cf. púdyot, diótay, tikî, ikî).

_kalyákay_, A kind of plant. (cf. talyákay id.).

_kályan_, See káli.

_kálye_, (Sp. calle) Road, way, street, causeway, walk,
row. (cf. dálan, kalsáda).

_kályo_, (Sp. callo) Callus, callosity, corn, wen. (cf. kíbul).

_káma_, (Sp. cama) Bed, couch. (cf. higdáan, higdaanán, balatángan).

_káma_, The felloe of a wheel, felly, curved section of the rim of
a wheel.

_káma_--, Often used instead of pagkama--for the formation of
abstract nouns from ma--adjectives, e.g. kamaulínggon--concern;
kamatinatápon--attention; kamaabí-abíhon--friendliness,
etc. etc. (cf. ka--).

_kamáda_, (Probably from the Sp. cama) A stack, heap, pile; to stack
or pile wood, etc. Kamadáha ang káhoy. Stack the wood. Ikamáda akó
sináng gatóng. Please pile up that fire-wood for me.

_kamág-an_, Lightness, levity, airiness, state of being easy to lift
or carry. (mág-an; cf. kabúg-at--heaviness.)

_kamag-anón_, See kamág-an.

_kamágo_, The string with which a spinning top (kasíng) is spun.

_kamág-o_, Novelty, newness, freshness, something new or strange
noticed or experienced for the first time. Kamág-o iní sa ákon. This is
new to me. (I have never seen or experienced it before). Nagmasakít siá
sang íya pagabút sa Mindanáw tungúd sang kamág-o. He became sick when
he arrived in Mindanao, because he was not accustomed to conditions
there. (cf. bág-o).

_kamag-ohán_, See kamág-o. Also: Things that have only lately been
introduced, new fashions and styles and the like. (cf. kalamág-ohán
id.).

_kamagóng_, A hardwood tree and its timber, related to ebony; mahogany.

_kamagulangán_, (H) The eldest brother or sister; the eldest
(first-born) son or daughter. (cf. kagulángan, maguláng).

_kamahál_, Dearness, costliness, preciousness, value, high price,
exorbitant price. (mahál).

_kamahálan_, See kamahál. Also: Preciousness; dear, precious things.

_kamahalón_, See kamahál.

_kamahistád_, Friendship, friend, intimate acquaintance, attachment,
mutual esteem or assistance. (Often used rather humorously instead
of the Sp. amistád).

_kamâ-kamâ_, Pygmy, dwarf, fairy, pygmean ghost; dwarfish.

_kamalá_, (H) Dryness, lack of moisture, aridity. (cf. malá, kalayâ,
kalayaán).

_kamalámalahán_, (H) Suspense, doubt, hesitation. (cf. kalamalamahán).

_kamalántang_, Proportion, symmetry, harmony (of a man, clothes,
a building, etc.). (cf. balántang).

_kamaláyo_, A kind of wasp with a very painful sting. (cf. mangaláyo,
alingáyo).

_kamalí_, To err, mistake, misunderstand, misinterpret, misapprehend,
misconceive, misconstrue. Nagkamalí siá sang íya nga nabasahán. He
misunderstood what he read. ("kamalí" appears to be of Tagalog origin).

_kamálig_, Hut, shed, hovel, granary, storehouse.

_kamalíngking_, The little finger. (cf. kumalíngking, tingayón,
tingáy-tíngay).

_kamalóson_, A kind of edible beans.

_kamalúnggay_, A tree whose leaves are often boiled and used as a
vegetable. (cf. balúnggay id.).

_kamándag_, A kind of plant similar to "kásla", but with a reddish
stem and dark leaves.

_kámang, kamáng_, To creep, crawl, walk on hands and feet (knees).

_kamáng_, Prostrate, inclined, lying down, bent towards the ground,
chiefly applied to sugar cane of the second crop (kalaánan) that
frequently does not grow erect as in the first crop.

_kám-ang_, Cant hook, peavy; barb, hook.

_kamánga_, Hone, whetstone. (cf. bairán).

_kamanghúdan_, Youngest (younger) brother or sister. (cf. mánghud).

_kamanghúran_, See kamanghúdan id.

_kamáng-kámang_, Dim. of kámang. To creep, crawl, jog along.

_kamángyan_, A kind of incense.

_kamanhawáan_, Openness, spaciousness; freedom to get a living and
make progress. (cf. manháwà, kamanwaháan).

_kamánsi_, The Philippine breadfruit.

_kamánso_, (From the Sp. manso) Tameness, gentleness, submissiveness,
mildness. (cf. kahagúp).


_kamantígi_, A beautiful flowering plant.

_kamantógol_, A kind of Philippine dance.

_kamantolán_, A kind of grass.

_kamanwaháan_, See kamanhawáan id. (cf. manwáhà--manháwà).

_kamápe_, (Sp. canapé) Sofa, settee, lounge, couch.

_kámara_, (Sp. recámara) Mortar, shooting mortar, detonator.

_kámara_, (Sp. cámara) Hall, chamber, house (of a legislative
body). Kámara álta. Upper House. Senate. Kámara báha (Sp. baja)
Lower House. House of Commons.

_kámara_, (Sp. cámara) The cabin of a "lorcha".

_kamarín_, (Sp. camarín) Barn, shed, outhouse, storehouse, go-down.

_kamaróte_, (Sp. camarote) State-room, berth; cabin (of a steamship,
etc.).

_kámas, kamás_, To fight using hands and feet as in wrestling
or as horses when fighting, to rear up, clamber, climb a steep
mountain-side using hands and feet. Ang mga kabáyo nagakamasáy. The
horses are fighting each other. Kamása siá. Fight him tooth and nail,
(with hands and feet). Figuratively: Maáyo ang íya kamás (kámas)
sang kadiós nga ginútan ko. He is greedily eating the kadiós-peas I
prepared as a vegetable dish.

_kamás_, Fight, scuffle, scrimmage; any limb, as an arm, leg, tentacle,
etc., used in a fight. (cf. kámas).

_kamásà_, To waste, squander, throw away. Dì mo pagkamasáan ang kwárta,
kán-on, kinitáan, etc. Do not waste money, rice, earnings, etc.

_kamasinalígon_, Trustworthiness, faithfulness, strength of character,
reliability. (cf. sálig).

_kamasóswon_, (B) The last child in a family, the baby of a family;
youngest brother or sister. (cf. kalibáynan, libáyon).

_kamát-an_, Eyes; source, beginning; centre. Ang kamát-an sang
subâ. The source of the river. The central or deep channel of the
river. (cf. matá).

_kamátay_, Many dying at one time, great mortality, frequency of death;
to die in great numbers. Ang pagkamátay--or--ang kamátay nga nagagíkan
sa pamalatián----. The mortality from sickness----. Madámò ang
nagkalamátay gíkan sa pamalaúd. Many died of dysentery. (cf. patáy).

_kamatáyon_, Death, termination, end, dissolution, decease,
demise. cf. patáy).

_kamátis_, Tomato.

_kamatuóran_, (H) Truth, verity, rightness, correctness; truthfulness,
veracity, frankness, candour. (matúod).

_kamaúg_, Greed, voraciousness, passion for. (cf. maóg).

_kám-aw_, A large, thick bowl as used in Philippine households.

_kámay_, To throw about one's arms, as in swimming. Magkámay ka,
kay kon dílì masálup ka. Use your arms, or you will sink.

_kamáy_, Hand, arm; the legs of a crab, spider, etc. (cf. kamóy).

_kamáy_, To beckon. Ginkamayán níya akó. He beckoned me. (cf. páypay).

_kamáy-kámay_, Dim. of kamáy. To beckon repeatedly or in
quick succession; swing the arms or throw them about as in
swimming. (cf. kapáykápay).

_kámbad_, To encircle, wind around, entwine. Ikámbad mo sa ákon bútkon
iníng tinábas. Wind this piece of cloth round my arm. Kambarí (--adí)
ang bútkon ko sang bínda. Bind up my arm with the bandage. (cf. kámbat,
kámbod, sabúd).

_kámbang_, Variegated, motley, marked with various colours, spotted,
dapple, dappled, mottled, brindled; to be or become variegated,
etc. Ang tínday nagkámbang na. The calf has become spotted. (cf. bolók,
pintókpíntok: the difference is that "kámbang" is used of variously
coloured surfaces with spots of a larger size than implied by "bolók"
or "pintókpíntok").

_kámbat_, See kámbad. (cf. kambatí--kambarí).

_kambíd, kámbid_, To twist round the legs or feet as in wrestling,
etc. Kambirí (--idí) siá. Entwine your legs around him. Ikámbid sa
íya ang ímo tiíl. Twist your foot around him. (cf. sálbid, lákwid).

_kámbio_, (Sp. cambio) Change, exchange, barter; to exchange, barter,
swop, swap, change. Ikámbio ko iníng báka sa ímo karabáw. I will
exchange this ox for your buffalo. Kambiohí iníng papél nga sínko písos
sing sensílyo. Give me change for this five-peso bill. Nagkambiohánay
silá sang íla mga baláy. They swopped houses. Ikámbio mo akó ánay
siníng kwárta. Please give me change for this money. (cf. báylo).

_kámbod_, See kámbad--to encircle, etc.

_kámbot_, Stomach--or chest-protector, abdominal belt; cholera belt;
armour, cuirass.

_kámbray, kambráy_, (Sp. cambray) Cambric; gauze, fine or transparent
linen.

_kambúsà_, Unseemly, unsightly, slovenly, not well done (of sewing,
etc.). Kambúsà (Nagakambúsà) ang ági siníng mákina, siníng talahían,
etc. No good sewing is done with this machine,--in this tailoring shop,
etc. Also: A kind of small dog with curly hair.

_kambúwà_, See kambúsà.

_kambúya_, (From the Sp. compañía) Partner, participant,
share--or stock-holder; to combine, form a partnership, company or
society. Nagakambúya silá. They are partners. Ginkambuyáhan níla nga
duhá ang pahunán sang íla nga negósyo. The two of them contributed
the capital of their business. Kambuyáhi akó sa pangomérsyo. Form a
partnership with me for a commercial enterprise. Kambúya ko siá. He
is my partner. (cf. kumbúya).

_kámbyo_, Change, exchange. See kámbio.

_kamélyo_, (Sp. camello) Camel.

_kamí_, We, excluding the person addressed or spoken to. See kamihánon,
kamíkámi.

_kámias_, Tap, light stroke, gentle slap; to tap, slap, strike with
the finger-tips. Kamiasá ang íya ilóng. Tap his nose. Indì mo siá
pagkamiasán sa íya guyá. Don't tap him on the face. (cf. káblit,
kúhit, kámlot, kámlò, tándog, kámlas, tápdas).

_kamihánon_, We among ourselves. (cf. kamí).

_kamí-kámi_, Dim. of kamí. (cf. kamihánon).

_kamíndag_, Capsized, overturned; to turn turtle, overturn. (cf. túmba,
sulî, balískad).

_kaminéro_, (Sp. camino--road) Road-mender, street-cleaner.

_kamíngaw_, Loneliness, solitariness, dreariness, glumness, moodiness,
dejection, sadness, gloom, sentimentality, melancholy, emotional
feelings. (cf. míngaw).

_kamingáwan_, See kamíngaw. Also: Things that make life lonely,
sad, etc.

_kamíno_, (Sp. camino) Road, way, street, causeway, walk,
row. (cf. dálan, kalsáda).

_kaminósan_, (From the Sp. menos) Something that does not come up to
expectations, a falling below the standard or requirements, anything
far below what is due.

_kamísa_, (Sp. camisa) Shirt (for women). Kamísa déntro. A shirt
with long sleeves worn under a coat or near the skin. Kamísa tsína
or kamísa de tsíno. A jacket or shirt-like upper garment worn by men
without a coat. The kamísa tsína is made in various designs, often
decorated with embroidered flowers, etc., and is frequently made of
very light and transparent fabrics, as jusi, piña, etc.

_kamiséta_, (Sp. camiseta) Shirt-like blouse, spencer, short shirt,
worn by men (without a coat).

_kamisóla_, (Sp. camisola) A shirt-like upper garment worn
by women leaving the neck free; ruffled shirt, dicky. Also:
night-shirt. (cf. báta).

_kamisón_, (Sp. camisón) Long shirt, night-shirt, chiefly worn by
women. (cf. báta).

_kámkam_, To touch, nudge, bring one's hand in contact with. Ikámkam
ang ímo kamót sa dalúnggan sang bátà. Touch the baby's ear with your
hand. Kamkamá siá. Touch him. Kamkamí siá sa íya bútkon. Touch him
on the arm. (cf. híkap, tándog, kámlot, etc.).

_kámlas_, See kámias.


_kámlò_, To nudge, touch momentarily. Kamloá siá. Nudge him. Kamloí siá
sa kamót. Touch him on the hand. Indì mo pagkamloón ang líbro, kay básì
mamansahán. Don't touch the book, for it may get soiled. (cf. kúhit,
káblit, kámkam, etc).

_kámlot_, (H) See kámlò. (kamlotá, kamlotí--kamloá, kamloí).

_kamó_, You, the plural of ikáw. (cf. kamókámo, kamohánon).

_kámog_, (B) To fight hand to hand, to grapple. Kamóga siá. Grapple
him. Anó ang ginkamógan nínyo? What are you fighting about?

_kamógol_, (B) To grasp, clutch, clench, grapple with, as in wrestling,
etc. Nagakamogoláy silá. They are grappling with each other. Kamagóla
siá. Grapple with him. Ginkamógol níya akó. He held me in a clench. Siá
gid lang nga isá ang nagakamógol sang íya trabáho. He grapples with
his work quite alone. (cf. kámog; gahús, gakám).

_kamohánon_, You among yourselves.

_kamókámo_, Dim. of kamó. (cf. kamohánon).

_kamôkamô_, Botched, bungled, not well done or made, badly wrought;
to botch, bungle, do something badly or carelessly. Dílì nínyo
pagkamôkamoón ang ínyo trabáho. Don't perform your work carelessly.

_kamól_, To encircle or span around with thumb and middle-finger. Indì
siá makakamól sang ákon liwatán. He cannot span my wrist with his thumb
and middle-finger. Tilawí kag kamolón ang ákon bútkon kon makasaráng
ikáw. Try to encircle my arm with your thumb and middle-finger,
if you can. Also: A handful, as much as one can grasp with thumb
and middle-finger. Hatági akó sing isá ka kamól nga humáy. Give me a
handful of rice. Metaphorically: Walâ gid sing nakadimól, kay gínúrut
lang níya sang kamól. Nobody had any benefit of it, because he grasped
(or took) everything for himself. (cf. gamól).

_kamól-kamól_, Dim. and Freq. of kamól. Also: to settle amicably,
come to terms, make an agreement. (cf. kapánkápan, tapáltápal).

_kamomóo_, The thumb. (cf. kumalagkô).

_kamóok_, Profoundness, soundness, deepness (of sleep). (cf. kahamúok).

_kamót_, (H) The hand. (cf. alíma).

_kamóti_, (Sp. camote) Sweet potato.

_kamotikáhoy_, A plant with edible roots.

_kamotingkáhoy_, See kamotikáhoy.

_kamóy_, The legs of a crab, spider, shrimp, etc. Nakuháan siá sing
kamóy. He was deprived of his legs (i.e. he lost his support).

_kampána_, (Sp. campana) Bell. (cf. bágting, linggánay).

_kampanáryo_, (Sp. campanario) Belfry, bell-tower. (cf. lingganáyan).

_kampanílya_, (Sp. campanilla) A small bell, altar-bell.

_kampaníro_, (Sp. campanero) Bell-man, bell-ringer; bell-founder.

_kampílan_, A large, long kind of sword; hanger, cutlass.

_kámpo_, (Sp. campo) Field, open ground, camp, campus. (cf. umá,
patág, halampángan, halampangánan).

_kámpod, kampód_, (B) To include all, embrace all, comprise all,
take in all, leave out none or nothing; equipped, provided or dealt
with, in an equal manner. Nagakámpod silá nga tanán sang páyong,
sang kálò, etc. All of them have umbrella's, hats, etc. Ikámpod mo sa
íla ang mga lápis sa látok. Distribute to them the pencils that are
on the table. Kampodán mo silá sing bíntay nga mútyà. Give them all
ear-rings made of pearls. Pakampodán mo silá nga tanán sing bág-o nga
mga tulún-an. Procure new books for all of them. Kámpod (magkámpod)
kamó nga tanán sang binángon kag maglakát. Take (all of you) your
boloes and go. (cf. tápud, túptup).

_kámra_, See kámara.

_kámras_, See kámlas, kámros id.

_kámros_, To tap, stroke, slap, etc. See kámlas.

_kamuadán, kamuarán_, Increase, multiplication, propagation,
procreation, augmentation, production, growth, increment. (cf. búad,
múad).

_kamúkhà_, Not quite normal, half-witted, fool,
softy. (cf. kulángkuláng, buangít, tampuháw, etc.).


_kamúkhà_, An equal, one of the same blood, condition or
position; to be partners, help or stick together and never fight
each other. "Nagakamúkhà silá" may mean "They are idiots or
half-fools" or "They are partners and will not fight against each
other". (cf. kaángay, kasúbung). (N.B. kamúkhà seems to be a Tagalog
word).

_kamulahán_, Apprehension, fear, misgiving, suspense,
doubt. (cf. kalamalamahán, kamalamalahán, kahangáwà).

_kamúning_, A kind of flower.

_kamunóan_, Beginning, start, commencement, first stage, introduction,
initiation, preface. Sa kamunóan, kag (sa) katapúsan----. At the
beginning, and at the end----. At any rate----. When everything is
said----. Under all circumstances----. (cf. púnò).

_kamunóan_, A kind of plant with very odoriferous leaves.

_kamúnsil_, A very common tree whose fruit is edible and whose wood
supplies many a house with posts.

_kamúra_, A kind of tall grass.

_kamúrang_, A creeper with beautiful leaves. It mostly climbs large
trees.

_kamúros_, (B) To lead in work, direct work and take the chief hand
in it. Sín-o ang nagakamúros sa ínyo nga pangabúdlay? Who is your
leading workman? Or: Who is your boss?

_kamús-kamús_, Living from hand to mouth, etc. See abátabát.

_kamusmúsan_, Destitution, poverty, misery,
penury. (músmus). (cf. kaimolán).

_kamústa_, (Sp. como está) How are (you)?; to greet, salute, shake
hands, inquire after another's health, etc. Kamústa ka man? How do
you do? How are you? Kamustahánay kitá ánay. Let us shake hands
first. Nagkamústa siá sa ákon. He asked me how I was. He saluted
me. He shook hands with me.

_kamútso_, (From the Sp. mucho) Much, a large amount. Abáw, kamútso
sang ímo kináon! Goodness, what an amount of food you have taken! What
a lot you have eaten! (cf. kadámò).

_kamútut_, To strive, exert oneself, strain every nerve, do one's
best, make great efforts; to fight, wage war, join battle, enter
into conflict, engage in a fight. Nagakamútut (nagakinamútut) silá
sa pagdaúg. They are making great efforts to win. (cf. pamurúg-ot,
himúd-os, paningúhà, panikasúg).

_kámya_, A flowering plant.

_kan_, (B) Article for the dative and accusative. (cf. sa, kay,
sang, kang).

_kaná_, (B) Him, her, it; to, at, from, by, etc. him, her,
it. (cf. íya, sa íya).

_kaná_, To test, try, examine, probe. (cf. tiláw).

_kanabâ_, (B) Lowness, shortness in height. (nabâ; cf. kanobô).

_kanabaón_, (B) See kanabâ.

_kanábaw_, Shallowness, little depth. (cf. nábaw).

_kanahán_, Test, trial, probe, examination, contest,
competition. (cf. kaná).

_kanákon_, (B) To me, etc. (cf. sa ákon).

_kanál_, (Sp. canal) Channel, ditch, trench, conduit. Also:
Verb. Kanalí ang higád sang dálan. Make a ditch at the side of the
road. (cf. kalóg, ililigán).

_kanála_, A large-sized, very savoury banana.

_kanalî_, To do quickly, thoughtlessly, absentmindedly,
unawares. Nakanalî lang akó sa paghámbal sinâ. I uttered that
thoughtlessly. (cf. tabinás, dalî).

_kanámì_, Sweetness, deliciousness; nicety, niceness, beauty,
comeliness. (námì)

_kanámit_, Tastiness, toothsomeness, savouriness. (cf. námit).

_kanamitón_, See kanámit id.

_kanamóg_, A kind of rice. (cf. arabón).

_kanámon_, (B) To us, etc. (cf. sa ámon id.).

_kananáks_, An exclamation of joy and pleasure: Oh, how nice! How
lovely! What a beauty! This is fine! (cf. aráw, aráwaráw).

_kananám_, Flavour, tastiness, agreeableness, especially applied to
nuts. (cf. nanám).


_kananáy_, Softness, mildness, gentleness, condition of things done
gently, quietly, noiselessly or peacefully. (cf. ananáy, kaananáy).

_kanánda_, (B) To them, etc. Maágda akó kanánda ni Pédro. (----sa íla
ni Pédro). I will invite Peter and his family or his friends. (cf. sa
íla id.).

_kanánday_, (B) To them, etc. Itúgrò iní kanánday Pédro. Give this
to Peter and his family, to Peter's household. (cf. kánday).

_kánang_, To be bright, conspicuous, to shine, glisten; be dressed
in bright colours. (cf. kánaw).

_kanáryo_, (Sp. canario) Canary (bird); yellow.

_kanástro_, (Sp. canasto, canastro) Basket, hamper, crate, used for
marketing fruits, vegetables, etc.

_kánat_, Slow, tedious, tardy, flagging; to be slow or
tedious. Nagkánat ang ámon trábano sa umá sa karón nga túig, kay
nagmasakít ang ámon mga háyup. Our farmwork has been slow this year,
because our animals are sick. (cf. kúnat).

_kanáton_, (B) To us, etc. See sa áton id.

_kánaw_, To shine, glisten, sparkle; to fill, brim, become full to
bursting or overflowing, cram--, chock--, full (of tears). Nagakánaw
ang íya mga matá sang (sing) lúhà. Her eyes are glistening (brimming)
with tears.

_kanáway_, The north-west wind; a sea-gull.

_kanawáyan_, The North-West.

_kanáw-kanáw_, Dim. and Freq. of kánaw--to glisten, etc. Nagakanáwkanáw
ang íya mga lúhà. His tears are ready to flow. His eyes are brimming
with tears.

_kánay_, To grow less, lessen, abate, relax, calm, grow calm, subside
(said of wind, waves, passions, etc.). Ang mga balúd nagakánay na. The
waves are now lessening.

_kanáy-kánay_, Dim. of kánay. To blow softly or gently (of wind);
to become calm, mild, gentle, good-tempered, etc. (of persons).

_kanáyok_, Great distance, farness, far away. (cf. nayóknáyok,
nayópnáyop).

_kanáyop_, See kanáyok.

_kandába_, A cotton-plant with reddish or light brown
flowers. (cf. búlak--a cotton-plant with white flowers).

_kandádo_, (Sp. candado) Lock, padlock. (cf. pamakúd).

_kánday_, (B) To, for, towards, etc. them. (cf. sa íla, kanánday,
kanánda).

_kandidáto_, (Sp. candidato) Candidate, aspirant; one offering himself
for an elective office. (cf. palapilián).

_kandílà_, (Sp. candela) Candle, taper.

_kandiléro_, (Sp. candelero) Candlestick.

_kandilerohán_, Candlestick. (cf. kandiléro id.).

_kánding_, Goat. Kánding nga laláki. Buck, goat. Kánding nga
babáye. Nanny goat.

_kandínggal_, Lean, meagre, spare, emaciated, thin. (cf. kalamanít,
maníwang).

_kandíng-kánding_, Dim. of kánding. Also: Women of loose or evil
habits, concubine. (cf. alaasáwa, babáe).

_kándol_, To form into lumps or balls. Ginakándol níya ang
samblági. She is forming tamarind into balls. Kandolá ang
tsokoláte. Make the cacao (cocoa) up into balls.

_kandól_, A kind of melon, or cucumber similar to the "atímon".

_kándus_, To shovel, scoop, spoon or ladle out dry and liquid
things. Kandusá ang humáy, sópas, etc. Scoop out the rice, ladle out
the soup, etc. Kandusí akó sing isá ka kándus nga sópas. Give me a
ladleful of soup. Ikándus akó ánay sing duhá ka gántang nga humáy,
kay ipíslong ko sa lusóng kag bayohón. Kindly scoop out two gantas of
rice for me, because I am going to put it into the mortar and pound
it. (cf. sarók, galó).

_kanéla_, (Sp. canela) Cinnamon.

_kang_, (B) See sang id.

_kángay_, (B) To engage, hire, invite, usually with the promise of
pay. Ginakángay si Fuláno, ang músika, ang manugsírko, etc. N.N., the
band, the circus-man, etc., are being invited (or engaged). Kinangáyan
níla ang pándut sing orkésta. They hired an orchestra for the
feast-day. Ikángay akó ánay sang orkésta sa Miagáw. Please engage
for me the Miagao orchestra. Kangáya ang kosinéro ni Fuláno sa áton
tábad. Engage N.N.'s cook for our banquet. (cf. ágda, hágad).

_kángga, kánggà_, Wagon, cart, with or without a roof and usually
provided with wooden wheels. (cf. káro).

_kanggéro_, Driver of a wagon or bull-cart, waggoner, carter. (kángga).

_kanghír-o_, (B) Mercy, compassion, sympathy, clemency. (cf. kaló-oy,
kaáwà).

_kangidlisán_, Terror, horror, frightfulness; terrible, horrible,
frightful, awful, shocking. (cf. ngídlis).

_kangíl-ad_, Nausea, loathing, detestation, abomination, shrinking
from, sickening at. (cf. ngíl-ad).

_kangíl-arán_, (H) See kangíl-ad. Also: Things that are loathsome,
sickening, noisome, abominable, detestable, nauseating, nasty,
filthy, shocking to look upon or to hear of, the abomination or
aversion produced by evil or by things of a very disagreeable
smell. (cf. kalangil-arán).

_kangílin_, Regret, sorrow, unwillingness to part with, a pining for
lost or absent things. (cf. ngílin, kahílak).

_kangílo_, Setting one's teeth on edge. (cf. ngílo).

_kangír-o_, (B) See kanghír-o.

_kangítngit_, Heartache, desolation, compunction, sorrow, pain,
darkness, distress. (ngítngit).

_kangítngitán_, See kangítngit. Also: Things that cause heartache, etc.

_kángkang_, See kalángkang. Kangkangá ang kamót mo. Spread out your
fingers.

_kangréna_, (Sp. cangrena) Gangrene, mortification. (cf. dágsang).

_kangúro_, (Sp. canguro) Kangaroo.

_kanguyús_, Surprise, shock, etc. See kahanguyús, kuyús.

_kanímo_, (B) You, to you, etc. See sa ímo, id.

_kaninít_, A dribbling, trickling, oozing, sending forth of a small
stream. (cf. ninít).

_kanínyo_, (B) You, to you, etc. See sa ínyo, id.

_kaniogán_, (B) Coconut-grove, coconut-plantation. (nióg;
cf. kalubihán).

_kanipaán_, Nípà-swamp, nípà-plantation. (cf. nípà).

_kanipís_, Thinness of a sheet, board, paper or the like. (nipís;
cf. kadámol--thickness).

_kanipisón_, See kanipís.

_kanipólon_, (H) Roundness, spherical shape, sphericity, rotundity,
circularity. (tipólon; cf. katipólon).

_kaniríg_, Small, dwarfish, undersized, stunted in
growth. (cf. koridíg, daúldaúl, aríarí, agílagíl).

_kanisí_, A kind of small-leaved "búyò" used for betel-nut chewing.

_kanít_, Lean, gaunt, thin, spare, emaciated; to be or become lean,
etc. Nagkanít siá, kay nagmasakít. He got lean, because he was
sick. Pakán-a siá sing maáyo, índì mo siá pagpakanitón. Feed him well,
don't allow him to become thin. (cf. níwang, kalamanít, kandínggal).

_kaníwang_, Leanness, thinness, spareness, skinniness, emaciation,
gauntness. (cf. níwang, kakanít).

_kaniwangón_, See kaníwang.

_kánkan_, To do, spend, eat, etc., to one's heart's content, because
there is so much (to do, spend, eat, etc.). Ginkankanán gid lang níla
ang mga pagkáon. They ate to their heart's content. (cf. patúyang,
pasamíyang, údak, pagústo).

_kanó, kanô_, Contr. of Amerikáno--American.

_káno_, To get yarn or thread ready for weaving. Nagakáno siá sang
háblon. She is getting the yarn ready for weaving.

_kanó_, (B) They say, it is said, rumour has it, it is reported,
etc. See konó, id.


_kán-o_, (B) When, at what time, (always with reference to the
past). (cf. sán-o pa, id.).

_kanô_, To be or sound hollow, empty, loose, shrivelled, shrunk, said
of the contents of bottles, tins, nuts, shells, etc. Iníng ítlog,
lubí, etc. nagakanô. This egg, coconut, etc. sounds hollow. Also:
dull, foolish, doltish, stupid. (cf. búngkag, búngaw, pákok, etc.).

_kanobô_, (H) Lowness, of little height, shortness. (nobô; cf. kanabâ,
id.).

_kanoboón_, (H) See kanobô.

_kanógon_, An exclamation expressive of regret for something lost or
spoilt. A, kanógon inâ! Oh, that's a pity! What a pity!

_kán-on_, Food, especially cooked rice. (cf. káon).

_kanótnot_, To fray and break easily, said of threads and yarn in
clothes, etc. Nagakanótnot gid lang ang báyò ko. My jacket is just
fraying away. (cf. nátnat, nútnut, tâtâ, sarabusáb).

_kánsay_, A kind of tree whose reddish seeds are used for medicinal
purposes.

_kansiáhà_, Dry leaves of the sugarcane.

_kansíl_, (Sp. cancel) Screen, (upright frame). (cf. biómbo).

_kansyón_, (Sp. canción) A song, lay, ballad, ditty; to sing, to
troll. Kansyoná ang "Adiós". Sing the song "Adiós!". Kansyoní akó
sing bilyansíko. Sing me a Christmas carol. (cf. ambahánon, ambáhan,
ámba, kalantáhon, kánta).

_kánta_, (Sp. cantar) To sing, troll, chant, warble. Kantahí kamí
sing isá ka matahúm nga kalantáhon. Sing us a nice song. Kantahá
iní. Sing this. (cf. kansyón).

_kántaw_, Diaphragm, midriff.

_kantéro_, (Sp. cantero) Mason, stone-cutter, stone-dresser,
bricklayer, builder in stone and brick.

_kánti_, Dog-vane, weather-cock; to call--, summon--, invite--,
the wind (at sea, at winnowing rice, etc.).

_kantidád_, (Sp. cantidad) Quantity, amount, sum. (cf. pilá, kapíd-an).

_kantíl_, (Sp. cantil) A steep, precipitous rock. (cf. píl-as).

_kánto_, (Sp. canto) Song, hymn, chant. (cf. ambahánon, kalantáhon,
kansyón).

_kántò_, (Sp. canto) Edge, rim, brim, corner, margin, bevel,
cant. (cf. binít, hamitán, bígki).

_kántong_, Yarn. (cf. bunáng).

_kantonís_, Cantonese, pertaining to--, made in--, from--Canton in
China, applied to a variety of textiles, silk-fabrics, poultry, etc.,
coming from China, especially from Canton.

_kantór_, Singer, cantor, chorister, choir-boy, especially one who
sings in church. (cf. manugámba from ámba).

_kantóra_, (Sp. cantora) A female singer, cantor, especially one who
sings in Church.

_kanulsulánan_, Repentance, contrition, compunction, sorrow for past
mistakes or for wrongs committed. (cf. núlsul, hinúlsul).

_kanumán, kan-umán_, Sixty. (cf. ánum).

_kanúnay_, A kind of bird.

_kanúnay_, Friend, intimate, companion; friendly, affectionate,
sociable. Kanúnay nga hángin. A favourable, steady
breeze. (cf. kahírup, mahírup, maabiabíhon).

_kanúnay_, Often, continual, frequent. (This seems to be a Cebuano
term; cf. masamí, masúnsun, himánhimán, imánimán).

_kanyámo, kanyamó_, (Sp. cáñamo) Jute, hemp; jute-cloth, sail-cloth,
hemp-cloth.

_kanyón_, (Sp. cañon) Cannon, gun, field-piece; cannon-ball; the
benches in a prominent part of the Church for the accommodation of
the Authorities and principal Catholics are also called "kanyón"
in some places. Also: Ravine, gorge, canyon.

_kanyúto_, (Sp. cañuto) A small pipe or tube, as the tube through
which the wick passes in a lamp.

_kaodtohón_, Midday, noon. (cf. ódto).


_kaolihánan_, The end, last things, latter happenings, final
outcome. (olíhi; cf. katapúsan).

_kaolíhi_, (H) Tardiness, lateness. (olíhi; cf. kaatrasádo,
kahudyánan).

_kaolihían_, (H) See kaolihánan.

_kaolitaóhan_, Young men, bachelors, youth. (olitáo).

_káon_, To eat, take food, feed, fare, devour, despatch, mess. Kán-a
iní. Eat this. Kán-i iní sing diótay. Eat a little of this. Pakán-a
siá sing maáyo. Feed him well--or--Give him good food. Pakán-a
siá sa pínggan. Let him eat off the plate. Pakán-i sa íya iníng mga
páhò. Let him eat some of these mangoes. Indì ka magkáon siníng búnga,
kay línghod pa. Don't eat this fruit, for it is not ripe yet. Anó
ang kináon mo? What kind of food did you take? Ipakáon ko sa íya
iníng kabúgaw kon makaúyon siá. I will let him eat this pomelo if
he likes it. Walâ akó makatupús sang ginpakáon níya sa ákon. I could
not stand the food he gave me. Iníng kalán-an ginakán-an sing duhá ka
púlò ka táo sa tágsa ka ádlaw. Twenty men take their meals--, mess--,
are fed--, in this dining room every day.

_kaoráson, kaorasón_, Hour, time. (cf. táknà, óras, orasón).

_kápa_, (Sp. capa) Mantle, large cloak; cope used at religious
functions.

_kapá_, To cover as with a mantle; to grasp, seize, take possession
of, appropriate. Daw buút níya kapahán ang tanán nga mánggad sa
kalibútan. It seems as if he would like to seize all the wealth
of the world. Ginkapahán níya ang tanán nga pílak nga nagsulúd. He
appropriated all the money that came in. (cf. karipón, ángkon).

_kápà_, To droop, hang down, be full of--, covered with--,
laden with--, weighed down with--, fruit, be enshrouded as with a
mantle. Nagakápà ang mga sangá siníng káhoy. The branches of this tree
are weighed down, (being covered with fruit as with a mantle). Nagakápà
gid lang sang búnga iníng páhò. This mango-tree is covered with and
bending under the weight of its fruit. (cf. gápà).

_kapáas_, To perish, disappear. Nagakapáas na ang mga talonón sa
talónan. The wild pigs are disappearing from the forests. Tungúd
sang madámò nga mga mangangáyam nagkapáas na ang talonón sa sinâ nga
búkid. On account of the great number of hunters the wild pigs have
now ceased to exist on that mountain. (cf. pápas, púas, pánas).

_kapagángan_, Corals, coral reef. (cf. pagáng).

_kapág-on_, Firmness, security, durability, stability, state of not
being shaken easily. (cf. pág-on).

_kapag-onán_, See kapág-on. Also: Things that are stable or give
stability.

_kapágsi_, Swiftness of movement, speediness, quickness, nimbleness,
etc. (cf. kalígsi, págsi--lígsi). Also: activity, energy, agility,
etc. (cf. kaábtik).

_kapahuáyan_, Rest, repose, quiet, peace. (cf. pahúay).

_kapahuwáyan_, See kapahuáyan.

_kapaít, kapa-ít_, Bitterness. (pa-ít).

_kapa-itán_, See kapa-ít. Also: Things that are bitter or difficult
to bear, crosses, trials, hardships, sufferings. (cf. kalisdánan,
kalalát-an, kapipít-an, kalilísdan, kahil-ánan).

_kapá-kápa, kapá-kapá_, Dim. of kápa. Also: To slap the water with
the hands as in swimming, flap the wings, throw about one's hands
and the like. (cf. kapáykápay).

_kapákok_, Slowness; dulness. (pákok).

_kapakokán_, Slowness; dulness, stupidity, ignorance. (cf. pákok).

_kapakokón_, See kapákok, kapakokán.

_káp-al_, To stick or adhere to; to paste, smear, put on powder,
etc. Nagapakáp-al silá sing pólbos sa íla nawóng. They are powdering
their faces. Nagakáp-al ang pólbos sa íya nawóng. Her face is thickly
covered with powder. (cf. ápol, kápol, pilít, pálhit).

_kapaláran_, Fate, chance, fortune, luck, happiness, blessedness. Maáyo
nga kapaláran. Good luck. Maláut nga kapaláran. Bad luck. (cf. pálad,
sukúd, swérte).

_kapalián_, The closing or healing of a wound, etc. (cf. pinalían--the
mark of a healed wound or ulcer, scar, cicatrix). (cf. pálì).

_kapamágna_, (Sp. capa magna) Prelate's mantle, called Capa Magna,
a dignitary's long gown.

_kápan_, To overflow, swamp, cover, pass over. Ang subâ nagkápan sang
ámon umá. The river overflowed our farm-land. Ang pángpang nakapánan
sang túbig. The banks were covered with water. Ginkápan sang mga
balúd ang sakayán. The waves passed over the boat--or--The boat was
swamped by the waves.

_kapanasán_, A wiping--, rubbing--, out, erasure, deletion,
abolishment, destruction, disappearance. (cf. pánas).

_kapanganúran_, (H) Clouds. (ánod; cf. pangánod, gál-um).

_kapánit_, Of the same skin or color or complexion. Kapánit ko siá. He
is of the same complexion as myself. Ang íya mga kapánit. Those of
his race. (cf. pánit).

_kapánkápan_, Dim. and Freq. of kápan. Also: To be about equal, be
a draw, be quits, square, neither winning nor losing; to settle in
peace, make mutual concessions, square or settle accounts, smooth
differences. Kinapánkápan lang kamí. We were about equal, (none of
us won or lost). (cf. pátas).

_kapánsal_, Noise, uproar. (cf. kagánsal, gáhud).

_kapánsot_, Smell of urin. (pánsot).

_kapantagán_, Tranquillity, repose, peacefulness, stability. Walâ
gid sing kapantagán ang ámon pangabúhì. Our life has no peace. We
can never rest at ease. (cf. pántag).

_kapántok_, Application, industry, assiduity, diligence,
zeal. (cf. pántok).

_kapanúng-panungán_, Army, large crowds or numbers, hosts, great
multitude assembled, throng; shoal (of fish); herds (of sheep, cattle,
etc.); numerous army (of soldiers); any great assembly or collection
of things or persons. (cf. panóng).

_kapapóan_, Great-grandfathers; forefathers, forebears, progenitors,
ancestors. (cf. pápò).

_kaparían_, The priesthood (in the concrete, priests,
clerics). (cf. párì).

_kapás_, (Sp. capaz) Capable, ingenious, clever, learned,
fit, suitable. (cf. makaákò, batíd, sagád, sampáton,
may--igkasángkol,--ikasaráng,--ikatakús).

_kapatagán_, Plain, campus, wide valley or open country. (cf. pátag,
patág).

_kapatán, kap-atán_, Forty. (cf. ápat).

_kapatás_, (Sp. capatáz) Foreman, one who has charge of a gang of
workmen on a road, a farm, etc.

_kapatawáran_, Forgiveness, remission, pardon, amnesty, absolution,
acquittal, acquittance. (cf. patáwad).

_kapatíd_, Friend, chum, "pal". (cf. atíd, akíd, idól, kahírup, ábyan).

_kapátol_, Strength, firmness, determination. (cf. pátol, kabákud,
kahúnlit, kahúnit).

_kapat-urán_, Punctuality, fixedness, fixity, stability; certainty,
sureness, exactness, preciseness. (cf. pát-ud).

_kapául_, Fatigue, tiredness, weariness. (cf. pául, kahiól, kaálay,
kabúdlay).

_kapáwà_, Light, illumination, luminosity, gleam, glow, brightness. Ang
kapáwà sang ádlaw. The light or brightness of the sun. Ang kapáwà
sang Pagtóo. The light of Faith. (cf. páwà, kasánag, íwag.

_kápay_, (B) Blanket; to use a blanket, cover with a blanket, to
blanket. Kapáyi siá. Put a blanket on him. Pakapáyi siá. Have him
covered with a blanket--or--Provide him with a blanket. (hábul).

_kapáy_, Fin (of fish). (cf. sílik, sírik).

_kapáy_, The wing of a bird. (cf. pákpak).

_kapayaón_, Youthfulness; childishness, silliness,
foolishness. (cf. payâ, kaalangón).

_kapáyas_, The papaw and its fruit. (cf. papáyas).

_kapáy-kápay_, To flutter, flop, slap, clap, flap the wings, strike the
water with the palms of the hands as in swimming, to swing or vibrate
(said of anything with a broad surface). Nagakapáykápay lang ang píspis
sa hángin. The bird is flapping its wings in the air. (cf. kapákápa).

_kapé_, (Sp. café) Coffee.

_kapetéra_, (Sp. cafetéra) Coffee-pot.

_kápid_, Twin, twins, (said of men, animals, plants and things in
general); grown together, joined side to side, double. (cf. dungán).

_kapidâ_, Fastidiousness, daintiness, overniceness, squeamishness
(particularly with regard to food). (cf. pidâ).

_kapíd-an_, Number, quantity, amount, an undetermined aggregate of
individuals, that may be either few or many. (cf. pilá--how many).

_kapígaw_, Frailty, feebleness, debility. (cf. pígaw).

_kapíhak_, Half, one half, moiety. Kapíhak siá sang ákon tagiposóon. He
is (forms) one half of my heart; i.e. I am very much attached to
him. I love him very much. (cf. píhak, pihák, tungâ).

_kapikít_, Tightness, closeness. (cf. pikít).

_kapíl-ay_, Tiredness, exhaustion, stiffness of limbs. (cf. píl-ay,
kaálay, kapául).

_kapílì_, Fastidiousness, squeamishness, condition of one who is
difficult to please. (cf. pílì, kapíslì).

_kapílya_, (Sp. capilla) Chapel, small church, village
chapel. (cf. ermíta).

_kapílyo_, Condition of one who is "pílyo", mischievousness,
naughtiness, shrewdness, roguishness, artfulness, tricksiness, cunning,
cheating. (cf. kalág-it, kasutíl).

_kapín_, More, over, above; to be more etc. Kapín kon kúlang----. More
or less, about, nearly, approximately----. Kapín pa----. Moreover,
besides, especially yet----. Magakapín áyhan ang bilí sa napúlò ka
mángmang, índì gid magkúlang. The price will probably exceed (or be
over) ten pesos, certainly not less. Kapín sa duhá ka líbo ka táo ang
nagtalámbong--or--Duhá ka líbo ka táo kapín ang nagtalámbong. More
than two thousand men took part or attended.

_kapíntas_, Cruelty, harshness, brutality, inhumanity, truculence,
ferocity. (cf. píntas).

_kapíot_, Pressure, strait, strictness, condition of being squeezed
into a tight corner. (cf. píot).

_kapiotán_, See kapíot, kapipít-an.

_kapipít-an_, See kapíot. Also: Crosses, troubles, difficulties,
trials, straits. (cf. kalilísdan, kalisdánan, kalalát-an, kapa-itán).

_kapísan_, Diligence, application, activity, industry, assiduity,
laboriousness, energy, zeal. (cf. písan, kaúkud, kapántok, kabákas,
katándus).

_kapisanón_, See kapísan.

_kapíslì_, Fastidiousness, overniceness, over-indulgence; wastefulness,
prodigality. (cf. píslì, kapidâ, kabuhahâ).

_kapispísan_, Birds. (cf. píspis).

_kapitál_, (Sp. capital) Capital, chief or principal town;
capital, principal, money invested or set apart for an
enterprise. (cf. úlo-bánwa; pahunán, prinsipál).

_kapitán_, (Sp. capitán) Captain; mayor, burgomaster, municipal
president (in Spanish times).

_kapíya_, See kapílya.

_kápkap_, To twist or twine round, encircle, entwine, cling to (as
ivy). (cf. kalápkap).

_kápkap_, To feel one's way, grope. (cf. híkam, etc.).

_kapobrehón, kapobréhon_, Poverty, penury, misery, impecuniousness,
pauperism. (cf. póbre; kaimolón).

_kápog_, (B) Cold cooked rice. May kápog kamó sa baláy? Have you any
cold rice in the house? (cf. báhaw).

_kapóktol_, Stumpiness, stockiness, condition of being
thick-set. (cf. póktol).

_kápol_, Plaster; to plaster, cover with a plaster, mend, repair,
seal or stop leakages or small holes with thick paint, mortar,
cement, etc. Kapóli sing pínta ang mga úlo sang mga lánsang sa atóp
nga sin. Cover the nail-heads on the zinc-roof with paint. Sín-o
ang nagkápol sang tohók sang alhíbi? Who plastered up the hole in
the water tank? Ipilák na lang iníng pínggan, kay índì na makapólan
ang íya sirâ nga balanâ. Throw this plate away, for it is so cracked
that it cannot be mended. (cf. pálhit, ápol).

_kapól-kápol_, Dim. and Freq. of kápol. Also: to patch, mend, repair,
make things up, settle amicably or peacefully. (cf. kapánkápan,
tapántápan).

_kapólpog_, To crumble, fall to pieces, said of clods of earth,
or the like. Nagakapólpog ang pugá. The clod of earth is
crumbling. (cf. pólpog).

_kapón_, (Sp. capón) Capon, gelding, any castrated animal, but
particularly applied to cocks, pigs and dogs; to emasculate,
castrate. Ginkapón níla ang mga báboy nga palatambókon kag
ilihawón. They castrated the pigs that are to be fattened and
slaughtered. Kaponá ang idô. Castrate the dog. Nakabakál akó sing
tátlo ka manók nga kinapón. I succeeded in buying three capons.

_kápot_, To stick or adhere to, paste, glue. (cf. dokót, pilít).

_kápot_, The marriage ceremony; the bride and bridegroom giving
their mutual consent and pledging conjugal fidelity and immediately
after joining hands, before the priest who solemnizes their
marriage. Bagtingán mo silá sa kápot. Ring the bells when they clasp
hands. Nagpakápot lang silá, ápang walâ pagbilóhi. They went through
the marriage ceremony, but did not receive the nuptial blessing during
the Holy Mass.

_kapóte_, Select tobacco leaves used as wrappers for cigars. Dálhi akó
sing maáyo nga dáhon sang tabákò, kay ikapóte ko sa ákon piokós. Bring
me a choice tobacco leaf, for I am going to use it as a wrapper for
my home-made cigar.

_kapóte_, (Sp. capote) Overcoat, raincoat, mackintosh,
macintosh. (cf. kúmbut, kúnup, kulámbot).

_kápoy_, To tire, fatigue, weary, knock up, wear out, exhaust,
weaken. Nakápoy (kinápoy) siá. He was exhausted (tired). Ginakápoy
(ginakapóyan) akó. I am getting tired. Ang amó nga pagpangabúdlay
nagpakápoy sa íya. That drudgery wore him out, knocked him
up. (cf. lúya, lúyà, pául, álay, búdlay).

_kapóy_, Tired, exhausted, weak, worn out, done up, fatigued, weary,
knocked up, jaded, spent. Kapóy na siá. He is tired out. (cf. paúl,
luyâ).

_kápre_, (Sp. cafre) A ghost or monstrous being alleged by the
superstitious to take the form of a horrible giant.

_kaprítso_, (Sp. capricho) Caprice, whim, fancy, fad, craze, quirk,
crotchet. (cf. luyáglúyag, lubá).

_kápsula_, (Sp. cápsula) Capsule; metal cap on a bottle or the like.

_káptan_, From kapút--to grasp, take hold of, etc.

_kápug_, Cold (cooked) rice. See kápog.

_kapulá_, Redness, reddishness, rosiness. (cf. pulá, mapulá).

_kapúnaw_, Exhaustion, inanition, frailty, feebleness,
faint. (cf. púnaw).

_kapúng-aw_, Isolation, loneliness, solitariness, desolation,
dreariness, dejectedness. (cf. púng-aw, kamíngaw, kasím-ong).

_kapungsurán_, Nations, powers, states, governments. Ang mga
kapungsurán sang kalibútan. The nations of the world. Ang katilíngban
sang mga kapungsurán. The league (society) of Nations. (cf. púngsud).

_kapupúd-an_, Archipelago, island-group. (pulô). Ang Kapupúd-an nga
Pilipínas. The Philippine Islands.

_kapuráut_, Dearth, misery, stress, hard lines, difficulty. Ang
kapuráut sang pangabúhì. The difficulties of life. (cf. hiwáos,
kalisúd).

_kapúsa_, Anger, excitement, exasperation expressed in strong
language. (cf. púsa, pamúsa).

_kapuslánan_, Profit, utility, use, gain, avail, benefit, good,
advantage, behoof, boot. Ang tanán náton nga mga paninguhâ manginwaláy
kapuslánan, kon walâ kitá pagabulígi sang Diós. All our efforts are
in vain--or--of no avail, unless God assists us. (cf. pulús).

_kapút_, To grip, grasp, seize, clasp, grab, get--, lay--, catch--,
take--, hold of. Kápti iní. Take hold of this--or--Grasp it. Kináptan
níya akó sa kamót. He took me by the hand. Ginkáptan níya ang
tulún-an kag ginlámba sa salúg. He seized the book and threw it on
the floor. Buót silá magkapút sang uluyatán sang kaláhà. They like
to hold the handle of the pan (i.e. wish to have power, influence and
especially a large share in the division of the spoils). (cf. kápyot).

_kapúta_, Condition of being a prostitute. (cf. púta).

_kaputî_, Whiteness, fairness, blondness. (cf. putî).

_kaputían_, The white race, the whites, Caucasians. (cf. putî).

_kaputohán_, Bankruptcy, liquidation, failure, insolvency. (cf. púto).

_kapútol_, A kind of maize with black and white kernels mixed on the
same cob.

_kaputóng_, Irritability, fretfulness, hotness (of temper);
narrowmindedness. (cf. putóng).

_kapúyat_, Sleepiness, drowsiness, tiredness; condition of one who
sleeps long,--awakes or rises late. (cf. púyat).

_kápyot_, To grip, grasp. See kapút. Kapyotí, kinapyotán--kápti,
kináptan. (cf. úyat).

_kára_, (B) See kála. Also: A kind of hard stone variously coloured.

_kára_, (Sp. cara) Head, face. (cf. úlo, nawóng).

_kará_, (B) Of that, etc. (cf. sinâ id.).

_kárà_, (B) To scold loudly, abuse in strong language, shout at,
rail at. Karái siá. Give him a good scolding. Ginkaráan níya kamí. He
shouted and railed at us. Dílì ka magságad pangárà. Don't be always
scolding so loudly. (cf. ákig, pamúsa, pamúrag, pamulúgso).

_karâ, kará_, (H) To go there, denoting a shorter distance than
when "kádto" is used. Kumarâ ka dirâ. Go over there. Indì pa akó
makadalikát sa pagkarâ dirâ sa ínyo. I cannot go away at once to
visit you there. (cf. kádto).

_karabátan_, Common or joint property. (cf. guráptan, garapátan).

_karabáw_, Buffalo.

_karáb-kárab_, To burn lustily, crackle and spread (of fire). Ang
kaláyo nagakarábkárab. The fire is burning lustily, is spreading, is
increasing (with a crackling sound). Agólagól (kirótkírot) gid lang
iníng kaláyo; butangí sing paámak, agúd magkarábkárab. This fire is
burning low; put some kindling on it, that it may burn bright.

_karabó_, (B) See kalabó--tastefulness, etc.

_karádto_, (B) Long ago, in olden times, once upon a time, a long
time since, in the past, of yore. A, inâ sa karádto pa! Oh, that was
in the good old times! Karádto ánay----. Formerly----. (cf. sádto).

_karágmang_, To run--, rush--, push--, against something with some
impetuosity. Karagmangá ang nagakatulúg. Run and shake the one who
is asleep. (cf. kurágmang which is the more usual form).

_karágto_, (B) See karádto.

_karáhà_, (B) See kaláhà--pan, etc. (cf. karuágan).

_karaháy_, To take another's "hand", or cards, or place, in
card-playing; one who temporarily takes another's place at the
card-table.

_karahílo_, (B) See kalahílo.

_karaidanón_, (B) Repairs, etc. See kilidanón, kaalayohón.

_karákal_, (B) Badly done, botched, bungled, clumsy, desultory,
careless work. (cf. bástos, bául, patarásak).

_karakalánda_, To be a loafer, roam about, idle away the time,
etc. See lagáwlágaw, landólándo, tiyógtiyóg, taratalánda.

_karák-an_, (B) Multitude, etc. See karakoán.

_karâ-kárà, karâ-karâ_, To come and go, visit frequently, go to and
fro. (cf. karâ).

_kará-kará_, A hustler, driver, one who urges or impels others;
to hustle, hurry, be very energetic, work with despatch, do
something--quickly,--carelessly,--thoughtlessly. (cf. tarátará,
tarágtarág, garógaró).

_karakarahán_, Uneasy, nervous, excited; to be excited, nervous,
etc. See darabáhan.

_karakatád_, (B) See kalakatád.

_karakaták_, To cluck (of a hen). (cf. kurukutúk, katákkaták).


_karakô_, (B) Many, plenty, multitude, much. (cf. rakô, dakô, kadakô).

_karakoán_, (B) Multitude, great number, many, plenty,
crowd. Ginpakahúy-an akó níya sa karakoán (karák-an). He put me to
shame in public. (cf. rakô).

_karalót_, (B) See kalalót.

_karambóla_, (Sp. carambola) A carom shot at billards, a
carambole, a cannon; quarrel; to quarrel. May karambóla kaína sa
bulangán. Nagkinarambóla silá kaína sa bulangán. A short while ago
there was a quarrel (row, fight, scuffle) in the cockpit. (cf. áway,
súay, gamô).

_karamélo_, (Sp. caramelo) Caramel, unrefined sugar, usually of a brown
colour and sold in square tablets that readily dissolve in water, etc.

_karamútot_, To scuffle, scramble, fight, to compete eagerly for
the possession of something. Nagakaramútot silá sa pagágaw sang mga
bukáka--or--ginakaramutótan níla ang pagágaw sang mga bukáka. They are
scrambling for the ripe camunsel-fruit. Indì kamó magkaramútot. Don't
scuffle (scramble, fight). (cf. ális, árnis, áway, kámas).

_karánda_, (B) To perform with despatch, expedite, do quickly and
hence carelessly. Karandahá lang ang panápton. Be quick with the
clothes (in dressing, washing, etc.). (cf. dalî).

_karandagán_, Restless, fidgety, unsteady. (cf. matínong--steady).

_karán-káran_, To be in a stir, excitement or hubbub on account of
a fire, a sudden inundation or the like. Nagakinaránkáran silá. They
are in a state of great excitement.

_karapâ_, See kadapâ, kurapâ.

_karápà_, To hang down, fall down loosely (of clothes that are
too large, etc.). Nagakarápà lang ang íya bistído. Her dress falls
down loosely (like a mantle--kápa), being too long and too wide,
etc. (cf. kápa, kápà).

_karapól_, See kalapól.

_kararóton, kararotón_, (B) See kalalóton, kalalotón.

_kararím_, (B) Taste, etc. See kalalím.

_karáskas_, To tear--, scratch--, pull--, off quickly vines, creepers,
an old thatched roof or the like; to tear the ground (of a galloping
horse); to perform with despatch, do quickly. (cf. káskas).

_karát_, To be in a hurry, have to do quickly; to hasten,
urge. Ginakarát akó sa pagpaúlì. I am in a hurry to go
home. (cf. alipasá, kalít, dalikát, dalî).

_kárat_, (H) Pungency, etc. See kádat, ádat id.).

_karatán_, One who is in a hurry, who "sits on needles",
etc. (cf. kuratán).

_karatíl_, To punish severely, chastise. Ginkaratíl níya ang íya bátà,
kay nagsinutíl. She punished her child severely, because it was very
naughty. (cf. baká-báka, tarítári, kátad).

_karátkarát_, Dim. and Freq. of karát. (cf. kurátkurát).

_karátula_, (Sp. carátula) Pasteboard, label, sign-board,
advertisement.

_káraw_, Tortuous--, winding--, zigzag--, movement, twist, contortion,
convolution; to crawl, creep, twist, contort, writhe, move along,
as snakes, or the like. (cf. isíísi, tikô).

_karawákaw_, A kind of bird.

_karawít_, (B) Hook. (cf. kalawít).

_karáwit_, (B) Deviation, digression, winding, turning aside, going
out of one's way (of speech, walking, etc.). (cf. ráwit).

_karáy_, Dry coconut leaves. (cf. lukáy).

_karáykay_, To scratch and scatter (rice, corn, etc. as chickens,
rats, etc. do); to bring into disorder, disarrange by trampling upon,
by shuffling or stirring levelled off grains, peas and beans, sand
or the like. Ginakaráykay sang mungâ ang humáy. The hen is scratching
in the rice, scattering it with her claws. Indì mo pagkaraykayón ang
humáy. Don't stir the rice.

_kárbaw_, (B) Buffalo. (karabáw id.).

_karbáwon_, Pertaining to a buffalo; like a buffalo. (cf. kinarabáw).

_karbón_, (Sp. carbón) Coal; papel de carbón--carbon paper.


_karenderíya_, Restaurant, eating-house; a small shop. (cf. karihán,
tiénda, tiánggi, talangwáyan, pansiteríya).

_karéra_, (Sp. carrera) Career, profession; run, race; to
race. Nagakaréra na ang mga kabáyo. The horses are racing, (are off),
already. (cf. palangitánan, kabuhián; palúmbà).

_karetéla_, (Sp. carretela) Cart, bus, two-wheeled vehicle for
passengers and freight.

_karetón_, (Sp. carreton) Wagon, cart, go-cart; wheel. Butangí sing
karetón ang sibáy. Put wheels (or rollers) on the baby's chair.

_kárga_, (Sp. carga, cargar) Burden, load; to load, burden; to
transfer, enter. Iníng kárga lakás kabúg-at sa ákon. This burden
is too heavy for me. Ikárga iní sa ímo áwto. Put this in your
auto. Ikárga akó ánay siní sa ímo karósa. Please put this on your
cart. Pilá ang hinákay kon kargahán ko ang ímo káro sing napúlò ka
pásong nga humáy? How much will the freight be, if I put ten bushels
of rice on your cart? Ikárga sa libro ináng mga binunyagán. Transfer
to the register the names of those baptized. Dílì mo siá pagkargahán
sináng sáko, kay támà kabúg-at sa íya. Don't burden him with that sack,
for it is much too heavy for him. Nalúnud ang sakayán, kay kinargahán
sing támà. The boat sank, because it was overloaded. (cf. lúlan).

_kargabúro_, (Sp. carga, burro) A game at cards.

_kargadór_, (Sp. cargador) Porter, carrier.

_kargaménto_, (Sp. cargamento) Luggage, baggage, goods, load, freight,
merchandise, cargo.

_kárgo_, (Sp. cargo) Office, duty, responsibility, charge; income,
receipts. Kárgo y dáta. Receipts and expenditure.

_karí_, A kind of dish. (cf. karihán).

_karí_, (H) To come here, approach. Karí ka dirí--or--Kumarí ka. Come
here. Walâ pa siá makakarí, or: makapakarí. He hasn't been able to come
here yet. Pakariá siá sa madalî. Order him to come here at once. Indì
siá saráng makakarí--or--makapakarí. He is unable to come here.

_kariá_, Of that, etc. See sinâ, kará, id.

_kariádag_, One who steps into--, walks into--, interferes with--,
meddles in--, something carelessly or thoughtlessly; to be careless,
etc. (cf. tarádag; túdag, tádag, lúdag).

_karibók_, Revolution, upheaval, violent change (of government, etc.),
war, strife, commotion. (cf. ribók).

_karibúd_, Short and stout, stocky, stumpy, stubby,
thickset. (cf. kiribúd, tipúngkò, búdul, pudól, karibudó).

_karibudó_, (B) See karibúd.

_karigáhot_, (B) Sultriness, stuffiness, mugginess, closeness (of
heat or weather). (cf. kagín-ot, kabóhot).

_karihán_, Inn, restaurant, rest-house. Place where "karí" is made
or sold. (cf. karí).

_karíkad_, (B) See kalíkad--to stir or loosen up rice, earth, etc.

_karikatúra_, (Sp. caricatura) Caricature.

_karikót_, Intricacy, complication, complexity. (cf. rikót).

_karíl_, (Sp. carril) Rail-rut, rail, cart-way, furrow.

_karímis_, (B) Sweetness. See katám-is. (cf. rímis).

_karintóndan_, A kind of banana. (cf. kúndal, túndal, térna).

_karintukáy_, (B) Small, little, tiny things, tots. Pulús mga
karintukáy ang mga nagaeskwéla sa ákon kláse sang toksóan. The children
that come to my catechism-class are all very small. (cf. íntok,
magágmay, magágming).

_karipón_, To gather, collect, bring together, join or associate with,
mingle, mix, put together. Indì mo pagkariponón ang mga kabatáan
nga magamáy kag dalágkò. Don't put the small children together with
the big ones. Ginkaripón níla ang mga báka kag karabáw. They put
the cows with the buffalloes. Kariponá silá nga tanán. Put them all
together. (cf. símpon, dápon, upúd, abáy).

_karitána_, A kind of plant.

_karítkítan_, Stunted, backward, kept back in growth. (cf. aríarí,
agíl-agíl, daúldaúl).


_karíto_, (Sp. carrillo) A small cart; toy-cart.

_karitót_, A small lobster. (cf. koritót, kiritót).

_kármel; karmelítas_; (Sp.) Carmel; Carmelite nuns; Carmelite monks.

_kármen_, (Sp. carmen) Carmelite order; scapular,
scapulary. (cf. eskapuláryo).

_karnabál_, (Sp. carnaval) Carnival.

_kárne_, (Sp. carne) Flesh; meat. (cf. kusúg, unúd).

_karnéro_, (Sp. carnero) Sheep; mutton. Karnéro nga babáe. Ewe,
a female sheep. Karnéro nga laláki. Ram, a male sheep.

_káro_, (Sp. carro) Cart, wagon, wain.

_karóbkob_, To rub or scratch with some force. Karobkobá ang batíis
mo kon magkatúl. Rub the calf of your leg if it itches. (cf. kalúbkub
id.).

_karódkod_, To rub, rasp, scratch (one's hair, head, etc.); to scrape,
scoop out, shell (coconuts, gourds, etc.). (cf. kódkod, kokód).

_károg_, (B) To hurry, hustle, urge on. Karóga tána nga magpánaw
ron. (padaliá siá sa paglakát). Urge him to go quickly.

_karóg-károg_, To do with great despatch, perform quickly,
hurry. Karóg-karóga ang ímo trabáho. Hurry on with your work,
(be quick about it). (cf. karókaró).

_karóg-karóg_, A hustler. (cf. karóg-károg).

_karokál_, A wide-meshed basket, usually hung up on a wire or string
and used for carrying various provisions.

_karó-káro_, Dim. of káro. A child's toy-cart.

_karó-karó_, To do something with great speed, to scamp work,
perform in a hurry; hasty, careless (of work). Karó-karó nga
pagtrabáho. Careless, hasty work. Indì kamó magkarókaró sa pagóbra
sinâ. Don't scamp that work--or--Don't be hasty and careless in doing
that. (cf. karógkárog, karótkot).

_karókos_, See kalókos.

_karokosó_, To rumple, tousle, tumble, jumble, put--, throw--, bring--,
in disorder; rumpled, jumbled, complicated. Indì mo pagkarókosohón
ang lánot. Do not tumble the hemp-fibers. (cf. gómon, gomón, korokosó).

_karomáta_, (Sp. carromata) A two-wheeled vehicle, bus.

_karón_, (H) Now, at present, at the
present-time,--day,--moment,--juncture,--occasion, presently,
immediately, shortly, forthwith, anon, nowadays; before long, soon;
adj.: present, current. Lakát kitá karón. Let us go now. Mapailóngílong
akó karón. I am going to Iloilo soon. Sa súbung siní walâ akó sing
tinión, ápang karón ugáling tatápon ko ang ímo kinahánglan. Just at
present I have no time, but before long I will attend to your need. Sa
karón nga mga tinúig----. At the present time, in the times we are
living in----. Ang karón nga túig. The present or current year.

_kár-on_, (B) See karón.

_karós_, To scratch, claw. Indì mo siá pagkarosón. Don't scratch
him. Ang kinarosán sang kuríng sa bátà nagdugô. The scratch made by the
cat on the baby was bleeding. Ang mga kuríng nagakarosánay. The cats
are fighting (are clawing or scratching at each other). (cf. kalós).

_karósa_, (Sp. carroza) Cart; sledge, sled, as used by farmers over
rough roads.

_karóskos_, To scratch (one's head or the like). Ginkaróskos níya ang
íya úlo sa kaákig, sa kabúlung, etc. He scratched his head in anger,
in astonishment, etc. Dílì mo pagkaroskosón ang úlo mo. Don't scratch
your head. (cf. kalós, karós).

_karótkarót_, To rub, stroke, scratch. (cf. kálot).

_karótkot_, To scratch or rub against a door (as cats and dogs do);
to scamp work, perform carelessly, hurry, hustle, do something by
tearing and pulling, by leaps and bounds. Ang idô nagakarótkot sang
ganháan, kay malúyag siá magsulúd. The dog is scratching at the door,
for he wants to come in.

_karóy_, To starch yarn or thread previous to weaving. Karoyí ang
bunáng. Starch the yarn. Bunáng nga kinaroyán. Starched yarn.

_karsíl_, (Sp. cárcel) Prison, jail; to imprison, confine. Karsilá
siá. Put him in prison. (cf. bilánggò, pahúnong; bilanggóan, kalabóso,
kalabús).

_kartéra_, (Sp. cartera) Portfolio, writing case, pocket book, note
book, letter case.

_kartílya_, (Sp. cartilla) Primer, first book for
children. (cf. katón).

_kartón_, (Sp. carton) Card-board, paste-board; paste-board cards
as used in various games. Malúyag akó maghámpang sang lóte, ápang
walâ akó sing kartón. I would like to play the game called "lote",
but I have no cards for it.

_kartútso_, (Sp. cartucho) Cartridge, cartouch.

_karuágan, karwágan_, A pan. (cf. kalwágan).

_karwáhe_, (Sp. carruaje) Equipage, coach, four-wheeler, usually
drawn by horses.

_kása_, (Sp. casa) House, abode, dwelling, domicile, residence,
habitation. (cf. baláy).

_kása, kasá_, (Sp. caza, cazar) Hunting; to hunt. Kasahí ang báboy
nga talonón. Hunt down the wild pig. (cf. pangayám).

_kasá_, To wager, bet, stake, lay, lay a wager, make a bet, put one's
money on. Kasahí siá sing duhá ka mángmang. Bet him two pesos. Pilá
ang ikasá mo sa íya? What is your wager with him?--or--How much did
you bet him? (cf. kási).

_kasábà_, Lawsuit, question or case before a court; to have a case in
court; sue by legal process, institute legal proceedings. May kasábà
silá--or--nagakasábà silá. They have a case in court.

_kasab-ahán_, Banana-plantation, collection of bananas called
"sáb-a". (cf. kasagíngan).

_kasáblag_, Impediment, let, check, hitch, obstacle,
hindrance. (sáblag).

_kasablágan_, See kasáblag. Also: a person or thing that is an
obstacle, that prevents, etc.

_kasáblok_, Voraciousness, greediness, gluttony, state of being greedy
or gluttonous, (sáblok; cf. kadalók, kakágud.

_kasáda, kasádo_, (Sp. casada, casado) A married woman, a married man.

_kasádia_, Good cheer, glee, enjoyment, gladness, gaiety, merriment,
merry-making, revelling, rejoicing, joy, pleasure, celebration,
solemnity, entertainment, applied to any religious, social or political
gathering, where good feeling and cheerfulness abound. (sádia, sádya).

_kasadiáhan_, See kasádia. Also: Things that are cheerful or that
provide enjoyment and diversion.

_kasadiahón_, See kasádia id.

_kasádya, kasadyáhan, kasadyahón_, See kasádia, kasadiáhan,
kasadiahón id.

_kaság_, A kind of crab. As this crab is usually rather lean it has
become a synonym for thinness, leanness, emaciation. Kaság nga táo. A
man as lean as a casag-crab. Kakaság siníng táo! How scraggy this
man is!

_kasagíngan_, (H) Banana-plantation, collection of bananas. (ságing;
cf. kasab-ahán).

_kasahô_, Liking, attachment to, affection for. May kasahô akó sa
íya nga batásan. I have a liking for his ways and manners. (sahô).

_kasáhos_, To cut up meat into strips, etc. See kusáhos id., and more
commonly used.

_kasáhot, kasahót_, Concern, regard, attention to visitors and the
like. (sahót; cf. kasinahóton id.).

_kasákay_, Passenger, fellow passenger. (cf. sakáy).

_kasákit_, Grief, mourning, pain, sorrow, affliction, woe, heartache,
unhappiness, infelicity, anguish, pang, agony, interior or spiritual
suffering, dolour, dolor. (cf. sákit).

_kasakít_. Pain, painfulness, suffering, pang, anguish, agony, torture,
torment, ache, smart, bodily illness, injury or ailment. (cf. sakít).

_kasakítan_, See kasákit. Also: Troubles, worries, anxieties, trials,
ordeals, crosses, mental sufferings.

_kasakitán_, See kasakít. Also: Torture, martyrdom, bodily pains or
punishments, things that inflict great bodily pain.

_kasáklaw_, Resentment, ill-feeling, dislike, sense of injury,
condition of one who is offended or takes things amiss. (cf. sáklaw,
ákig).

_kasakláwan_, See kasáklaw. Also: things that are irksome, unpleasant,
irritating.

_kasákò_, Hustle, bustle, press of work, much work, much to do,
condition of one who is very busy or much occupied. (cf. sákò).

_kasakoón_, See kasákò.

_kasál_, To marry, bless or solemnize a marriage. Sín-o ang nagkasál
sa ínyo? Who married you? Who solemnized your marriage? Sín-o ang
nagpakasál kaína sang ága? Who was married this morning? Sín-o
ang ginkasál sang Párì kahápon? Who was married by the Priest
yesterday? Mapakasál kamí buás. We are going to be married
to-morrow. Nakasál--or--nagpakasál na kamó ukón walâ pa? Have
you been married yet or not? Indì mo pagipakasál ang ímo anák sa
kasamiénto sibíl. Don't permit your son (daughter) to contract a civil
marriage. Ang mga Kristiánhon nga nagapakasál sa sibíl nagapakasalâ
sing dakô sa atubángan sang Diós. Christians that contract a civil
marriage sin grievously in the sight of God.

_kasál-ag_, Grudge, spite, anger, resentment, aversion, antipathy,
difference, quarrel, condition of one who is at variance with
another. (cf. sál-ag, ákig, aligótgot, gulut-ánon, kasíb-ot).

_kasal-ánan_, Sins, faults, errors, offences, transgressions,
trespasses, wrong-doing, slips, mistakes, blunders. (cf. salâ,
kasáypan).

_kasalangisagán_, Incongruity, discrepancy, inconsistency, awkwardness,
inharmoniousness. (cf. salangiság).

_kasálo_, A messmate; friend, companion. (cf. sálo, kahámbal, kahírup).

_kasálpan_, Sunset, west, Occident. (cf. sálup, katúndan, katulúndan).

_kasamarán_, Injury, damage, destruction, harm, havoc. (cf. samád,
sámad).

_kasamiénto_, (Sp. casamiento) Marriage, wedlock, wedding. Kasamiénto
sibíl. Civil marriage. (Sp. casamiento civil). (cf. mínyo, pangasáwa,
kasál).

_kasámok_, Disturbance, commotion, mix-up, hodge-podge, miscellany,
medley, jumble, disorder, confusion. (cf. sámok).

_kasamputánan_, Goal, end, result; benefit, advantage;
consummation. (cf. sámput, alapután, kapuslánan, kahimoán).

_kasamwáran_, Progress, continuity, prosperity, solidity,
stability. (cf. sámwad, kauswágan).

_kasanáaw_, Dimness, twilight, the light of the early morning or
evening. (cf. sanáaw).

_kasánag_, Clearness, brightness, lucidity, light. (cf. sánag).

_kasanagán, kasanágan_, Explanation, exposition, clearing-up, a clear
proof of, manifestation, publication, explication, the unfolding of
the facts or throwing light on something obscure, etc. (sánag).

_kasanagón_, See kasánag.

_kasanágon_, Daybreak, peep of day, dawn, first blush--, prime--,
of morning, morning light, aurora, daylight in its initial stages,
the time preceding sunrise. (cf. sánag, kasánag, kasanagán, kasanagón).

_kasánggà_, Opponent, contestant, adversary, antagonist. Kasánggà
níya siá sa pagkapangúlo-bánwa. He is his opponent for the office of
Municipal President. (cf. kasúmpung; sánggà).

_kasángga_, A partner at play, especially in a game of
cards. (cf. sángga; dápig, kadápig, kadámpig).

_kasanghápon_, (B) The day before yesterday. (Kang isaráng hápon,
sang isá ka hápon).

_kasanghíran_, Trial, probation, examination. (cf. sánghid).

_kasángkad_, Width, breadth, wideness, latitude, amplitude,
expanse. (cf. sángkad).

_kasangkadón_, Width, etc. See kasángkad, kasangkarón.

_kasangkápan_, Equipment, outfit, gear, tools, furniture,
the collective name for all the things required for a certain
purpose. (sángkap; cf. galamitón).

_kasangkarón_, (H) Width, etc. See kasángkad, kasangkadón.

_kasángkol_, Capacity, capability, preparedness, ability, fitness,
proper preparation for an undertaking, etc. (sángkol; cf. takús,
ikatakús, kaákò).

_kasánglit_, Companion, equal, one of the same class, example,
type. (cf. sánglit, panánglit, pananglítan, pananglitánan).

_kasánhi_, Formerly, in times past, long ago. (cf. sádto ánay,
sang úna).

_kasántò_, Exactness, fitness, harmoniousness, good proportion,
symmetry, harmony. (sántò; cf. kasíbò).

_kasanyogán_, Continuance, continuation, durability, permanence,
persistence, lastingness, quality of lasting long, decision,
determination. Ang katin-arán kag kasanyogán sang bánwa----. The
prosperity and stability of the town, commonwealth, etc. Isilíng
mo na ang kasanyogán. State now your final decision or
determination. (sányog).

_kasapátan_, Animals in general, the animal kingdom, fauna, brute
creation, beasts. (cf. sápat).

_kasapinítan_, Thorns, briars; place overgrown with thorns or
briars. (cf. sapínit).

_kasaplídan_, Skim, that which is taken off or removed as by skimming;
gain, profit, emolument, benefit, advantage, interest. (cf. sáplid,
latáb, gáhi, gáhab, láhab, túbò).

_kasaplidánan_, See kasaplídan.

_kasaplíran_, See kasaplídan. (cf. ganánsya).

_kasápnot_, Roughness, ruggedness, unevenness, opposed to smoothness
and slipperiness. (cf. sápnot).

_kasápul_, One who is a party to an agreement or contract, a member
of a meeting or board, a councillor. Kasápulbánwa. A municipal
Councillor. (sápul).

_kasapulán_, A meeting, assembly, board;
council. Kasapulán-bánwa. Municipal Council. Kasapulán-puód. Provincial
Board.

_kasapulánan_, See kasapulán. Also: agreement, accord, resolution.

_kasarangán_, Possibility, potentiality, practicability,
feasibility. Walâ na sing kasarangán sa paglikáw sinâ. There is now
no possibility of avoiding it. (cf. saráng; ikasaráng).

_kasarángan_, Temperance, moderation, sobriety, soberness,
restraint; enough, not too much and not too little. Ang
kasarángan. Temperance. Ang birtúd nga kasarángan. The virtue
of temperance. Kasarángan gid lang ang íya nga pagkabutáng. He
has just sufficient property to live on. He is neither poor nor
rich. (cf. saráng, kasarangán).

_kasárot_, Ugliness, plainness, hideousness, repulsiveness (of face);
cursedness, curstness. (cf. sárot).

_kasarót_, Bad luck, evil fate. (cf. sarót).

_kasâsâ_, To fray, become useless, run to seed. Nagakasâsâ ang
ákon panápton sa kagabúk. My clothes are getting frayed through
rottenness. (cf. katâtâ).

_kasáw-a_, Disgust, aversion, loathing, antipathy. (cf. sáw-a).

_kasawáyan_, Fault, blame, mistake, blunder, slip, error that needs
correction. (sawáy).

_kasáy-kásay_, To recuperate, recover, get slowly better and stronger,
improve in health and strength after an illness, be convalescent,
convalesce. Nagakasáykásay na ang masakít nga bátà. The sick boy is
now slowly recuperating, (improving, moving about again).

_kasayopán, kasayópan_, Errors, mistakes, fallacies, blunders,
oversights, slips; faults, shortcomings, defects, imperfections,
deficiencies. (sayóp; kasáypan id.; cf. kasal-ánan, kakulángan,
katalángan).

_kasayóran_, (H) Explanation, exposition, elucidation, explication,
meaning, interpretation; knowledge, understanding. (sáyod;
cf. kasaysáyan).

_kasáypan_, See kasayopán.

_kasaypánan_, See kasayopán.

_kasáyran_, (H) See kasayóran.

_kasayránan_, (H) See kasayóran.

_kasaysáyan_, Explanation, exposition, elucidation, explication,
clear statement, interpretation. (sáysay; cf. kasayóran).

_kaséra_, (Sp. casera) Mistress of the house, housewife, landlady,
housekeeper; to be a housekeeper, etc., accept boarders and
lodgers. Nagakaséra siá sang mga bumulúthò sa matáas nga buluthóan. She
accepts High-School students as boarders and lodgers.

_kaseróla_, (Sp. caserola) Pan, saucepan. (cf. kaláhà, kalwágan).

_kási_, (Sp. casi) Nearly, about, somewhat more or less,
almost. (cf. bílang, daw).

_kási_, To bet, lay, lay a wager, put one's money on, wager, stake. See
kasá id. Kasíhi siá sing pilô. Bet him double the amount. Pilá ang
ikási mo? How much is (was) your wager? (cf. patád, tayâ).

_kasiamán_, Ninety. (cf. siám).

_kasíbag_, Quarrel, a falling-out, disagreement, difference, disaccord,
dissidence, variance, dissension, misunderstanding. (cf. síbag).

_kasibágsíbag_, Divergence, difference, opposition, disunion,
disharmony. Nagaabyánay silá sa gwâ, ápang may ginahúptan silá sa
dúghan nga kasibágsíbag ang isá sa isá. They are friends outwardly
but in their hearts they oppose one another. (cf. síbag--to disagree,
etc.).

_kasíbò_, Fitness, exactness, accuracy, suitability, quality of
fitting precisely. (cf. síbò).

_kasiboán, kasibóan_, See kasíbò. Also: Things that fit or suit
exactly.

_kasíb-ot_, Disgust, grudge, displeasure, annoyance, angry feeling,
vexation, irritation, chagrin. (síb-ot).

_kasídla_, Courage, strength, bravery, valour, intrepidity, dash,
pluck, mettle. (cf. kaísug, kabáskug).

_kasídlak_, Brilliancy, brightness, gleam, shine, resplendence,
effulgence, refulgence, glitter, lustre, sheen, shimmer. (cf. sídlak).

_kasídlaw_, Radiance, dazzling brightness. (cf. kasílaw,
sídlaw--sílaw).

_kasidô_ Hiccough, hiccup. (cf. sidô).

_kasíga_, Light, brightness, gleam, illumination, visibility,
luminosity, luminousness, irradiation. (cf. síga).

_kasígla_, See kasídla id.

_kasígne_, Horribleness, dreadfulness, horridness, frightfulness,
fearfulness, hideousness, repulsiveness, awfulness, state of being
shocking to look upon or to hear of. (cf. sígne, makasisígne).

_kasí-kási_, A small flag, banner or signal.

_kasílag_, Anger, spite, grudge, ill will, hatred, detestation,
dudgeon, spleen, acrimony, aversion. (sílag; cf. dumút).

_kasílak_, See kasídlak.

_kasílaw_, See kasídlaw.

_kasílì_, Brightness, gloss, lustre, shining surface,
glistening. (cf. sílì; kasilíng).

_kasíli_, A kind of fish.

_kasilíng_, (B) Gloss, shine, sheen, gleam, glint, brightness,
brilliancy. (silíng; cf. kahíning, kasílì, kasídlak).

_kasilíngan_, (H) Neighbour; neighbourhood; grounds at the side of
a house. (silíng; cf. kaíping, kaíngod, etc.).

_kasílo_, Square, having four equal sides; carpenters
square. (cf. askwála, eskwála, kaládo).

_kasílyas_, (Sp. casillas) Lavatory, privy, closet, latrine, jakes,
W.C. (short for water-closet). (cf. lubô, komún).

_kasimánwa_, Co-citizen, fellow-countryman, citizen,
resident. (cf. bánwa).

_kasím-ong_, Loneliness, solitariness, isolation. (cf. sím-ong).

_kasína_, To fool, cheat, play a trick to. Dílì mo pagkasináhan ang
ímo isigkatáo. Don't cheat your neighbour. (cf. dáyà, límbong, lág-it).

_kasinahóton_, See kasahót.

_kasinántò_, See kasántò.

_kasínaw_, Limpidness, limpidity, pellucidity, clearness,
transparency, translucence, translucency especially of liquids. (sínaw;
cf. katín-aw).

_kásing_, To spin a top. Ikásing ang kasíng mo. Spin your
top. (cf. kasíng).

_kasíng_, Spinning top. (cf. trómpo).

_kasíngkal_, Very great heat, torrid heat, hot weather, torridity,
torridness, state of being very hot; heat (of anger or passion).

_kasíng-kásing_, Heart, affection, heart as the seat of love and
tenderness. (cf. tagiposóon).

_kasíngkasíng_, A knob or protuberance on the neck of some horses
(as a distinctive horse-mark).

_kasín-it_, Feeling, sentiment, regard, consideration; to have regard
or consideration for. (cf. patugsíling, pasunáid, balatyágon).

_kasinô_, A hollow sound, quality of sounding hollow, as a half-empty
coconut or the like. (cf. sinô).

_kasíno_, (Sp. casino) Clubhouse for social or political
reunions. (cf. tilipunán).

_kasiók_, (B) See kasí-ot. (siók--síot).

_kasí-ot_, (H) Denseness, thickness, condition of ground cumbered
with high grass, brush or undergrowth. (sí-ot; cf. kasiók).

_kasírum, kasirúm_, (B) Eventide, nightfall, evening twilight. (sírum;
cf. kasisídmon).

_kasisídmon_, See kasírum.

_kasisígmon_, See kasírum, kasisídmon.

_kasisít-an_, Straitened circumstances, difficulties,
troubles. (cf. síot; kapipít-an, kalalát-an, kalisdánan).

_káskas_, To tear or pull off as an old thatched roof, vines or the
like. Kaskasá ang dáan nga atóp kag ilísan mo sing bág-o. Tear off
the old roof and replace it with a new one. Ikáskas akó ánay sináng
mga balágon. Please pull off those creepers. (cf. karáskas).

_kásko_, (Sp. casco) Hull, hold of a ship, hulk. (cf. dágpak).

_kásla_, Imperative passive of kasál.

_kásla_, A kind of plant much used for hedges and
fences. (cf. kamándag).

_káso_, (Sp. caso) Case, cause (legal); result, event, occurrence,
contingency. Walâ man sing káso. There was no result. Nothing happened.

_kasóbol_, Nearness, proximity (of time, as of a feast,
etc.). (cf. sóbol, kakóg-ong).

_kasogoán_, Commandment, order, injunction, law, prescription,
rules; testament. Ang dáan kag bág-o nga kasogoán. The Old and
New Testament. Kasogoán-bánwa. Municipal ordinance. (cf. sógò,
pagbulút-an).

_kasogóran_, (H) Beginning, opening, outset, inception, start,
commencement. (cf. súgud, ginsugúran, kamunóan).

_kasókáso_, To tousle--, rumple--, tumble--, the hair, grasp and shake
by the hair, or the like. Indì mo pagkasókasóhon ang íya bohók. Don't
rumple his hair. (cf. karokosó),

_kasóy_, A Philippine folk-dance.

_kasóy_, A kind of tree with an edible fruit. The stone protrudes
from the ripe fruit.

_káspang_, Roughness, hardness, callosity, callus, harshness, asperity
(of skin); to be or become rough, etc. (cf. gáspang, gúphal).

_kásra_, (B) Once. See makaisá.

_kásta_, (Sp. casta) To mate, pair, cover (of animals). Kastahí ang
kabáyo. Bring the mare to the stallion. Pakastahá ang kabáyo. Let
the stallion cover the mare.

_kastányas_, (Sp. castañas). Chestnuts, chesnuts.

_kastanyétas_, (Sp. castañetas) Castanets, castanettes.

_kastígo_, (Sp. castigo) Punishment, chastisement, correction,
castigation, penalty; visitation (of God); to punish, chastise,
castigate, penalize. Kastígo inâ sang Diós. That is (was) a visitation
of God. Kastigóha siá. Chastise him. Ikastígo mo sa íya iníng múlta
nga duhá ka písos. Punish him with this fine of two pesos. (cf. sílot,
gábà).

_kastílyo_, (Sp. castillo) Castle, fortress; imitation of a bombardment
by letting off detonating fireworks tied to a bamboo-erection.

_kastoníkas_, (A corruption of castañetas) Castanets. (See
kastanyétas).

_kastór_, (Sp. castor) Castor, small vessel with a perforated top
for sprinkling pepper, etc.; beaver (animal so called). Aseite de
kastór. (Sp. aceite de castor) Castor oil.

_kastorílyo_, (Sp. castoreño) A derby hat, felt hat, any hat made
of cloth.

_kasúay_, Quarrel, dispute, brawl, contention, disagreement, discord,
difference, squabble, altercation, dissension, tiff; an opponent in
a quarrel. (cf. súay, kasuáyan).

_kasuáyan_, Quarrelling, bickering and biting; things fought or
quarrelled about. (súay; cf. kasúay, kasuayón).

_kasuayón_, Cause or origin of a quarrel, quarrelsomeness. (súay).

_kasubô_, Sorrow, grief, sadness, distress, woe, affliction, mourning,
bitterness, heart-ache, dolour, dejection, care, dole, fret. (subô).

_kasuboán_, See kasubô. Also: Things to be grieved over; that causes
affliction or sorrow; sorrows.

_kasúbung_, (H) An equal, one in the same predicament as another;
sameness, equality, like, as, similar to. (súbung).

_kasúdlan_, Entrails, bowels, guts, viscera. (sulúd).

_kasudlánan_, See kasúdlan. Also: Contents; vessel, container,
receptacle.

_kasúgpay_, Exhaustion, inanition, starvation. (cf. súgpay, súp-ay).

_kasúgpon_, Continuation, prolongation, lengthening, production,
protraction, extension, accession, addition; continued (of
serials). (cf. súgpon).

_kasúgut_, Party, partner; agreement, compact, pact. (cf. sugút).

_kasukatán, kasukátan_, Anniversary, annual or yearly
celebration. (sukát).

_kasulátan_, Writings, books, works, writ, scripture. (cf. sulát).

_kasúlgan_, Current, torrent, flow, race, course, swift motion of
water. (sulúg).

_kasúlgan_, Cocks. (sulúg).

_kasulómo_, (H) Exciting nausea, loathing, aversion, turn, queasiness,
qualm, repugnance, antipathy. (sumó, makasolómo, kataláka, kataká,
kangílad).

_kasulúg_, Swiftness, velocity of a current. (cf. sulúg, kasúlgan).

_kasulugán_, See kasúlgan.

_kasúlya_, (Sp. casulla) Chasuble, vestment used by a priest at Mass.

_kasúmbung_, Plaintiff, accuser, prosecutor, complainant,
arraigner. (súmbung).

_kasúm-od_, Nausea, loathing, queasiness, qualm. (súm-od).

_kasum-orán_, (H) Loathing, aversion; abomination. (cf. kasúm-od,
kasulómo).

_kasum-orón_, See kasúm-od.

_kasúmpung_, Opponent, enemy, adversary, antagonist,
assailant. (súmpung).

_kasúod_, Intimacy; near relationship. (cf. súod, kahírup, kahámbal,
kadágil, pariénte).

_kasuokán_, Nooks, corners, out-of-the-way places, secluded
places. (cf. suók).

_kasúpug_, Daring, recklessness, boldness, hardihood, rashness, cheek,
frowardness, dash, impertinence, audacity, temerity. (cf. súpug,
kakáhas, kaaháng).

_kasúsi_, Inquisitiveness, curiousness, curiosity. (cf. súsi).

_kasústo_, (Sp. sústo) Shock, surprise, trepidation, turn, a strong
and sudden agitation.

_kasutíl_, Badness, naughtiness, wickedness, disobedience. (sutíl).

_kasutilán_, See kasutíl. Also: Naughty behaviour, wicked deeds,
naughty practices, bad manners.

_kasutilón_, See kasutíl.

_kátà_, (B) To be full, brim--, chock--, choke--, full, replete,
replenished, crammed, stuffed. Nagakátà ang túbig sang ísdà, ang
bólsa sang tinápay, etc. The water is full of fish, the pocket is
crammed with bread, etc. (cf. punô, butâ).

_katáas_, Height, tallness, loftiness. (cf. táas).


_kataasán, kataásan_, See katáas. Also: High dignity, things that
are lofty or sublime.

_kataasón_, See katáas.

_kataastaásan_, Excellences, prerogatives, high perfections, privilege,
exaltation, elevation (in rank, etc.), great dignity. (cf. táas,
kalabihán, kamahálan).

_kátad_, To stretch on a frame or rod, as yarn previous to weaving;
to stretch on the rack, figuratively or literally. Katáda (--ára)
ang bunáng. Stretch the yarn. Ginkátad níla siá. They put him on the
rack. They punished him severely.

_katadán_, A frame to stretch yarn on, etc. Walâ ko makátad ang bunáng,
kay walâ akó sing katadán. I cannot get the yarn ready for weaving,
because I have no stretching frame.

_katád-katád_, See kalakatád, karakatád.

_katádlung_, Straightness, directness, rightness. (cf. tádlung).

_katadlungán_, See katádlung. Also: Straight-forwardness, honesty,
rectitude, uprightness; honest and upright dealing.

_katág-an_, Retiredness, shyness, bashfulness, coyness; to be shy,
etc. May katág-an siá--or--nagakatág-an siá sa paghámbal. She is too
bashful to speak. (cf. tágò).

_katagiposoónan_, Hearts; kind, sympathetic people, tender-hearted
folks. (cf. tagiposóon).

_katagúmtum_, Fog, mist, cloud; darkness. (cf. ámbon, alopóop, gál-um,
pangánod, dámpug).

_katahâ_, Respect, reverence, awe, fear, veneration, regard,
consideration, deference. (cf. tahâ).

_katáhap_, Fear, alarm, dismay, consternation, apprehension; shyness,
respect. (cf. táhap).

_katahápan_, See katáhap. Also: Danger, things that cause fear or
apprehension.

_katáhaw_, Loss of strength, defection, deterioration. (cf. táhaw).

_kataháwan_, See katáhaw. Also: Things that cause loss of strength,
etc.

_katahúm_, Beauty, loveliness, comeliness, fairness, good
looks, goodliness, pulchritude, niceness, pleasing appearance,
handsomeness. (cf. tahúm, katahumán, kagayón, kaányag).

_katahumán_, See katahúm. Also: Objects that are beautiful or pleasing
in appearance.

_katahumón_, See katahúm.

_katahurán_, Reverence, deference, respect, veneration, esteem;
distinction, glory, honour, dignity. (cf. táhud).

_kataká_, Nausea, surfeit, loathing, queasiness, qualm, quality that
excites a loathing or aversion. (cf. taká).

_katá-káta_, To manage--, distribute--, portion out--, well,
apportion, assign; to spend little, be economical, live frugally, be
thrifty. Katákatáha ang humáy, agúd índì kitá makulángan, kay dílì gid
maáyo ang áton pinatubás sa karón nga túig. Portion out well the rice
or we may run short, because this year's harvest was far from good.

_katâ-kátà_, To prattle, prate, talk much and flippantly, be a noisy
or idle chatterer. Anó na man ang ínyo nga ginakinatâkátà? What are
you talking about so much? (cf. búrà, ngálngal, ngásal, etc.).

_katák-katák_, To cackle. Ang mungâ nagakatákkaták. The hen
cackles. (cf. kákak, kurukutúk).

_katáksan_, Dimension, size, bulk, volume, extent, measurement,
measure. (cf. takús).

_kataksánan_, See katáksan.

_kátal_, To hang down freely, dangle loosely, (particularly applied
to the male organ of generation of a horse or other animal).

_katál_, Hanging down freely, dangling loosely in the meaning of
"kátal".

_katalágman_, Danger, apprehension, peril, risk, hazard, jeopardy,
liability. (tagám).

_kataláka_, (H) See makataláka. Kataláka iníng kalán-on. This food
is loathsome, sickening, nauseous. (cf. taká, kataká).

_katalámdan_, (H) Attention! Observation, notice. (cf. tamúd; talámdan,
katámdan, pahibaló, abíso, patimáan).


_katalángan_, Mistake, blunder, slip, missing one's way, deviation,
swerving, declination, going astray, wandering, error, deception,
illusion. (tálang).

_katalarúngan_, (H) One of the same class or condition. Si
Fuláno katalarúngan ko sa pageskwéla. N.N. is my classmate at
school. (cf. dungán).

_katálaw_, Cowardice, faint-heartedness, funk, timidity, poltroonery,
weakness. (tálaw).

_katalawón_, See katálaw.

_katálhà_, Quality of wood, or the like, that is easy to
split. (tálhà).

_katalína_, (Sp. catalina) A wheel with teeth, cog-wheel,
sprocket-wheel, spur-wheel.

_katalipuspusán_, The last part or stage of a thing, end,
termination, condition of approaching ripeness, completion or
termination. (cf. tápus, talipuspusón).

_katalíwis_, (H) Pointedness, acuteness, sharpness of a point or
pointed instrument, as of a needle, awl, thorn, etc. (cf. talíwis).

_katalúm_, (H) Sharpness of an edged tool, keenness, quality of
cutting well, said of a knife, bolo, etc. (cf. talúm).

_katalumón_, See katalúm.

_katalúnan_, Jungle, deep forest, bush, wild country, uninhabited
territory. (cf. tálon, katalunánan.)

_katalunánan_, See katalúnan.

_katámad_, Laziness, sloth, indolence, idleness, slowness,
remissness. Katámad sa ímo! How slow or lazy you are! (cf. támad).

_katamarón_, See katámad.

_katámbi_, Condition or quality of being adjacent, adjoining or
contiguous, especially said of grounds that border on each other;
neighbour, one whose land is adjacent to another's. Katámbi ko siá. He
is my neighbour, his field borders on mine. (cf. támbi).

_katámbok_, Fatness, obesity, stoutness, corpulence. (cf. támbok).

_katám-is_, Sweetness, deliciousness, exquisiteness, condition
of being sweet, agreeable, exquisite, delightful to sense or
feeling. (cf. tám-is).

_katam-isán_, See katám-is. Also: Objects that are sweet, etc.

_katam-isón_, See katám-is.

_katámnan_, Field, cultivated land, farm, especially
rice-land. (cf. tánum, tanúm, palangúmhan).

_katampalásan_, Wickedness, depravity, maliciousness, insulting
behaviour. (cf. tampálas).

_katanáng_, Condition of being overripe, rotten-ripeness, very soft
and rotten (of fruits), (cf. tanáng; kalanóng).

_katándà_, Accuracy of aim, unerring aim, sure or good aim, hit,
pointing well, taking good aim, certainty of hitting. (cf. tándà).

_katándus_, Dexterity, adroitness; application, zeal, diligence,
assiduity, industry. (cf. tándus, kapísan).

_katáng_, A kind of crab.

_katán-up_, Sound, echo, noise (of a cry, voice, etc., heard from
a distance).

_katanús_, (B) Straightness, straight growth (of trees,
etc.). (cf. tanús).

_katányog_, Reach, scope, extent, stretch (of one's power,
influence, etc.). Ang katányog sang íya nga tíngug. The reach of his
voice. (cf. tányog).

_katáo_, To be born. See táo. Sa adláwádlaw may nagakatáo kag may
nagakamatáy. Every day--some are born and others die,--there are
births and deaths.

_kataó_, To live independently, have a household of one's own, live
together with others. Pilá kamó nga nagakataó sa ínyo baláy? How many
are you living together in your house? (cf. táo).

_kataohán, kataóhan_, Men, mankind, humanity, the human race, man
(taken collectively). (cf. táo).

_katápan_, Evenness, smoothness, levelness, flatness, quality of
being even or level (of a floor, road, plain, etc.; tápan).

_katáp-ing_, Dirtiness, uncleanness, impurity, foulness, filthiness,
filth. (cf. táp-ing).


_katap-ingón_, See katáp-ing.

_katáp-ol_, Weakness, feebleness; dulness, stupidity. (cf. táp-ol).

_katápò_, Associate, member of a society or club, share-holder,
stock-holder; mate, companion, fellow, partner, confederate,
colleague. (cf. tápò).

_katapúk_, Fragility, frailty, brittleness, weakness, flimsiness,
quality of--being easily broken or torn,--having neither strength
nor solidity. (cf. tapúk).

_katapúsan_, End, finish, completion, termination, expiration, wind up,
consummation, denouement, limit, stoppage, close, conclusion, finale,
finis, period, term, terminus, last. Sa waláy katapúsan. Endless,
for ever and ever, in perpetuity, evermore, aye for aye, for evermore,
without end, eternal, everlasting. (cf. tápus, katalipuspusán).

_katarág-tarág_, Thoughtlessness, carelessness, imprudence, lack of
circumspection or consideration. (cf. tarág-tarág).

_katarangkalán_, (B) Jungle, bush, forest, wild country. (cf. tángkal;
katalúnan).

_kataráta_, (Sp. catarata) Cataract, cascade, waterfall; cataract of
the eye. (cf. busáy; kúlap, bítlig).

_katarúngan_, Justice, equity, justification, righteousness;
argument, reason, contention, reasoning, argumentation. Ginpaháyag
níya ang íya nga katarúngan. He gave his reason. He explained his
argument. (cf. tárung).

_katarús_, (B) Often stands for makatarús. See tarús--to accomplish,
perform, etc.

_katâtâ_, To fray, etc. See kasâsâ id.

_katáw_, Mermaid, naiad, siren, water-nymph.

_katáwhay_, Tranquillity, peace, peacefulness, freedom from worry,
obstruction or opposition, calmness. (táwhay).

_katawháyan_, See katáwhay. Also: Things that make for a tranquil life,
for peacefulness, etc.

_katawhayón_, See katáwhay.

_katawóhan_, See kataóhan. (cf. táwo--táo).

_katáy_, A parade, procession. See kátay.

_kátay_, File, line, parade, procession; row (of houses); to follow
in line, file, line up, parade, walk in Indian file. Pakatáya
ang mga táo sa prosesyón. Marshal the people in orderly lines
for the procession. Buás, konó, may kátay sang mga salín sang
kagúbut. To-morrow, it is said, there will be a parade of the
war-veterans. Magkátay kamó. Line up--or--Form in line. (cf. ídas,
kóro).

_katáyog_, Farness, etc. See katayogón).

_katayogón_, Farness, distance, remoteness. (cf. táyog, kanáyop,
kanáyok).

_káte_, (Sp. cate) A measure for sugar, etc., equal to about two thirds
of a kilo. (gm. 632.60). One hundred "káte" make a "píko" or "píkul"
(Sp. pico).

_katedrál_, (Sp. catedral) Cathedral.

_katekísta_, (Sp. catequista) Catechist.

_katesísmo_, (Sp. catecismo) Catechism, christian
doctrine. (cf. toksóan).

_káti_, To decoy, catch birds by a decoy; to provoke, excite, induce,
lure, allure, draw, draw on. Amó inâ gánì ang ginakáti (ikáti) níya
sa ákon. That is exactly what he is enticing me with. (cf. katián).

_kátià_, Glass, crystal. (kátyà id).

_katián_, Lure, bait, decoy, especially a bird used to lure other
birds into a trap. (káti).

_katiáyon_, Spouse, husband, wife, love; betrothed, lover. Katiáyon
níya siá. She (he) is his (her) wife (husband). (cf. tiáyon).

_katibawásan_, Freedom, liberty, independence. (cf. tibáwas, kaluásan).

_katíbsol_, Roundness, plumpness, etc. See katibúnog. (tíbsol, típsul).

_katibúdol_, Stockiness, stumpiness, stoutness,
plumpness. (cf. tibúdol, búdul, katipúngkò).

_katibúnog_, Roundness, plumpness, stoutness, fleshiness, beefiness
(of arms, legs, etc.). (cf. tibúnog, katipólon, kanipólon, katíbsol,
katámbok, kabahúl).

_katíd_, To be narrow, etc. See kitíd id.

_kátig_, Outrigger, usually made of bamboo-spars. Its purpose is to
steady a boat.

_katíg-a_, (H) Hardness, solidity, quality of great resistance to
pressure or of being unyielding to physical or moral agencies. (tíg-a).

_katigayónan_, Procurement, preparation, effectiveness; capacity or
ability to bring something about or to get results. (cf. tigáyon).

_katigayonán_, Possibility, feasibility, facility, occasion,
opportunity (of obtaining or procuring a thing). (cf. katigayónan).

_katigbawán, katigbáwan_, Place overgrown with
tígbaw-reeds. (cf. tígbaw).

_katígdà_, Clearness, distinctness (of pronunciation,
etc.). (cf. tígdà, kaáthag).

_katígdas_, See katíg-a. Also: hardness, toughness (of food that is
underdone); harshness, roughness, abruptness, bluntness, brusqueness
(of speech).

_katigulángan_, (H) The old, aged, superannuated, old folks, old
people, parents advanced in age, forefathers, ancestors, ancients,
by-gone generations. (cf. tigúlang).

_katigulangón_, Old age, oldness, senility, advanced age,
superannuation. (cf. tigúlang, kagulangón).

_katihán_, Lure, bait, etc. See katián.

_katí-katí_, Dim. and Freq. of káti. Katíkatihá siá. Provoke (induce)
him. Ginkatíkatí (kinatíkatí) níya akó sa pagpakigáway. He challenged
me to fight. (cf. ákyat).

_katí-katí_, Small, very itchy eruptions, pustules or boils in various
skin diseases.

_katilíngban_, (H) Union, gathering, collection, assembly, meeting,
society, resume, selection, anthology. (cf. tingúb).

_katimawáan_, Freedom, liberty, independence; the common people,
ordinary folks. (cf. timáwà).

_katímbang_, Balance, scales, counterweight, counterpoise; partner,
mate, assistant. (cf. tímbang, kabúlig, binangî).

_katín_, Reaching to below the knees, but above the ankles, short
(of dress); a few inches above the ground, not reaching to the floor
(of curtains, or the like).

_katin-áran_, (H) Prosperity, economical independence, stability,
durability, progress. (tín-ad).

_katín-aw_, (H) Limpidness, limpidity, pellucidness, lucidity,
pellucidity, clearness, transparency. (tín-aw; cf. kasínaw).

_katingála_, Wonder, astonishment, marvel, amazement, wonderment,
admiration, surprise; to wonder, etc. Nagakatingála akó. I am
astonished. Punô siá sa katingála. He is full of wonder. (cf. tingála).

_katingaláhan_, Wonder, marvel, miracle, prodigy, phenomenon, things
that are astonishing. See katingála. (cf. katanhagáan).

_katíngban_, Union, reunion, etc. See katilíngban. (cf. tingúb).

_katingbánan_, See katíngban, katilíngban.

_katingúg_, For makatingúg, nakatingúg. See tingúg.

_katín-kátin_, To squat down in such a way that one does not quite
sit on the ground. Indì ka magkatínkátin sa simbáhan. Indì mo
pagkatínkatínan ang simbáhan. Don't squat down in church. Indì ka
magkatínkátin, kóndì magtíndog ka kon may bisíta. Don't squat down,
but stand up, when visitors are present.

_katínlò_, Cleanness, cleanliness, spotlessness, purity, freedom from
dirt or stain. (cf. tínlò).

_katípan_, Bond, agreement, covenant, compact, bargain, engagement;
lover, affianced, fiancé, fiancée, paramour. Ang Dáan (Bág-o)
nga Katípan. The Old (New) Testament. Katípan níya siá. He is
her--lover,--intended,--betrothed. He is engaged to her. (cf. típan).

_katipólon_, (H) Roundness, spherical shape. (cf. tipólon, kanipólon).


_katípon_, Meeting, gathering, congress. (cf. típon, katipúnan,
tilipunán).

_katípsul_, Plumpness, etc. (cf. típsul, katíbsol, katibúnog).

_katipúnan_, Union, society, association, assembly, meeting, gathering,
club. Ang Katipúnan. The revolutionary society founded by Filipino
Patriots during the latter part of the nineteenth century and directed
against the Spanish colonial Government. (cf. katípon, katilíngban,
tilipunán, tinipóntípon, talapuán, talapuánan).

_katipúngkò_, Stumpiness, stockiness. (cf. tipúngkò, katibúdol).

_katískug_, Stiffness, rigidity, inflexibility. (tískug; cf. kabáskug).

_katístis_, Spitefulness, malevolence, malice, maliciousness,
spite. Patúga inâ kag búnga sang katístis sang ákon kaáway. That is
the work and result of my enemy's spite. (cf. tístis).

_katitáw_, A kind of coarse native cloth made in various colours that
soon fade.

_katitíya_, Undersized, dwarfish, little, petite, diminutive, less
than medium size, applied especially to women.

_katitíyo_, Small, insignificant, worthless. (cf. katitíya).

_katiwalwágan_, Dangers, perils, jeopardy, hazard. (cf. tiwálwag).

_kátkat_, To find out about other people's affairs, to fish--,
worm--, ferret--, out secrets and reveal them, to disclose, lay
open, divulge. Katkatá ang sekréto ni Fuláno. Try to fish out N.N.'s
secret. Kinátkat níya siá. He wormed out his secret. Sagád gid siá
magkátkat sang mga tinágò sang ibán. He is an adept at worming out
the secrets of others (and revealing or telling them to others).

_katloán_, Thirty. (tátlo).

_kátlon_, Pertaining to or affected by the skin-disease "katúl". Ang
may katúl ginatawág nga kátlon. One who has the skin-disease "katúl"
is called "kátlon".

_katólika, katóliko_, (Sp. católica, católico) Catholic. Ang Iglésia
Katólika. The Catholic Church. Ang mga katóliko. Catholics.

_katón_, (Sp. catón) First spelling and reading book for small
children, Primer.

_kátre_, (Sp. catre) Bed, couch. (cf. higdáan, balatángan).

_kátsa_, A large, thick kerchief used for wrapping up things brought
to or from the market, etc.

_katsílà_, A kind of banana.

_katsílà_, (Sp. cachil, castilla) Spanish; Spaniard. Sang tiémpo sang
mga Katsílà. In Spanish times. (cf. Kakatsiláan).

_katsilán-on_, Spanish, Iberian. (cf. katsílà, kinatsilâ).

_katsórì_, A kind of field-mouse with a long, pointed snout and a
very offensive smell; a kind of rice that when cooked and stirred
emits a very strong odour.

_katsubúng, katsúbung_, A kind of plant; it is poisonous.

_katubaán_, Place where toddy is produced or sold. (cf. tubâ).

_katubáson_, Harvest-time, rice-harvest, season for gathering in the
crop, the season following immediately after harvest-time. (cf. tubás;
tagaláni, tigaláni).

_katúbhan_, Sugar-cane field, sugar plantation. (tubó).

_katúbò_, Quality or condition of being of equal age with another
or of having grown up together with another; contemporaneousness,
contemporariness, coexistence. Katúbò ko siá. He is of the same age
as myself. (cf. kadúngan, tubô).

_katubohán_, See katúbhan.

_katubsánan_, Delivery, salvation, redemption; freedom. (cf. tubús;
katibawásan, kaluásan).

_katubtúban_, Goal, end, termination, limit (of time or place). Sa
waláy katubtúban. Without end or limit, endless, eternal, boundless,
everlasting, immense. (túbtub).

_katubúsan_, Delivery. See katubsánan.

_katúbwan_, See katúbhan, katubohán id.


_katúdus_, Force, impetus, vigour in the use of one's hands, as in
striking, boxing, throwing, etc.; harshness, roughness, abruptness
(of speech). (cf. katígdas, kaábtik).

_katúgdang_, Sinking, submersion, foundering, disappearance under
water, drowning. (túgdang).

_katugdángan_, See katúgdang. Also: Danger of sinking; jettison,
the throwing of goods overboard to save a ship.

_katúgnaw_, (H) Freshness, coolness, coldness, cold, chill, keenness,
bleakness, bitterness, chilliness, rawness, frigidity. (túgnaw).

_katugnawón_, (H) See katúgnaw. (cf. kabúgnaw).

_katugón-túgon_, An adviser, counselor, reminder. (cf. túgon).

_katúhay_, Difference, dissimilarity, distinction, quality of not
being the same or not belonging to the same class or kind. (cf. túhay).

_katuháyan_, See katúhay. Also: things that are
different. (cf. kinatuháyan).

_katuigán_, Years, time, centuries, ages, aeons; yearly obligation,
Easter-duty. (cf. túig).

_katuigón_, Time, year, season. (cf. katuigán, panuigón).

_katúl_, A kind of skin-disease, producing a very itchy rash that
soon forms painful pustules, scabs, etc. It often takes many months to
cure; pruritus, itch; to itch, cause the skin-disease katúl. Ginakatúl
siá. He is affected with "katúl". Kinatúl man akó sádto ánay. I also
once had the skin-disease "katúl". Pakátli siá sing nípay, kalahós,
etc. Give him a painful itch by means of "nípay, kalahós", etc.

_katúlad_, Similarity, equality, likeness, example, like. (cf. túlad;
kaángay, pananglítan).

_katul-anán_, Bones, skeleton, collection or heap of bones. (túl-an).

_katúl-katúl_, Dim. and Freq. of katúl. To itch a little, have or
cause an itchy feeling.

_katúl-katúl_, Loose, not firm or tight, not well joined or adapted
and hence creaky, squeaky, emitting a harsh or grating sound (said of
tools, knives (not well joined to the handle), of cart-wheels, etc.,
with loose parts); to be loose; to creak, squeak. Nagakatúlkatúl
ang kaláptan sang súndang. The handle of the knife is loose, creaks
(not being well joined to the handle). Indì mo pagpakatúlkatulón
ang káro, kóndì pisákan mo. Don't rattle the cart, but steady it by
means of wedges. (cf. lágtok, palágtok--to creak, crack (of bones,
fingers, etc).

_katulúbhan_, Sugar cane fields. See katúbhan, tubó.

_katulúgon_, Sleep, slumber, nap, snooze. (cf. túlug, tulúg).

_katulúndan_, (H) West, sunset; going down, disappearance. (cf. túnud,
tunúd, katúndan, katúngdan).

_katulúyhon_, Sleep, sleepiness, drowsiness, somnolence, heaviness,
torpidity. (cf. tuyó, ginatuyó).

_katumánan, katumanán_, Fulfilment, execution,
accomplishment, performance, observance, discharge, acquittal,
satisfaction. (cf. túman).

_katumanán_, Sarcastically used for: Obstinacy, wilfulness, self-will,
heedlessness. Ay katumanán siníng bátà! Oh, the obstinacy of this
boy! How obstinate this boy is!

_katúmbal_, Chili, a species of capsicum, red pepper, Cayenne pepper,
Guinea pepper.

_katúndan_, West, etc. See katulúndan.

_katundanánon_, Western, occidental, European. (cf. katúndan).

_katungâ_, Half, moiety. Isá ka katungâ. One half. (cf. tungâ).

_katung-ánan_, The midst, middle, centre, middle part, central portion;
the heart (of trees, etc.). Ang katung-ánan sang káhoy. The middle part
(the heart) of the tree. (cf. tungâ; alibútud).

_katúngdan_, West, etc. See katulúndan, katúndan. Also: relation,
etc. See katungdánan.

_katungdánan_, Relation, connection with, reference to; duty,
obligation. (cf. tungúd).

_katungdanánon_, Western. See katundanánon.


_katúnggan_, Swamp, bog, nípà-swamp, morass.

_katunggánon_, Swampy, marshy, fenny, boggy; growing in swampy
soil. (cf. katúnggan).

_katunukán_, (H) Thorns, briars; place where thorns and briars
grow. (cf. tunúk).

_katunurán_, (H) Sinking, setting, the going down (of a vessel,
etc.), disappearance; crash, smash, failure, bankruptcy, insolvency,
liquidation, closing down, wind-up. (cf. tunúd).

_katúpad_, State of being over against or at the side of, opposite,
facing, vis-a-vis, over the way, nearby, in a line with; neighbour,
one living over against or at the side of another. (cf. túpad, luyó,
kaluyó, kaatúbang).

_katúpung_, Equality, sameness, identity, similarity, condition of
being of equal size, influence, attainments, etc., with another;
an equal, compeer. (cf. túpung, tupúng).

_katútum_, Courage, bravery, fidelity, trustiness, allegiance, loyalty,
fealty, devotion. (tútum).

_katutúyhan_, Sleep, disposition to sleep, sleepiness, somnolence,
drowsiness, heaviness. (tuyó).

_katutúyhon_, Sleep, act of sleeping, slumber, nap, snooze.

_katutúywan_, (B) See katutúyhan.

_katutúywon_, (B) See katutúyhon.

_katuyó_, Sleepiness, somnolence, drowsiness, heaviness. (tuyó).

_katuyoán_, Scheme, plan, intention, design, project, proposal,
measure, course, things intended to be carried out. (túyò).

_kátyà_, Glass; crystal. See kátià.

_kaúbay_, Companion, helper, assistant, help, attendant, associate
colleague, one at the side of another; company, companionship; friend,
adviser. Ang Diós nga Espiritú Sánto kaúbay sang Iglésia Katólika. God
the Holy Ghost is with (Holy Church) the Catholic Church. Hukóm nga
kaúbay. An assistant judge. (cf. kabúylog, kaluyó, kaúpud, kadámpig)

_kaudál_, (Sp. caudal) Stock, capital, funds, assets, property,
wealth. (cf. pahunán, mánggad, pagkabutáng, pílak).

_kaúdhà_, Waste, prodigality, wastefulness, unthriftiness, lavishness,
profusion, squandering, extravagance. (cf. údhà, kabuhahâ).

_kaugalíngon_, Own, proper, private, personal, independent, peculiar,
particular.

_kaugatán_, Blood-vessels, veins, arteries; muscles,
tendons. (cf. ugát).

_kaúgdang_, Modesty, reserve, decorum, decency, delicacy, pudicity,
correct behaviour. (cf. úgdang, kalígdong).

_kaugdáwan_, Abatement, alleviation, mitigation, decrease. (cf. úgdaw).

_kaúhaw_, Thirst, thirstiness, drought, drouth, dryness. Dakô ang
íya nga kaúhaw. He is very thirsty. Kaúhaw sa ímo! How thirsty you
are! (úhaw).

_kaúkud_, Diligence, industry, assiduity, ardour, earnestness,
sedulity, laboriousness, zeal for acquiring knowledge or experience,
application, inquisitiveness. (úkud).

_kaúlag_, Impurity, lasciviousness, lewdness, uncleanness, impudicity,
pruriency, lechery, carnality, lubricity, immodesty, indecency,
obscenity, bawdry, unchastity. (cf. úlag).

_kaulángan_, Hindrance, obstacle, impediment, obstruction, let, check,
hitch. (uláng).

_kaulángan_, Grandparents; forefathers, ancestors, progenitors,
forbears, forebears. (úlang).

_kaúlay_, Purity, virginity, maidenhood, integrity, continence. (úlay).

_kaúl-ul_, Stiffness of joints, etc. (cf. úl-ul, ól-ol, kaálay).

_kaumahán_, Fields, tillable soil, plantation, arable land,
farmland. (umá).

_kaúmang_, (B) Foolishness, folly, absurdity, nonsensicality, nonsense,
bosh, twaddle. (úmang).

_kaumangán_, (B) Folly, nonsense, craziness, twaddle,
bosh. (cf. kaúmang, kabuangán).


_kaumangón_, See kaúmang. State or condition of one who is a fool,
idiot, lunatic, madman; lunacy, idiocy, foolishness, insanity, madness.

_kaúmhan_, Fields, etc. See kaumahán id.

_kaúndag_, Shake, jolt, jolting, bump, jerk, shock, joggle, jounce,
a jerking motion. (cf. úndag, kagúnda).

_kaúndan_, Flesh, meat, the fleshy parts of a slaughtered animal,
etc., as distinct from the bones. (cf. unúd). Also: The prominent,
wealthy, influential people.

_kaúngdan_, See kaúndan.

_kaupángan_, Obstacle, hindrance, objection, impediment, obstruction,
let, check, hitch, stoppage, interruption. (cf. upáng, kaulángan).

_kaupdánan_, (H) Company; companions, associates, comrades, friends,
chums, intimates, acquaintances. (upúd).

_kaúpud_, (H) Companionship, intimacy, acquaintanceship, fellowship,
association, comradeship, the going with, companion. Kaúpud (sa)
sang--together with, in company with. Nagabút siá dirí kaúpud sang
íya mga útud. He arrived here in company with his brothers. (upúd).

_kauríka_, (B) Good management, carefulness, circumspection,
acuteness, keenness, penetration, shrewdness, sharpness, discretion,
wisdom. (uríka).

_kauswágan_, Advance, progress, getting on, making headway, extension,
improvement. (úswag).

_kauswáran_, See kauswágan. (cf. úswad, úswag, kasamwáran).

_kautangán_, Debts, obligations, what one owes to another. (cf. útang).

_kaúti_, Activity, diligence, application, zeal, assiduity, sedulity,
ardour, earnestness, laboriousness. (kautihón id.).

_kautihón_, Industriousness, attachment to work, assiduousness,
activity. (úti; cf. kaúti).

_kautitirón_, (H) Care, solicitude, concern, zeal. (cf. utitíd).

_kautúd_, One half--, one side--, of a thing. Ang kautúd sang
láwas. Half the body. One side of the body. (cf. utúd, útud, kapíhak).

_kautúran_, (H) Brothers and sisters, brethren, brotherhood,
sisterhood, all near relations in general. (cf. útud).

_káwà_, A boiler, large pan or cauldron of metal, as used in
sugar-milling. (cf. kináwà).

_káwad_, A link; to link, connect as by a link, to unite or
join. (cf. káw-id).

_kawád-an_, Lack, need, want, loss, privation; things that are lacking
or whose want is felt, destitution, deprivation. (cf. walâ, kawád-on,
kinawalâ, kinawád-on).

_kawád-on_, Deprivation, bereavement, lack, want, loss, poverty,
destitution. (cf. kawád-an, etc.).

_káwal_, To hang down, depend from, be suspended from, stick
out, dangle. Nagakáwal ang pányo mo sa bólsa. Your handkerchief
is hanging out of your pocket. Pakawála ang koréa sa kílid mo,
dílì sa atubángan. Let your girdle hang down at the side, not in
front. (cf. kábit, káway, gáway).

_kawalís_, Left handedness, awkardness, clumsiness. (cf. walís).

_kawaloán_, Eighty, four score. (walô).

_káwas_, To go or step over a fence, pass out over the side of
a vehicle instead of leaving it by the ordinary way of exit,
etc. Nagkáwas lang siá sa bintánà. He simply went out by the
window. Dílì mo pagpakawáson ang mga karabáw sa kodál. Do not let
(make) the buffaloes step over the fence. Kinmáwas ang kabáyo sa
kwádra. The horse escaped from its fenced-in stable. Ang kalámpay
nagkáwas sa kólon. The calampay-crabs escaped over the rim of the
kettle. Pataáson mo ang díngding sang tángkal agúd índì na makakáwas
ang báboy. Make the sides of the pigsty higher so that the pig cannot
get out again. (cf. áwas, sagáhay).

_káwat_, (H) Stealth, secrecy, wiliness, slyness, craftiness; to
steal, rob, commit theft, take, pilfer, filch, pinch, nab, prig,
appropriate unlawfully. Sa káwat. Secretly. On the sly. Stealthily,
craftily, cunningly. Sín-o balá ang nagkáwat sang ákon taknáan? Who has
stolen my watch? Indì ka magkáwat (mangáwat). Don't steal. Kinawátan si
Fuláno sing duhá ka mángmang. N.N. had two pesos stolen from him. Indì
mo pagbáklon ang mga butáng nga nahibál-an mo nga kináwat. Don't buy
things you know are stolen. (cf. tákaw, káwtì, tíkas).

_kawatán_, A thief, robber, stealer, burglar, gangster. (cf. makáwat).

_kawátan_, Correspondent, lover, paramour (particularly said of
one who has illicit relations with a married woman). (cf. kalólot,
kahagúgma, banábána).

_káway_, Anything that dangles or hangs down freely as a tassel,
fringe, hair, rope, string, etc.; to dangle, hang down, protrude and
shake in the wind, etc. (cf. gáway, káwal, kábit).

_kawáyan_, Bamboo.

_kawayánan_, Place where bamboo grows; clumps of
bamboo. (cf. kakawayánan).

_kawayangán_, A large plain, extensive grounds, extended level land
fit for cultivation. (wayáng).

_kawáy-kawáy_, To dangle, swing in suspension, etc. (cf. káway,
kabítkábit, kabílkabíl, gawáygáway).

_káwdas_, To wound, tear, scratch, lacerate. (cf. pílas, píla, gádras,
karós, bákris).

_káwhat_, To reach for, stretch out the arm after something, make a
long arm. Kawhatá ang ákon báyò nga yárà sa salab-ítan. Take down my
jacket from the peg there. Ikáwhat akó ánay sang ákon kálò. Please
reach up and take down my hat. (cf. káb-ot, dáwhat).

_káwhi_, Earpick; to use an earpick, pick out the earwax. Kawhihí
siá. Scoop out his earwax. Nagapangáwhi siá. He is taking out earwax
with an earpick. (cf. gómi).

_káw-id_, The link of a chain, loop, ring; to link. (cf. káwad).

_kawíli_, Attractiveness, charm, winsomeness, pleasantness,
delightfulness, agreeableness, quality of an object that is pleasing
or attractive; liking, attraction, delight; to like, be pleased
with. Nagakawíli siá sinâ (Ginakawíli níya inâ). He likes it. He is
pleased with it. (cf. wíli, kawilíhan, makawiwíli).

_kawilíhan, kawilihán_, See kawíli. Also: Things to be liked,
attraction, attractiveness. Ngáa man nga nagwíli ka dídto nga walâ
man sing kawilíhan? Why did you like it there where there is no
attraction? (cf. kalawilián, kalawilihán, kawilihánan).

_kawilihánan_, Attraction, objects that give pleasure or
enjoyment. (cf. kawilíhan, wíli, kawíli).

_kawít_, Hook; a receptacle for palm-wine made of bamboo and having
a hook attached to it for carrying over the shoulder. (cf. káwit).

_káw-it_, To hook in, insert a hook, take hold of by means of a
hook. Kawití ang sangá sang káhoy kag uyúgon mo. Get a hook on the
tree-branch and shake it. Ginkaw-itán níla ang lángkà kag ginbútong
túbtub nga nadágdag. They hooked the jack fruit and pulled till it
fell down. (cf. káwit).

_káw-it, kaw-ít_, The small rope connecting the trace-beam with the
plough, etc.

_káwit_, To hook, pluck or gather with pole and hook, pull or shake
down with a hook. Kawíta ang dúldul. Shake (pull) down the (ripe)
pods of the kapok-tree with pole and hook. (cf. síngit, dágas, dúgus,
paníngit, pangáwit).

_kawít-káwit_, Dim. and Freq. of káwit; Dim. of kawít.

_káwkaw_, To touch with the hands, handle, grasp, take hold of
(somewhat roughly or violently). Indì ka magkáwkaw (magpangáwkaw)
sang súd-an, kóndì kuháon (galohón) mo sang kutsára. Don't touch the
side-dish with your hands, but take it with the spoon. Kawkawá lang
inâ. Seize it--, catch hold of it--, with your hands. (cf. kámkam,
kámlò, kapút, hámò, búklas, sábnit).

_kawó_, Band, rope, satchel-string, wallet-strap, basket-sling and
the like.

_kawól_, A small quantity of yarn or thread, a skein. Ang isá ka
ágpang may napúlò ka maréhas kag ang isá ka maréhas may napúlò ka
kawól. A large hank of thread has ten small hanks and each small hank
has ten skeins.

_káwtì_, Dim. of káwat. To pilfer, sneak, steal a little, be a thief
in a small way, to commit a petty theft.

_kawtían_, Thief, sneak-thief, petty thief, pilferer. (cf. makáwat,
kawatán).


_kay_, Particle denoting dative or accusative of persons. Ginhátag
níya iníng líbro kay Pédro--or--sa kay Pédro. He gave this book to
Peter. Nagsúmbag siá kay Pédro--or--sa kay Pédro. He struck Peter.

_kay_, (H) For, because, on account of, for the reason. Indì akó
magkádto dídto, kay nagaulán. I am not going there, because it
is raining.

_káya_, To delight, please, attract, cause a liking for (especially
for money). Sang pagkakítà níya sang madámò nga pílak nga ginpamakál
sing magáy nagtoón siá sa paghabúl, kay nakáya siá sang báyad. When
she saw the large amount of money paid for magáy-cloth, she learned to
weave, because she was attracted by the (high) price (pay). (cf. ílà,
íma, íbug, lúyag).

_kayâ_, To lie on one's back, to lie supine, lie face upward. Nagakayâ
silá sa lándong sang páhò. They are lying on their backs in the shade
of the mango-tree. Pakáy-a (pakayaá) ang pínggan. Put the plate face
upwards. Pakáy-i akó siníng pínggan. Turn this plate face upwards
for me. (cf. kayáng).

_kayáb_, Sometimes used for "kuyáb", which is the proper and more
usual expression. To fan.

_káyab_, To ascend, rise, go up on high. Nagkáyab--or--kinmáyab sa
lángit ang Aton Ginóo. Our Lord ascended into heaven. Ginpakáyab sa
lángit sang Mahál nga Diós ang Ilóy ni Hesukrísto. God caused to ascend
(assumed) into heaven the Mother of Jesus Christ.

_kayába_, To seize, snatch greedily or selfishly. Kayabáha lang
tanán. Just seize everything--or--take all for yourself.

_káy-ag_, To lie supine, etc. See kayáng, kayâ.

_káy-ag_, To spread, scatter; disorder, dishevel. Kay-agón mo silá
sing alalángay. Spread them out--equally,--evenly,--in groups of equal
size. Ang íya bohók ginakáy-ag sang hángin. Her hair is fluttering
in the wind. (cf. báhin, bahínbáhin, bulád, búkag).

_kayágkag_, A kind of fishing net. (cf. pókot, sálap, láya, sápyaw).

_kayâ-kayâ_, Dim. and Freq. of kayâ. Ang bátà nagakayâkayâ sa
salúg. The baby lies on its back on the floor.

_kayán_, Maize cob, corn cob.

_káy-an_, For kayaán from kayâ.

_kayáng, káyang_, To lie on one's back, to lie supine, lie face
upward. Pakáynga ang bátà. Turn the baby face upwards. Lay the baby
on its back. (cf. kayâ).

_kayánghag_, Shock, start, surprise; to be shocked or
surprised. (cf. kibút, pamalúng, hanguyús, búlung, tingála).

_kayáng-káyang_, Shed, hut, kiosk, tent; tabernacle (of the Old
Testament). (cf. kamálig, hayúbháyub).

_kayán-káyan_, To float, hover, drift. Ang mga sakayán nagakayánkáyan
sa túbig, ang mga píspis sa hángin. Boats float on water, birds in
the air.

_kayás_, To be taken by surprise, be startled, be taken aback,
receive a shock. Nakayás siá. He was taken by surprise--or--he was
startled. (cf. kuyús, hanguyús, kibút, pangyós, panglígbos).

_kayás_, Exposed to the wind, open. (cf. ábong).

_káyat_, To trail, sweep the floor, be dragged along the ground. Ang
íya sáble, sáya, etc., nagakáyat. His sword, her skirt, etc., is
trailing on the ground. (cf. gánoy, gúyud).

_kayawáan_, Devils, hell; devilish--, diabolical--, acts or behaviour;
great hardship, distress, anguish, torture, torment. (cf. yáwà).

_káykay_, To scratch and scrape like chickens, to use one's fingers
in a similar way. Kaykayá ang dútà. Scratch and scrape the earth
together. Kaykayí ang kamóti. Dig the sweet potato out with your
fingers. Ikáykay akó sang gamót siníng tanúm nga himulák. Please
dig out with your fingers the root of this flowering plant for
me. (cf. karáykay).

_kayô_, See kayót.

_kayô_, A beggar, petitioner, haggler, one who always asks for some
privileges, gifts, discount or the like. (cf. ayô).

_kayóg_, Rice-cutter, sickle, reaping-hook, a small semicircular
knife used for cutting off ears of rice.

_kayót_, Small, little. (cf. diótay, isót, ikî, tikî, magamáy).


_kayubúg_, A small young pigeon or dove.

_kayúgpus_, To shrink, shrivel, contract; shrug (the shoulders);
cross one's arms, cover (the chest, etc.). (cf. kúpus, panimókò).

_kayúmad_, A young louse, the young of "kúto" or "botól". (cf. kúto,
botól, lusâ),

_kayumánggì_, Dark, darkish brown, dun, tanned,
sunburnt. (cf. ilómilóm).

_kayúmkum_, To shrivel, etc. See kayúgpus.

_kayúm-uk_, Softness, tenderness. (cf. yúm-uk, kahómok, kalum-ok).

_káyus_, A kind of creeper.

_káy-us_, To glide, slither, slide down a tree, pole, rope,
steep incline, etc. Nagkáy-us siá sa pángpang. He slid down the
bank. (cf. alóg-og, dáhog, dalóhog, dalús-us, kalós-os).

_kayús-kayús_, To crawl, creep, wriggle, move along the ground on
hands and feet. (cf. káyus--a kind of creeper).

_kayuyó_, A moan, groan, sigh. (yuyó).

_kayúyum_, Sweetness, tenderness, mildness, kindheartedness, evenness
and mildness of temper. (yúyum).

_kébra_, (Sp. quebra, quiebra) Breakage, breaking loose or
asunder; loss, shrinkage; failure, bankruptcy; to break asunder,
be severed from; to become less, shrink; to fail in business, become
bankrupt. Indì mo pagkebrahón ang kinitáan sang mga tápì. Don't force
asunder the joints of the planks. Nagkébra ang íya komérsyo. His
business failed. Nagkébra ang humáy sing tagisá ka gántang ang
pásong. The rice shrunk one ganta to the bushel. (cf. púto; ángkat;
kúpus, kúlpà).

_kéha, kehár_, (Sp. queja, quejarse) See under kíha.

_kerída,--o_, (Sp. querida,--o) Beloved, sweetheart, liked; love,
lover, love-partner; paramour, concubine, correspondent.

_késo_, (Sp. queso) Cheese.

_kiámpaw_, Gentle, soft, slight, little; to do gently, tease slightly,
make another a little angry or the like. Maunáuná kiámpaw, bálus
matámà. (Proverb) Such a beginning such an end. Some who mean only
to warm, burn themselves. (Literally: At first a little (quarrel or
the like), then as a result very much trouble).

_kían, kí-an_, See luát. Walâ gid níya pagkiáni kon walâ níya makúhà
inâ. He would not have--yielded,--been satisfied, if he had not
succeeded in getting that (it).

_kiáng-kiáng_, To limp, hobble, walk lamely, trudge. (cf. ikángíkang,
kunád).

_kiápò_, Dead branches and roots, drift-wood, weeds, debris,
rubbish piled up or swept along by a current of water; dry stalks of
sugar-cane. (cf. siápò--Bagasse).

_kías_, To take or cut off a little. Kiási akó sing kalabása, lángkà,
tosíno, etc. Cut off for me a piece of squash, jackfruit, bacon,
etc. (cf. kíyas id.).

_kiás-kías_, Dim. and Freq. of kías. To cut off piece by piece or
little by little.

_kiáw_, Kitten, young cat, kitty.

_kiáy_, To move the shoulders up and down, to rock, undulate, pulsate;
a rocking motion or movement. Ang kiáy sang túbig sa baybáyon. The
rise and fall of the water on the sea-shore. Nagakiáy siá sang íya
abága. She moves her shoulders up and down. (cf. kiáy-kíay).

_kiáy-kíay_, To walk about or promenade ostentatiously moving the
body and buttocks in an affected manner.

_kíbang_, To tremble, be shocked; to astonish, surprise,
take aback. Kiníbang siá. He was taken by surprise, was taken
aback. (cf. kibút, tingála).

_kíbias_, See kíbyas.

_kibít_, To be supported insecurely on a narrow ledge, be but slightly
connected, hang by a thread, be in danger of having the connection
severed. Nagakibít na lang iníng págbo sá halígì, sa baláyan, etc. This
rafter rests only on a narrow ledge of the post, girder, etc. Indì
mo pagpakíbton ang baláyan sa halígi, kóndì pasámlon mo gid. Don't
permit the girder to rest on the edge of the post, but put it on
far enough to secure it well. Walâ man mabálì ang íya bútkon, kóndì
nakíbtan lang. His arm was not entirely broken, but only dislocated.


_kíbkib_, To nibble, gnaw. Ang ilagâ nagkíbkib sang tinápay. The rat
nibbled at the bread. Ginkibkibán sang idô ang túl-an. The dog gnawed
the bone to bits and devoured it. (cf. ót-ot).

_kíblon_, Callous, hard, leathery, horny, thick-skinned, having the
skin hardened or thickened by constant pressure or friction like
farmers, etc. (kíbul, kibúlon).

_kibô_, A throb, pulsation, beat (of the pulse, the heart, etc.);
to throb, etc. Malúya na ang kibô (pagkibô) sang íya nga púlso. His
pulse is weak.

_kibô-kíbò, kibô-kibô_, Dim. and Freq. of kibô.

_kíbtan_, See kibít.

_kíbul_, A callus, thick or hardened skin, to be or become
callous. Nakíblan (nakibúlan) ang íya mga kamót sa dáyon nga
pagpangabúdlay. His hands became horny from constant work. (cf. kíblon,
kibúlon).

_kibúlon_, See kíblon id.

_kibún_, To surround, besiege, beleaguer, blockade, shut up in,
enclose, encircle. (cf. líkup, kabán, líbut).

_kíbut_, To pout, murmur, complain. (cf. kúmud).

_kíbut_, To mutter, murmur, utter indistinctly. Nagakíbut siá sing
mga palangadíon. He is muttering some prayers.

_kibút_, (H) To get a shock, be surprised, be startled, to start,
jump. Nakibút siá sang pagkabatî níya siná. He got a shock when he
heard that. (cf. kayás, panguyús, pangyós, kuyús).

_kibút-kíbut_, Dim. and Freq. of kibút. Also: To quiver, tremble, move
in agitation. Nagakibútkíbut ang íya bibíg. His lips are quivering.

_kíbyas_, To strike at a tangent, miss the centre, hit only the edge
or corner, graze; missing the centre, grazing, hitting or cutting the
edge. Indì mo pagpakibyasán sang binángon ang kawáyan, kóndì biálon
mo sa tungâ. Don't strike to one side the bamboo with the bolo, but
split it in the middle. Nagkíbyas lang ang bála sa íya bútkon. The
bullet merely grazed his arm. Ginlabô nía siá sang binángon, ápang
kíbyas lang ang pagtupâ. He struck him with the bolo, but it was only
a glancing blow.

_kíd-an_, (B) To mend, repair, set to rights. (cf. kaáyo, kaídan).

_kídang_, To recline or sit comfortably in an arm-chair, etc. Kidángi
lang ang butáka kag magtúlug, kon malúyag ka. Just make yourself
comfortable in the arm-chair and go to sleep, if you wish.

_kidáng-kídang_, Dim. and Freq. of kídang.

_kídkid_, To cut in thin slices, to slice very thin and fine. Kidkirá
(-idá) ang támbò. Slice the bamboo-shoot very thin. (cf. kíhad, ád-ad,
kías, kíyas).

_kídlab_, To spark, emit sparks, twinkle, sparkle,
scintillate. (cf. ídlab, kídlas).

_kídlap_, See kídlab.

_kídlas_, See kídlab, ígpat, ínggat.

_kíd-ol_, Cooked to a turn, neither too hard nor too soft, but just
right, well-done, said of eatables; to be or become nice, tasty, etc.

_kídos_, To go about peering, as when looking for something lost, to
move, stir, be restless. Anó ang ginakídos mo sa plása? what are you
looking for on the public square? Hinúgay sang kídos. Be quiet. Don't
keep moving or stirring. Don't fidget. (cf. lághap, húlag, etc.).

_kigáng_, Dry, etc. See kigás

_kigás_, Very dry, hard, exsiccated; to be or become
very dry. Pahalmokí ang tabákò nga kigás. Soften the dry
tobacco-leaves. Nagkigás ang tabákò, kay walâ mo pagbalahósi sing
maáyo. The tobacco-leaves became quite dry, because you did not wrap
them up well. (cf. layâ, layóng, báskug, kusúg).

_kígbut_, See kibút, kíbut.

_kigí_, To tear asunder, separate the fibres, strip hemp,
etc. Kigihá--or--kígya ang lánot, magí, pínya, etc. Strip the hemp,
maguey, pine-apple leaves, etc. Kigií (kígyi, kigihí) akó siníng
lánot. Strip this hemp for me.

_kíha_, (Sp. queja, quejarse) Accusation, complaint, charge,
imputation, inculpation, denunciation, citation, arraignment,
impeachment, indictment; to accuse, bring before a court or judge,
institute a lawsuit; to complain, express dissatisfaction. Ikíha
siá sa hukóm. Accuse him before the judge. Kiháhi ang hukmánan sang
maláin nga ginbúhat ni Fuláno. Lodge a complaint with the court
against N.N.'s evil deed.

_kíhad_, To cut into slices, to slice, carve. Kihára (-áda)
ang kapáyas, kalabása, lángkà, tinápay, etc. Slice the papaw,
squash, jack-fruit, bread, etc. Mansánas nga kiníhad. Sliced
apples. (cf. ád-ad, kídkid, gulút, láplap).

_kíhap_, See kíhad.

_kíkì_, Tartar, the film that collects on the teeth and which is
easily removed by cleaning the teeth frequently.

_kíkik_, Cicada, cicala; grass hopper, cricket. Ang kíkik nga maitúm
nagahuní sa gáb-i, ang maputî sa ikapúlò ka táknà sa ága, ang borók
sa kaagáhon. The black cicada chirps at night, the white one at ten
o'clock in the morning and the speckled one early in the morning.

_kikión, kikí-on_, Pertaining to or covered with "kíkì".

_kiláb_, A flash. See kiráb.

_kilábò_, A dish of coconut-meat mixed with toddy; the verb is
"pangilábò"--to eat coconut-meat mixed with palm-wine. (cf. kulábò).

_kílag_, (B) To look about curiously or searchingly. Anó ang ginakílag
mo? Why are you looking about so curiously (or distractedly)? Indì
ka magkílag sa simbáhan. Don't look about in church. Nagkílag siá
sa mga baláy nga dalágkò kag sa hinálì nadalasâ sang trak. He was
looking curiously at the large houses and suddenly he was run over
by the truck. (cf. lísi, língas).

_kilála_, To know, recognize, recollect, be acquainted with; an
acquaintance, a person known. Kilála ko siá. I know him--or--He
is an acquaintance of mine. Nakakilála ka sa íya? Do you know
him? Ginakilála mo si Fuláno? Do you know N.N.? Kilaláha siá. Make his
acquaintance. Magkilalaháy kamó. Get to know each other. Nakakilála
siá sing madámò nga mga tanúm. He knows many plants. Kinilála nga
táo. A man well known. Ipakilála ko sa ímo si Fuláno. I am going to
introduce you to Mr. N.N. May nakilál-an siá sa amó nga bánwa. He has
some acquaintances in that town. Indì akó magkilála sa íya. I do not
wish to recognize him--or--I'll give him the cold shoulder.

_kilála_, The pomelo with reddish pulp. Dálhi akó sing kabúgaw nga
kilála. Bring me a pomelo with reddish pulp.

_kiláng-kílang_, To shine, glisten, twinkle, sparkle. (cf. igpátígpat,
kipát-kípat, ínggat).

_kilán-kílan_, To sparkle, etc. See kilángkílang.

_kilás_, Unsteady, easily upset, said of small boats without
outriggers, or the like.

_kilás_, A sudden movement, start or jerk; electricity; electrical;
to give a sudden start or jerk as if shocked by an electrical
current. Nagkilás ang íya láwas, kay nangilát. He gave a sudden start,
because it lightened. Ang síya nga kilás--or--Ang síyang-kilás. The
electric chair, used to execute criminals. Kakilás sang íya mga
matá! How shifty his eyes are! His eyes seem to be always moving as if
he were in danger. (Said of murderers and other criminals or the like).

_kilát_, Lightning, bolt, flash of lightning. (The verb is pangilát.

_kílaw_, To eat raw fish or meat. Malúyag ka magkílaw sing ísdà? Would
you like to eat some raw fish? Sa dakô nga kadalók kinílaw níya ang
báboy. Very greedily he ate some raw pork. Kiláwa lang ang gunô. Simply
eat some raw "gunô".

_kilawát_, A young hen beginning to be broody. (cf. sumaláyhaw--a
young cock; pisô, sulúg, agák, mungâ, manók).

_kiláw-kiláw_, To burn dimly, give but little light. (cf. kíraw,
kiráwkiráw, kírot, kirótkírot).

_kílay_, The eyebrows. (cf. amimilók--eyelashes; pangiláy,
pinangiláyay).

_kiláy_, The edge of a sickle or scythe.

_kilibúton_, Nervous, excitable, easily upset; surprising, shocking,
startling. (cf. kibút).

_kílid_, Side, flank, beam, quarter. Sa kílid sang baláy. At the
side of the house. Ari siá dirí sa ákon kílid (luyó). He is here at
my side. (cf. luyó).

_kilíd_, To lean against, have the back supported by pillows, etc.

_kilidanón_, Things to mend or in need of repair. (cf. kaídan, kíd-an
kaalayohón, kiridanón, kalaayohón).

_kilíkog_, To clean a small hole or aperture with a feather, etc.;
to clean the ears, nose, wounds by means of a cotton-probe or the
like. Kilikóga ang ilíg sa dulúnggan sang bátà. Clean the flow from
the child's ear. Kilikógi ang dalúnggan sang bátà. Clean the child's
ear. (cf. kolíkog, kolíkot).

_kilikóg_, A feather or any other similar instrument used for the
operation of "kilíkog". (cf. kolikóg, kililikóg, kirilikóg).

_kilíkot_, (H) To scratch gently (the edge of a wound, of an itching
eruption or the like). Indì mo pagkilikóton ang ímo katúl. Don't
scratch your "katúl". Ginakilíkot nía ang íya pilás. He is scratching
the edge of his wound. (cf. kálot, kolíkot, kilíkog).

_kililikóg_, (H) See kilikóg id.

_kilinahanglánon_, (H) Wants, needs, necessaries, requirements,
what is lacking, required or necessary. (cf. kinahánglan).

_kilíng_, The month of April. (cf. abríl).

_kilíng_, The ring attached to the traces and through which ring
the rein or nose-rope is passed; a steadying device put on a kite,
so that it may fly straight and smooth.

_kilíng-kilíng_, To tinkle, tingle, jingle, ring (said of small bells).

_kilipután_, (H) Closure; constrictor ani. (cf. kípot).

_kílis_, Calesa, rig, cab, a two-wheeled and one-horse vehicle for
the conveyance of passengers.

_kilís_, (H) To wash or clean hulled rice previous to boiling
it. (cf. balónas id.; kísli, kiníslan, etc.--balonási, binalonásan,
etc.).

_kilitaán_, (H) Place of meeting, trysting-place,
rendez-vous. (cf. kítà).

_kilitáan_, (H) Juncture, junction, meeting, juxtaposition, seam,
joint, coming together, position side by side. (kítà; cf. kinitáan).

_kilitáon_, (H) What is to be joined, connected or brought
together. Kilitáon pa iníng mga tápì. These boards have to be joined
yet. Kilitáon pa si Hosé kag si Andres. José and Andres are to meet
still, have to be brought together yet. (kítà).

_kílkig_, A rough fish-skin, usually of the pági-fish, used to rub and
smooth wood, etc. after the manner of sand-paper; to clean, smooth,
rub boards, etc. with fish-skin or sand-paper. Kilkigí ang tápì,
agúd magtínlò. Rub the board with fish-skin to make it smooth.

_kílkil_, To gnaw, nibble, bite to pieces. See kíbkib.

_kílod_, Side, border, brim, edge, flank. (cf. kílid, kólod, bíbì,
bígki).

_kímay_, Tiny, small, diminutive, slender, applied to roundish
and oblong objects like bananas, fingers, etc. Kímay ang íya mga
túdlò--or--kímay siá sing túdlò. He has very small fingers, his fingers
are too slender in proportion to his size. Also verb. Nagkímay ang
isá níya ka bútkon sang pagbutí sa íya. One of his arms has become
quite thin since he had small-pox.

_kimít_, To eat slowly and little, take food leisurely and in small
quantity.

_kimít-kimít_, Dim. and Freq. of kimít. Indì mo pagkimítkimitón ang
pagkáon. Dont eat so slowly and so little.

_kimóno_, (Sp. quimón) Kimono, Japanese garment for both sexes
resembling a lady's dressing gown; a short-sleeved, buttonless woman's
upper dress with just a hole for putting the head through and reaching
down to the waist, as often worn by Philippine women.

_kímpa_, To move to and fro or up and down, fluctuate, undulate,
pulsate, oscillate, rock or pitch. (cf. linggílinggi).

_kimpá-kímpa_, Dim. and Freq. of kímpa.

_kímpang_, See kímpa.

_kimpáng-kímpang_, Dim. and Freq. of kímpang. (cf. lumpálúmpa).

_kímpit_, A pair of pincers, pliers, nippers, tweezers; to use or apply
pincers; to pinch. Kimpíton ko ang ímong ilóng. I'll pinch your nose.

_kímpul_, Mutilated, maimed, having parts, ends, corners or
edges broken or cut off; to break off ends, etc., to mutilate or
become mutilated, to dock. Nagkímpul ang íya túdlò. His finger is
mutilated. Kimpulá ang íkog sang idô. Dock the dog's tail. Kimpulí
ang manók sang íya íkog, agúd makilála nga áton. Cut off part of the
cock's tail, so that it may be recognized as ours. (cf. kúmpul).

_kímud_, (H) To frown, sulk, be offended, take ill, murmur,
complain, pout, scowl, fume, resent, take--ill,--to
heart,--amiss,--umbrage,--offence,--exception,--in bad
part. (cf. kúmud, kósmod).

_kinaádman_, Learning, knowledge, wisdom, education, cleverness. (álam;
kaálam, kinaálam).

_kinaálam_, (H) See kinaádman--learning, etc.

_kinaanáran_, (H) Habit, custom, practice, manner, behaviour,
usage. (cf. ánad, batásan, kinabatásan).

_kinaáyo_, Goodness; benefit, advantage. (cf. áyo, kaáyo).

_kinabasî, kinabásì_, Like--, in the form of--, a kabásì-fish;
sharppointed. Bángkaw nga kinabasî. A lance with a straight, sharp
point. (cf. kabásì, pinángdan).

_kinabátà_, Childhood, pertaining to childhood or to children,
childlike, childish, silly; from childhood, since one's birth. Ang
pagkasungî sináng táo kinabátà níya. That man--is hare-lipped from
his birth,--was born hare-lipped. (cf. bátà, bataón).

_kinabatásan_, Custom, manner, habit, behaviour. (cf. kabatásan,
kinaanáran).

_kinabón_, Tribe, bunch, crowd, troop, company, flock, herd; by tribes,
etc. (cf. kabón).

_kinabúhì_, Life, period from birth to death. (cf. kabúhì).

_kinabuhî_. Life, mode or manner of one's life, living conditions; to
live, remain, stay, reside, lead a--, pass one's--, life. Nagakinabuhî
silá sing matáwhay. They are leading -a tranquil life, -a happy
life. Magbuligáy kamó, agúd magtáwhay kag maglinóng ang ínyo
pagkinabuhî. Help each other, that you may live a tranquil and peaceful
life. (cf. buhî, búhì, pangabúhì, kabúhì).

_kinaburígal_, Noisy shouting, disturbance,
confusion. (burígal). Kinaburígal kag linabugáyay. Confused noise
and melée.

_kinaburíghul_, Boisterousness; to be noisy, rowdy. See kinaburígal.

_kinaburúka_, Excitement, stir, disturbance, trouble; to be excited,
be in commotion. (cf. buróka).

_kinadáan_, Oldness, antiquity; old, ancient, of old, of yore, of long
ago, bygone. Batásan nga kinadáan. An old custom. (cf. dáan, dumáan).

_kinadámò_, Multitude; many. (cf. dámò, madámò, kadámò).

_kinádtan_, Bite, wound from a bite, place where one has been
bitten. Ang kinádtan sang idô sa bátà naghubág. The place where the
child was bitten by the dog has swelled. (kagát).

_kinagamó_, Commotion, disturbance, trouble, uproar, riot. (gamó;
cf. kagamó, kagarokán).

_kinagúbot_, Stir, commotion, uproar, confusion, excitement; to make
an uproar, be excited. (cf. gúbot).

_kinagúlà_, Noise, uproar, commotion, boisterous proceedings, row;
to be noisy, excited, rowdy. (cf. gúlà kinagamó, kagarokán, kinagúbot).

_kinagúlang_, Seniority, priority of birth, state of being
older. (cf. kinamagulangán, kinagúrang id.).

_kinagúrang_, (B) See kinagúlang.

_kinágut_, The end, termination or last of anything, as the last grain
of rice, the last centavo, etc. (cf. hiringítyon, katalipuspusán,
katapúsan).

_kinahánglan_, Need, lack, want, indispensability, necessity; to
have need of, stand in need of, be necessary, require, entail, call
for. Anó ang kinahánglan mo? What do you want?--or--what is it you
need? Kinahánglan gid nga magkádto ka dídto. You must go there--or--it
is necessary for you to go there. Pilá ka butáng ang kinahánglan sa
...? How many things are required for...? Kon magkinahánglan ka sing
kwárta----If you need some money----.

_kinahóy-káhoy_, Tree-like; to develop into a tree-like shrub. Iníng
sibúkaw nagakinahóykáhoy na. This sebucao is developing into a
tree. (cf. káhoy).


_kinaíya_, One's own affairs, proper to oneself, selfishness,
individualism, egotism. (cf. íya, kaugalíngon).

_kinákoy_, Cheating, trickery; tricksy; hypocrite; to cheat, trick,
defraud, obtain by fraud or foul play. (cf. kákoy).

_kinalabáw_, Superiority, advantage, preeminence, predominancy,
advance over, odds. (cf. labáw).

_kinaláin_, Disadvantage, drawback, hindrance, damper, wet blanket,
objection. (cf. láin; kinaáyo--advantage, etc.)

_kinalibutánon_, Worldly, earthly, earthy, secular, natural and carnal
as opposed to the supernatural and spiritual. (kalibútan).

_kinaló-oy_, Mercy, pity, compassion, ruth, clemency, commiseration,
tenderness of heart. May kinaló-oy siá--or--nagakaló-oy siá sa
napílas. He has pity upon the wounded man. (cf. ló-oy, kaló-oy).

_kínam_, To taste, try the taste of. Nagakínam siá sing páhò,
ginakínam níya ang páhò. He is trying the taste of a mango. See
kinámkínam which is more in use.

_kinamagulangán_, Seniority, etc. See kinagúlang id.

_kinamatáy_, The cause of death, what kills or causes death. Ang
ános amó ang íya nga kinamatáy. Consumption was the cause of his
death. (cf. patáy).

_kinamátyan_, The place or reason of one's death. (cf. patáy).

_kinám-kínam_, Dim. and Freq. of kínam. Kinámkináma iníng ságing,
kon malúyag ka sang íya sabór. Try the taste of this banana and see
whether you like its flavour. Kinámkinámi (tilawí) sing diótay iníng
súman. Taste a little of this suman-dish. (cf. tiláw).

_kinamútsing_, Fight, quarrel, row; to fight, etc. (cf. kinaburúka,
kinagamó, kinagúlà, áway, sinambúnut).

_kinarabáw_, Like a buffalo; a kind of "úbi" with a covering like
the skin of a buffalo. (cf. karbáwon).

_kinarabáw-karabáw_, To behave like a buffalo; buffalo-like, according
to the ways and manners of a buffalo.

_kinarádto_, (B) Past events, past time, the past, things
of long ago, of yore; old, of old, bygone, ancient, out of
date. Ang kinarádto----. Things or events or customs, etc. of
long ago. Sa kinarádto nga batásan----. According to an ancient
custom----. Sa kinarádto----. Formerly, in former, olden or bygone
days----. (cf. sádto, sinádto, karágto, sinágto, tinó-o).

_kinarágto_, (B) See kinarádto id.

_kinárbaw_, (B) See kinarabáw--buffalo-like, etc.

_kinasál_, Married, wedded; wedlock, nuptials, matrimony, marriage,
wedding, wedding-feast, marriage-feast. (cf. kasál, kalasálon,
kasamiénto, pangasáwa, mínyo).

_kinatakús_, Worthiness, excellence, dignity; capacity, capability,
quality of being up to the standard of. (cf. takús, kasángkol).

_kinatáo_, The nature of man; natural, human, pertaining to--,
referring to--, man, from birth, congenital; parts--, organs--,
of generation, genitals, sexual organs. (cf. táo, kinatúbò, taohánon).

_kinataóhan_, Birth-day. (táo).

_kinataohánon_, Human, pertaining to human nature. (táo).

_kinatáwo, kinatawóhan_, etc. See kinatáo, kinataóhan,
etc. (táo--táwo).

_kinatúbò_, Nature; natural, growing or developing naturally. Labáw
inâ sa kinatúbò sang táo. That is beyond or above the nature of man,
that is preternatural. Kinatúbò (kinaugálì) sang táo ang pagsayúp. To
err is human, is natural to man. (cf. túbò, kinaugálì).

_kinatuháyan_, Difference, etc. See katúhay, katuháyan.

_kinaugálì_, Natural peculiarity, nature, idiosyncrasy, personal or
individual characteristic; habit, custom, manner. (ugálì).

_kinaúnay, kinaunáy_, A banquet, feasting, conviviality, eating in
common, mess; to feast. (cf. káon.

_kínaw_, To glisten, sparkle, shine. (cf. kánaw).

_kináwà_, A kettleful; by the kettle or cauldron. (cf. káwà).

_kinawád-on_, Lack, need, want, what one needs or lacks. (walâ).

_kinawalâ_, (H) See kinawád-on.

_kinawatáy_, Stealing, robbing, burglary; to steal, rob (of
many). (cf. káwat).

_kináw-kínaw, kináw-kináw_, Dim. and Freq. of kínaw--to
glisten. (cf. kanáw-kanáw).

_kíndab_, To glisten, sparkle, shine, twinkle. (cf. kídlab, ídlab,
ínggat, ígpat).

_kíngke_, (Sp. quinque) Lamp, table-lamp, light. (cf. sugâ, solô,
paról).

_kíngking_, To lift--, raise--, one's leg (as if to give a kick);
to hop, jump, stand (on one leg).

_kíngking_, To grasp or take hold of very carefully with two or
three fingers for fear of soiling one's hands, etc.; to be averse
to touching unclean things, be fastidious. Indì ka magkíngking sa
pagpúlut sinâ kay dílì man makalolóod. Don't be afraid to pick that
up, for it is not at all loathsome.

_kínhod_, To hobble along, limp, halt, walk lamely. (cf. kunád, íkang).

_kínhol_, To shrug, jerk one's shoulders, give a start as one
tickled. Itíka siá, agúd magkínhol. Tickle him and make him
jump. Pakinholá ang íya láwas. Startle him.

_kínì_, To economize, stint, be niggardly, live very frugally. Indì ka
magkínì sing lakás sang ímo pagkáon, kay magalúya ang ímo láwas. Don't
live too frugally, for you will become weak. (cf. kínot, kínit).

_kinigihán_, The waste or useless remnants of stripped fibre, as of
hemp, maguey, etc. (cf. kigí).

_kinî-kínì_, Dim. and Freq. of kínì.

_kinilís_, The water in which hulled rice has been washed. (kilís;
cf. balinónas).

_kinína_, (Sp. quinina) Quinine. (cf. bitâ).

_kininótan_, Savings, something saved or hoarded (through economy,
frugality, etc. cf. kínot).

_kinipát-kípat_, To sparkle, twinkle. (kipátkípat; cf. igpátígpat).

_kinísdak_, Life; breath of life; stomach. (cf: tirúsdak, tinúsdak,
hinurángus, gináhab, ginháwa, solóksolók, kabúhì).

_kínit_, See kínì, kínot.

_kinitáan_, Earnings; junction, juncture, seam, joint, joining, meeting
together. Ang kinitáan sang mga mamumugón mapúslan sang búg-os nga
bánwa. The earnings of the working population are of advantage to the
whole commonwealth. Ang kinitáan sang tápì. The board-seam. (kítà;
cf. kilitáan).

_kinít-kínit_, Dim. and Freq. of kínit. Kinítkiníti sing mantékà
ang manók. Use only little lard for the chicken. (cf. kinîkínì,
kinótkínot).

_kiniyánò_, To play the "kiyánò-game".

_kíno_, (Sp. quino) Kino, cinchona, peruvian bark.

_kinolás_, To brag, boast, praise oneself and one's own. Pamatíi,
nagakinolás na man siá. Listen, he is boasting again.

_kinólas_, To be noisy, boisterous, rowdy, (of movements like running,
stamping, rushing, etc, but not of voices). Indì kamó magkinólas. Don't
make so much noise. (cf. kólas).

_kinolás-kólas_, Stir, movement with some noise; to stir, move
rather noisily. Nagahinulághúlag kag nagakinolás-kólas na ang mga
nagapapílì. The candidates for election are already on the move and
making some stir. (cf. kólas, koláskólas).

_kinomédya_, Comical, ludicrous; to play a comedy, trick, make a
farce of. (cf. komédya).

_kínot_, To economize, etc. See kínì.

_kinótkínot_, Dim. and Freq. of kínot. (cf. kinîkínì).

_kíntos_, (Sp. quinto, quintar) The law of requisition for military
purposes; to draft men for--, press into--, service. Nakintosán siá
sídto ánay. He was drafted for military service in bygone days.

_kinúgon_, Made as pointed or as sharp as cogon-grass; the point of
a spear, lance, arrow, etc. (cf. kógon).

_kinúkik_, The cry of a large bat, as of the fruit bat or flying
fox. (cf. kúkik).

_kinumpariháy_, Relationship through affinity or
affiliation. (kumpári).

_kinúntan_, Crease fold, wrinkle, plait. (cf. kunút, piníd-an).

_kinuripót_, Wrinkled, creased; miserly, stingy,
close-fisted. Kinuripót nga batásan. A miserly habit. (cf. kuripót).

_kinutútan_, The place or part that has been stung or bitten by a
mosquito or the like. (cf. kútut).

_kinuyúng-kúyung_, Stir, movement, noise. Silá íla walâ gid sing
kinuyúng-kúyung, kóndì naghípus lang silá. They for their part did
not make any stir, but remained silent or quiet.

_kiô_, To abstract, purloin, filch, pinch, pilfer, steal, (cf. tíkas,
takáb, tákaw, káwat, káwtì, kúhà).

_kipát-kípat, kipát-kipát_, To twinkle, shine, glitter, sparkle, emit
flashes of light. (cf. igpátígpat, bádlak, ínggat, kídlab, kíndab).

_kipáw-kípaw, kipáw-kipawón_, See kitáw-kítaw, kitáw-kitawón.

_kípì_, To cross the legs; to sit or stand with crossed legs.

_kipî-kípì_, Dim. and Freq. of kípì. Also: to gather one's dress,
etc. See kupîkúpì.

_kípong_, To close, shut, draw together, pull tight (by means of a
running string or the like. (cf. kípot).

_kípot_, To shut, close. Kipóta ang matá, bâbâ, ganháan, bintánà,
baúl, etc. Close the eye, the mouth, the door, the window, the trunk,
etc. (cf. kíum).

_kipóy_, Maimed, mutilated, docked, having a part cut off or shortened
as feathers, hair, tails, arms, legs or the like; to be or become
maimed; to maim, cut off a piece, etc. Kipoyá ang íkog sang manók. Cut
off part of the cock's tail. (cf. kímpul).

_kiráb_, To flash, emit a flash or spark of light; a flash or
spark. Ang kilát nagakiráb. The lightning flashes. Sang pagtupâ sang
wásay sa bató nagkiráb ang kaláyo. When the hatchet hit the stone, it
struck fire from it. Pakirabá ang isá ka asúgi. Strike a match. Nakítà
ko ang kiráb sang sugâ. I saw the flash of the light.

_kiráb-kógon_, A sudden flame or light, spark, flash, flare-up;
transient, transitory, momentary, ephemeral, not lasting or enduring,
passing quickly, soon over, (as the burning of cogon-grass).

_kirabón_, Spark, flash, sudden flame or light; sparking, flashing,
as lightning, a gun, a flash-light, etc.

_kíraw_, To burn dimly, give but a dull, feeble, low light, to
glimmer. Nagakíraw ang kíngke. The lamp burns but dimly. Pakiráwa
ang sugâ. Dim the light. Make the light shine less bright (by turning
down the wick, etc.). (cf. kírot).

_kiráwkiráw_, Dim. and Freq. of kíraw. (cf. kirótkírot).

_kiráy, kíray_, See kiláy, kílay.

_kiréu_, (B) To quiver, tremble, shake, shudder. Nagkiréu ang
íya láwas. His body trembled. Nagakiréu ang íya matá. His eye is
quivering. (kíryo id.).

_kiréw_, See kiréu.

_kírhat_, Open-eyed, wide-eyed, having wide open eyes as a natural
peculiarity. Kírhat siá sing matá. He has wide open eyes.

_kiribúd_, Small, undersized, dwarfish, below standard size (of fruits,
etc). Báklon ko iníng mga páhò, ápang kuháon ánay ang mga torakón
kag kiribúd. I am going to buy these mangoes, but the rotten and
undersized ones must first be taken away. (cf. kímay--small, slender,
(of fingers, etc.).

_kiridanón_, (H) See kilidanón (cf. kaídan, kíd-an, karaidanón,
kaalayohón).

_kiríkol_, A pin. (cf. sibít, turúbok, alpilír).

_kiríkot_, See kilíkot id. Kirikóta ang hígkò sa kinitáan sang
tápi--or--kirikóti ang kinitáan sang tápì sang hígkò. Pick the dirt
out from between the board-seams.

_kirilikóg_, See kilikóg, kililikóg.

_kirís_, To slice, cut off a piece. Kirisá ang kárne. Slice or cut
the meat. Kirisí akó sing duhá ka kirís sa páa sang báka. Cut for me
two slices off the leg of beef. (cf. gulút).


_kirítot_, To wrinkle, shrivel, shrink, form creases, said of skin,
leaves, fruits, clothes, etc. (cf. korítot).

_kirikót_, Wrinkled, shrivelled, creased; a wrinkle,
crease. (cf. koritót).

_kirikót_, A small lobster. (cf. karitót, koritót).

_kír-ol_, See kíd-ol.

_kírot_, See kíraw. Pakiróta ang kíngke. Dim the light of the lamp.

_kirót-kírot, kirót-kirót_, Dim. and Freq. of kírot. (cf. kiráwkiráw).

_kirubín_, (Sp. querubin) Cherub.

_kíryo_, To tremble, quiver. See kiréu.

_kiryó-kíryo_, Dim. and Freq. of kíryo.

_kís-a_, (H) Once in a while, sometimes, now and then. Kon
kís-a----. Now and again----. (cf. kaisá).

_kisamí_, (Sp. quizame) Ceiling, plafond.

_kisáp_, Gold beads, sequins (usually flat and thin). Kilála mo
yanáng babáe nga nagapangolíntas sang kisáp? Do you know that lady
that wears a golden necklace--or--that has gold beads in her necklace?

_kísap_, To open and shut the eyes rapidly, to blink,
twinkle. (cf. pisók).

_kisáp-kísap, kisáp-kisáp_, Dim. and Freq. of
kísap. (cf. pamisókpisók).

_kisáy_, Nimble, lithe, agile, quick, swift (of movement); to be
nimble, etc.

_kisáy-kísay_, Dim. and Freq. of kisáy. Also: to trip, skip, move
with light quick steps. (cf. págsi, líksi).

_kísdong_, (H) To frown, sulk, pout, look cross or angry. (cf. lárong,
ariwaróng, kósmod, kúmud, kolisáw, súnggud, súngon).

_kisí-kísi_, A very fine awl, drill or bit, any thin and sharp-pointed
tool.

_kisí-kísi_, To rub (between the palms of the hand) rice before
boiling or the like. (cf. pilípis).

_kískis_, To scrape, rub with something sharp. Kiskisá sang kotsílyo
ang hígkò sa látok. Scrape the dirt off the table with a knife. Kiskisí
ang báboy sang íya búlbul. Scrape the pig clean of its bristles.

_kíso_, See késo--cheese.

_kisó_, Plait or fold in a garment, loop, ornamental doubling in
fringes, various decorations made of paper, ribbons, etc.

_kisól-kísol_, A kind of grass often fed to pigs.

_kisóm_, (B) Sour; to be or become sour. Nakisomán akó siníng ísdà,
kay napatám-an (natám-an) sing lánggaw. I find this fish very sour,
for too much vinegar has been put into it. (cf. áslum).

_kistán_, (Sp. sacristan) Sacristan.

_kisúl-kísul_, See kisólkísol.

_kisúm_, (B) See kisóm.

_kitá_, We; including the person or persons spoken to. Kitá
áton--or--kitá sing áton--or--kitáy áton--We for our part----As far as
we are concerned----. Kitá nga tanán. All of us. Sa katapúsan kitá
gid kag dílì silá ang nakadaúg sa kasábà. The upshot is that we,
and not they, are the ones that have won the case (or lawsuit).

_kítà_, To see, behold, discern, perceive, descry, sight, make out,
discover, distinguish, spy, espy, set one's eyes upon; to meet,
find. Nakakítà ka na sa íya? Did you see or meet him? Hóo, nakakitaáy
na kamí. Yes, we met or saw each other. Ang alipokpokán sang búkid
índì makítà kay natabúnan sang gál-um. The top of the mountain cannot
be seen, because it is covered by the cloud. Nakítà--or--nakít-an
ko siá dídto. I saw him there. Dílì na siá makakítà sa pagbása. He
can no longer see to read. Ang íya nga balatían daw sa índì na
makitáan sing bulúng. It will be almost impossible to find a remedy
for his disease--or--his sickness is, I think, past cure. Diín mo inâ
makíta?--Kinítà ko inâ sa dálan. Where did you see or find it?--I found
it there on the road. Ang nagapangítà makakítà. He who seeks shall
find. Sa yanáng bakólod kitáon mo túbtub ang simbáhan sa Ogtón. From
that hill yonder you can even see the church of Oton. (cf. tán-aw,
túluk--to see, inspect, look at).


_kítà_, Trial, hearing (of a case in court); to try, hear (a case in
court or the like). Buás kitáon ang íya nga kasábà. His case will
be tried tomorrow. Ang pagkítà sang kasábà. The hearing (trial)
of the case.

_kitáon_, Visible. (cf. kítà).

_kitár_, (Sp. quitar) To remove, take away, separate, put aside. Sang
pagísip níla sang mga ságing nga íla baláklon ginkitár níla ang mga
sinipî nga magágmay. When they counted the bananas they were going
to buy, they put the small clusters apart. (cf. kúhà, bulág, báhin).

_kitáw-kítaw_, To be dim, hazy, in the far distance, indistinct
(of sights and sounds).

_kitáw-kitawón_, Scarcely perceptible, dim, hazy, indistinct,
visible--in the far distance,--in contour,--in indistinct outlines;
not clear or distinct (of sounds), scarcely audible.

_kitíd_, Narrowness; narrow; to be or become narrow. Nakitirán (-idán)
akó siní. This is too narrow for me. This seems to be too narrow.

_kitíkot_, See kilíkog, kilíkot--to clean a hole, a wound, etc. by
means of a feather, a small stick or the like.

_kitíkot_, To grumble, croak, clamour, mutter, growl, murmur, complain
in the hope of getting redress. Ginkitíkot níya ang ákon báhin, kay,
konó, labán ang ákon báhin. He complained about my share, for, he said,
my share was larger than his. (cf. yámo).

_kitikót_, The very small chili with an exceedingly hot taste. Dinálhan
níya akó sing katúmbal nga kitikót. He brought me very small and
hot chilis.

_kitín_, The chief tendon connecting the calf with the heel; to cut
that tendon, to hamstring. Kitiní ang karabáw sang binángon. Cut the
buffalo's tendon with the bolo--or--Hamstring the buffalo.

_kítkit_, To gnaw, nibble, bite to pieces. (cf. ót-ot, kíbkib, kílkil).

_kíum_, To shut, close. Kiúma ang bábà mo. Shut your
mouth. (cf. kípot).

_kíwal_, To raise with a lever, crowbar, spar of wood, etc. Kiwáli
sang bára ang bató. Raise the stone with the crowbar. Ikíwal ang báhì
sa halígi. Use your dibble to lever the post.

_kiwás_, Awry, twisted, etc. See kiwî.

_kiwî_, Turned or twisted aside, awry, oblique, inclined, sloping,
slanting, leaning, canting, crooked. (cf. hiwî, sambigî).

_kiwíg_, A kind of squirrel. Ang kiwíg amó ang isá ka sápat nga malábà
sing pangolíhi kag malíp-ot sing pangúnhan. The "kiwíg" is an animal
with long hind-legs and short fore-legs.

_kiwô_, (B) To move or bend the body sideways, to twist and turn
(as in many folk-dances), to bend, curve. Ikiwô ang láwas mo. Bend
your body sideways.

_kiyánò_, A kind of game that is usually played with nuts of the
"dalógdog" and "búgtong". (cf. kiniyánò--to play that game).

_kíyas_, To slice, etc. See kías id.

_kiyô_, To steal, pilfer, rob. See kiô. (cf. káwat, tíkas).

_klabítos_, (Sp. clavetes) Small nail, tack, brad.

_klára_, (Sp. clara) The white of an egg, albumen. (cf. bátog--the
yolk).

_klarinéte_, (Sp. clarinete) Clarinette, clarinet; clarinet-player.

_kláse_, (Sp. clase) Class, kind, sort, species, brand, variety;
class, class-room work, school-hours.

_kléro_, (Sp. clero) Clergy, priesthood. Ang kléro nga sekulár kag
regulár. The secular and regular clergy. (cf. kaparían).

_klíma_, (Sp. clima) Clime, climate. (cf. hángin, kahangínan).

_ko_, Mine, of me, etc. (See ákon, nákon).

_kóbal_, Curve, fold, plait; enclosure, entrenchment,
fence. (cf. kobál).

_kobál_, To form curves, waves and creases as a mat, an uneven ground
or the like. Anó na man ang sa idálum sang mantél, kay nagakobál sa
tungâ? What is lying under the tablecloth, because there is a bump
in the middle?

_kóbkob_, To scratch lightly with the finger-tips not using the
nails. Kobkobá ang likód ko, kay makatúl. Scratch my back, for it
itches. (cf. kálot, karós).

_kóbo_, To flap the wings and splash or bathe as a bird in shallow
water. Ang mungâ nagakóbo sa talámnan. The hen is flapping its wings
and splashing in the rice-field.

_kobó-kóbo, kobó-kobó_, Dim. and Freq. of kóbo. To flutter, flap
the wings, move with quick vibrations or undulations. Ang mga gánsa,
bíbi, etc. nagakobókóbo sa lúnang. The geese, ducks, etc. are bathing
(or splashing) in the mud. Pakobókobóha ang manók sa túbig. Let the
chicken splash in the mud (flapping its wings and shaking itself).

_kóbot_, To hold on to by the teeth, stick or cling to as a leech,
a pair of pincers, the claws of a lobster, etc. Ang katáng nagkóbot sa
ákon kamót. The crab held on firmly to my hand. Ang bintósa nagakóbot
na sa likód sang masakít nga táo. The cupping glass is now firmly
attached to the sick man's back. Pakobóta ang tándok sa bútkon sang
bátà. Apply the cupping glass to the child's arm. Pinakóbot níla ang
tándok sa páa sang bátà, agúd makúhà ang dálit sang kinádtan sang
idô. They put a cupping glass on the boy's leg in order to draw off
the poison from the place bitten by the dog.

_kóbre_, (Sp. cobre) Copper.

_kóbre_, (Sp. cubrir) Cover, protection; to cover, shield,
protect. Ipakóbre sa kapitán iníng napúlò ka soldádo--or--kobrehí ang
kapitán siníng napúlò ka soldádo. Protect the captain with these ten
soldiers. Ang mga soldádo nagakobrehánay. The soldiers are covering
each other.

_kódak_, Kodak, a small photographic apparatus.

_kodál_, (Sp. corral) Fence, hedge, inclosure, yard, corral, pen,
fold; to fence or hedge in. Kodalí ang ímo pamulákan. Fence in your
garden. Pakodalí ang ímo pamulákan. Have a fence made around your
garden. Ikodál mo iníng kawáyan sa ímo pamulákan. Use this bamboo to
make a fence for your garden.

_kodál-kódal_, Dim. and Freq. of kodál.

_kódkod_, To scrape, shred, grate, rasp, scoop out with some sharp
tool. Kodkorá (-dá) ang sulúd sang lubí. Scoop out the meat of the
coconut. (cf. kokód id).

_kodkódan_, A grater, shredder, scraper, scoop, any tool or instrument
used for the action of "kódkod."

_kodkóran_, (H) See kodkódan.

_kodô_, To play with stones, throwing them up and catching them in
falling down, picking up meanwhile some more lying in front of the
players; small gravel is commonly used by children for the purpose
of this game. Ang mga bátà nagakodô. The children are playing
the game called "kodô". Pakodoá lang ang mga bátà, agúd nga índì
maggamó. Let the children play with stones, that they may not be
troublesome. (cf. korô id.).

_kodô_, A game played with six stones and a ball.

_kodô-kódò_, Dim. and Freq. of kodô.

_kodól-kodól_, Uneven, not level, not quite plain or smooth;
to be or become uneven, have or form some little prominencies or
reliefs. Nagakodól-kodól ang alpómbra. The floor carpet is not quite
smooth, has some raised figures or relief-work.

_kódong_, A cloth to cover the head with, head-cover; to cover the
head with any kind of cloth. Kodóngi ang úlo mo sang pányo. Cover
your head with the kerchief. Kodóngi ang bátà. Cover the child's
head. Pakodóngi ang bátà. Have the child's head covered. Ipakódong
sa íya iníng tuálya. Cover his head with this towel. (cf. tákdong,
takuróng).

_kodót_, (B) To pinch, compress between thumb and fore-finger, to
nip with the finger-nails. Kódta siá. Pinch him. Ginkodót nía akó. He
pinched me. Ang kinódtan sa bátà masakít. The place where the child
was pinched is painful. (cf. kosî).

_kódtan, kódton_, (B) See kodót.

_kógkog_, A kind of bird.

_kógkog_, Bareheaded, uncovered; to walk about bareheaded. Daw kógkog
gid lang iníng táo. This man is accustomed to walk about bareheaded.

_kógon_, A kind of long grass, much used for thatching purposes.

_kóg-ong_, To tie up short, put near, fasten with a short
tether. Ikóg-ong ang karabáw sa káhoy. Fasten the buffalo to the tree
with a short rope.


_kohín_, (Sp. cojin) Hassock, cushion, pillow, especially one for
kneeling on.

_koíng, ko-íng_, Short-sighted, near-sighted. (cf. kortabísta).

_koíng, ko-íng_, Bow-legged, bandy-legged; to be or become
bow-legged. Koíng siá. He is bandy-legged. Ang kapitán nagkoíng
tungúd sang lakás níya nga pagpangabayó. The captain became bow-legged
through too much riding on horseback.

_kók-kok_, The cooing of doves; to coo.

_kokó_, Nail, hoof, claw, talon.

_kóko_, A kind of cheap white cloth, white cotton-stuff.

_kókò_, Catarrh, cold with running at the nose. Also verb. Ginakókò
siá. He has a cold.

_kôkô_, To stoop, bend down. (cf. kuúb, sungúk, súngroy, sikóktot,
dúkoy, dúroy, súngkok).

_kokód_, Hoof, claw, pig's foot. (cf. kokó).

_kokód_, To grate, scrape, rasp, shell, shred, scoop out. (cf. kódkod
id.; kokorá (-odá)--kodkorá (-oda).

_kokóran_, Grater, scraper, rasper, any tool used for shredding or
scooping. (cf. kodkóran id.).

_kokót_, To rasp or rub off with some sharp instrument, to shell,
husk, shuck beans, peas or the like. Kokotá ang maís. Scrape off the
maize (from the cob). Shuck the corn. Kokotí akó sing kadiós, mónggo,
etc. Shell for me some cadiós-peas, monggo, etc. (cf. kódkod, kokód).

_kókoy_, To bathe; to take a bath. (cf. dígos, palígos).

_kóla_, (Sp. cola) Tail, train (of a gown, etc.).

_kóla_, (Sp. cola) Glue, mucilage, paste.

_kolábò_, (H) Coconut-meat mixed with toddy. (cf. kilábò).

_koládo_, (Probably from the Sp. cola--paste, glue) Cigar, tobacco
rolled for smoking. (cf. abáno, piokós).

_koláknit_, Bat. (cf. kolápnit, kololáknit, kolonáknit, múrtik).

_kólan_, To place, put, lay. Ginkólan níya siá sa isá ka pasungán. She
laid him in a manger. Ikólan ang bátà sa duyándúyan. Put the baby in
the hammock. (cf. butáng, pahígdà, tángday, pahámtang).

_kolápnit_, Bat. See koláknit.

_kolár_, (Sp. collar) Collar. (cf. kolyár, kwélyo, kolíntas).

_kólas_, To make a noise by walking to and fro, to move audibly or
noisily. Ang mga ilagâ, haló, etc. nagakólas sa ibábaw sang kisamí. The
rats, iguanas, etc. are moving about noisily above the ceiling. Indì
kamó magkólas. Don't be noisy. Indì nínyo akó pagkolásan. Don't disturb
me with your noise. Kagáhud sang kalóng sang sibúkaw nga nagakólas
sa hángin. What a noise the dry sebucao-pods make rustling in the
wind. (cf. gáhud, galúng).

_kolás-kólas_, Dim. and Freq. of kólas. Ginapakoláskólas sang
hángin ang mga kawáyan. The wind is stirring and rustling the
bamboos. Nagakoláskólas silá dirâ. They are rather noisy over
there. (cf. hulághúlag, gahúdgáhud, litóklitók, etc.).

_kolasyón_, (Sp. colación) A light repast, collation, snack,
bite. (cf. pamáhaw).

_koláta_, (Sp. culata) The butt of a musket or rifle; to strike with
the butt-end. Kulatáha siá. Strike him with the butt.

_kólera_, (Sp. cólera) Cholera.

_kolgadúra_, (Sp. colgadura) Drapery, embroidery, light decorations,
hangings, festoons.

_kolíhio, kolíhyo_, (Sp. colegio) College. (cf. buluthóan).

_kolíkog_, To bore or clean one's ears, etc. with a feather, the
finger or the like. (cf. kilíkog).

_kolikóg_, Anything used for the operation "kolíkog". (cf. kilikóg).

_kolíkot_, (H) See kolíkog. (cf. koríkog, kotíkot).

_kolikót_, (H) See kolikóg. (cf. korikót, kilikóg).

_kolindánte_, (Sp. colindante) Neighbour; adjacent, near,
hard--, fast--, by, adjoining, neighbouring, bordering,
contiguous. (cf. katámbi).

_kolíntas_, (Sp. collar) Necklace, string of pearls; rosary.

_kólis_, (Sp. col, pl. coles) Cabbage.

_kolisáw_, To twist one's face, wrinkle the brows, make grimaces as
if tasting something very sour or sharp. Nakainúm siá sing lánggaw,
kay nagakolisáw siá? Has he drunk vinegar, that he makes such a
face? (cf. korisáw).

_kolisóng_, See kolisáw. Also: To pucker one's lips in anger or
passion.

_kólkol_, To carry in one's arms. Kolkolá siá. Carry him in your
arms. Ikólkol akó ánay siníng bátà. Kindly carry this baby for me in
your arms. (cf. kúgus, kalóngkong).

_koló_, To carry something Negrito fashion by means of a string
around the forehead. Kolohá--or--kólwa lang ang pinutús. Just carry
the parcel in Negrito-fashion.

_kólo_, A large bundle, a load (of cogon-grass, etc.). Katloán ka
búgkos manginisá ka kólo. Thirty bunches make a load (of cogon-grass).

_kólò_, (B) Fool, ass, idiot, simpleton. (cf. búang, úmang, tampuháw,
hángà, búngaw, pákok, lóko).

_kolô_, To expand and contract; to squeeze, compress. Ang lástiko
nagaúnyat kag nagakolô. Elastic bands expand and contract. Kól-a ang
lubí nga inurá-od. Compress the coconut-meat taken from the shell.

_koló_, A kind of tree.

_kólod_, Side, edge, rim. (cf. kílid, kílod).

_kolód-kólod_, Uneven, hilly, not quite level, plain or smooth,
etc. See kodólkodól, boklódbóklod.

_kolokasyón_, (Sp. colocación) Position, employment, service, place,
job. (cf. alagarán, palamúgnan, palangitán-an, pangítà).

_kolokóbo_, To move about fluttering or flapping the wings, take a
dust--or water--bath, said especially of geese, ducks, hens and the
like. (cf. kobókóbo, kobókobó).

_kolokógo_, A kind of plant with very odoriferous flowers.

_kolô-kolô_, Dim. of kólò--fool, ass, etc. (cf. buangít).

_kolókos_, To tuck up one's trousers, sleeves or the like. Kolokósa
ang delárgo mo. Tuck up your trousers. Nagalakát siá nga kinolókos
ang pakô sang íya báyò. He walks with the sleeves of his jacket tucked
up. (cf. baláking--to tuck up skirts, sotanas or the like).

_kolokóton_, What is to be rasped, scraped, shelled, husked, shucked
as corn, peas and beans, etc. (kokót).

_kolokotón_, The gizzard, principal stomach of a bird. (cf. batikólon).

_kololáknit_, Bat. (cf. koláknit).

_kololápnit_, See koláknit, kololáknit, múrtik.

_kolómpyo_, (Sp. columpio) Rocking chair.

_kólon_, An earthenware pot, especially a rice- or
cooking-pot. (cf. kóron).

_kolonáknit_, (H) Bat. See koláknit, etc.

_kolóng_, (H) Curly, woolly, crinkly. Kolóng ang íya bohók. His hair
is curly. Ang mga áti kolóng sing bohók. The Negritos have woolly hair.

_kolór_, (Sp. color) Colour, hue, tint, shade, tinge, dye,
complexion. (cf. duág).

_kolóskos_, A primitive brush made of half a coconut-husk with the
shell removed and used especially for brushing yarn previous to
weaving. (kúskus). Also: to rub rather violently, brush.

_kolotkóton_, What is to--, should--, be dug out; tubers,
roots. (cf. kótkot).

_kóloy_, (B) See kólò--fool, etc.

_kolóy-kolóy_, (B) See kolôkolô--fool, etc.

_koltsón_, (Sp. colchon) Mattress.

_kolyár_, (Sp. collar) Collar. (cf. kolár, kolíntas, kwélyo).

_kóma_, (Sp. coma) Comma.

_komári_, (Sp. comadre) The relationship of the godmother to the
parents of her godchild and to the godfather.

_kombáte_, (Sp. combate) Combat, fight, war, skirmish, battle, fray,
encounter. (cf. áway).

_kombidádo_, (Sp. convidar) Feast, celebration, banquet, repast,
entertainment. (cf. tábad, punsyón, pagkáon, bádò).

_kombirádo_, See kombidádo.

_komedór_, (Sp. comedor) Dining room, refectory, dining hall,
mess-room. (cf. kalán-an).

_komédya_, (Sp. comedia) Comedy; any stage-play.

_komedyánte_, (Sp. comediante) Comedian; player, actor, actress.

_komersyánte_, (Sp. comerciante) Merchant, shop-keeper, tradesman,
trader, chandler, retailer, hawker, huckster, higgler, pedlar,
colporteur, any seller of goods even in a small way, dealer, salesman,
chapman, costermonger; cheapjack, caterer. (cf. pumalatíkang).

_komérsyo_, (Sp. comercio) Commerce, business, trade, traffic,
lucrative enterprise. (cf. palatikángan, palangitán-an).

_kométa_, (Sp. cometa) Comet.

_komída_, (Sp. comida) Dinner, meal, repast, feed, spread, fare; food,
comestibles, eatables, victuals, viands; eating, feeding. (cf. pagkáon,
kináon, kalán-on).

_komód_, (B) Silent, reserved, retired, uncommunicative, reticent,
taciturn, not talkative.

_kómod_, To grumble, murmur, sulk, pout, complain. Indì ka
magkómod. Don't murmur. Indì mo akó pagkomóran (-ódan). Do not grumble
at me--or--in my presence. (kúmud id.).

_komóda_, (Sp. cómoda) Chest of drawers, bureau, night-commode.

_komód-kómod_, Dim. and Freq. of kómod. To grumble a little, or have
a habit of grumbling and complaining on every occasion.

_komósta_, See kamústa. Nagkomostahánay silá. They saluted each other,
they shook hands.

_kompanía_, (Sp. compañia) Company, society, concern, firm; troop,
body of soldiers or the like. (cf. kumbuyahán, hubón, kabón).

_kompanyár_, (Sp. acompañar) To accompany, attend, convoy,
bear--, keep--, company, join, go along with; join in, play an
accompaniment. (cf. upúd, tawás, búylog).

_kompanyéro_, (Sp. compañero) Companion, partner, friend, fellow,
associate, curate, assistant, mate, consort. (cf. kaúpud, kadámpig,
kabúylog).

_kompári_, (Sp. compadre) The relationship of a godfather to the
parents of his godchild and to the godmother. (cf. komári).

_kompás_, (Sp. compas) A pair of compasses, callipers, measure, time
(in music), rule, standard (of life). (cf. solóndan).

_komponér_, (Sp. componer) To put together, compose, do up, repair,
mend, put to rights. Komponehá inâ. Put that together, put it to
rights, mend it. (cf. kaáyo, kaídan, búhat, hímò).

_komposisyón_, (Sp. composición) Composition, repair, mending, make,
making, putting to rights. (cf. búhat, binúhat).

_komún_, (Sp. comun) In common, common to. Iníng dútà komún námon. This
land belongs to us in common. (cf. guráptan, garapátan).

_komún_, (Sp. comun) Privy, water--closet or (abbreviated) W.C.,
lavatory, public lavatory, jakes, latrine. (cf. lubô, kasílyas).

_komunikasyón_, (Sp. comunicación) Communication, intercourse,
converse; means of communication, connection.

_kón_, Particle: If, when, whether; or. Kon magabút siá--. When he
comes--. Usisáon mo sing maáyo iníng mga kasangkápan kon mapúslan pa
ó kon dílì. Examine these tools well, whether they are still of some
use or not. Padálhi akó sing duhá kon tátlo ka páres nga sapátos. Send
me two or three pairs of boots. Kon maáyo ang tiémpo magadúaw akó
sa ímo. If the weather is fine I will pay you a visit. (cf. ó,
ukón. N.B. ukón is now mostly used in the meaning of "or" and kon
in the meaning of "if, when, whether", "ukón" is a contraction of
"ó kon").


_konbénto_, (Sp. convento) Convent; Parish Priest's house, presbytery.

_kónde_, (Sp. conde) Count; aristocrat.

_kondenádo_, (Sp. condenado) Condemned, sentenced; damned, the soul
of a damned person. (cf. tinagudilían).

_kóndì_, But, if not, unless, except; really, surely, certainly. Iní
dílì matúod, kóndì butíg gid. This is not true, but a downright
lie. Waláy saráng makabúhat sináng mga kalatingaláhan, kóndì
ang Diós. No one, except God, can perform such miracles. Abáw,
kóndì kahalamútan gid inâ. Now, if that isn't funny! ("kóndì" is a
contraction of "kon dílì").

_kondíman_, A kind of rather rough red cloth used chiefly for
pillow-cases and for decorative purposes; a native song and
dance. (cf. kundíman).

_koného_, (Sp. conejo) Rabbit.

_kóngkong_, To carry at the side or astride the hip as small children
are often carried. Kongkongá ang bátà. Carry the baby on your hip.

_konkaisá_, Sometimes, occasionally, from time to time, now and then,
repeatedly, but not very often. (kon kaisá, kon kís-a).

_konó_, They say, it is rumoured or reported, it is said, the story
goes, rumour has it, etc. Maáyo siá nga táo, konó. They say that he
is a good man. May súnug, konó, kagáb-i sa dálan Rizál. There was a
fire, last night, in Rizal-street, they say.

_konó-kóno_, Dim. and Freq. of konó. Ginakonókóno nga----. It is
being rumoured that----. (cf. hudínghúding).

_konperénsya_, (Sp. confencia) Conference; consultative
meeting. (cf. sinápul).

_konpesár_, (Sp. confesar) To confess, go to confession, receive the
Sacrament of penance. Sán-o pa ikáw magkonpesár? When did you go to
confession? Pakonpesará siá. Hear his confession. (cf. túad).

_konpesór_, (Sp. confesor) Confessor.

_konpesyón_, (Sp. confesión) Confession, the sacrament of Penance;
sick-call.

_konpesyonáryo_, (Sp. confesionario) Confessional, confessional box.

_konsábo_, (Sp. consabido, consaber) Confabulation, collusion,
agreement, understanding. Konsábo níla iní. There is an
understanding between them as regards this--or--They jointly contrived
this. (cf. kasugtánan, kasapulán, húmon, hinubónhúbon, pahítò, padúgi,
patúga, etc.).

_konsagrár_, (Sp. consagrar) To consecrate. Konsagrahí iníng mga
pórmas. Consecrate these hosts. Pilá ka pórmas ang nakonsagrahán
kaína sang ága? How many hosts were consecrated this morning?

_konsagrasyón_, (Sp. consagración) Consecration.

_konsehál_, (Sp. concejal) Councillor, member of a council, municipal
councillor. (cf. kasápul).

_konsého_, (Sp. concejo) Council or board, especially a municipal
council. (cf. kasapulán).

_konsého_, (Sp. consejo) Advice, admonition, monition, counsel,
opinion. (cf. láygay, túdlò, panúgyan).

_konsiderár_, (Sp. considerar) To consider, take into consideration,
have a heart, show sympathy. Konsiderahí ang ákon mga kalisúd. Take
into consideration my difficulties. (cf. pasunáid, patugsíling).

_konsiderasyón_, (Sp. consideracion) Consideration, commiseration,
fellow-feeling, humanity, sympathy, compassion, forbearance. De
konsiderasyón-worthy of consideration, to be reckoned with, having
influence, standing or property. Táo nga walâ konsiderasyón. A man
without consideration or pity. Táo nga de konsiderasyón. A man of
influence or good standing. (cf. pasunáid, patugsíling; kaló-oy,
kaáwà; dawâdawâ, dirâ-dirâ).

_konsiénsya_, (Sp. conciencia) Conscience. (cf. ipalatugsíling,
tagiposóon).

_kónsul_, (Sp. cónsul) Consul.

_konsúlta_, (Sp. consultar) To consult, ask advice, take
counsel, take counsel with. Magkonsúlta--or--magkonsultár ka sa
manugbúlung. Consult a doctor (physician). Ginkonsultahán ko siá. I
asked his advice. Ikonsultár mo sa íya kon mapamanílà ikáw ukón
índì. Ask his advice whether you should go to Manila or not. Also
noun: Consultation, conference, a question proposed and the answer
given. (cf. pamángkot, pakigkítà).

_konswélo_, (Sp. consuelo) Consolation, relief, condolence, solace,
encouragement, comfort; joy, cheering up, mirth, gaiety, merriment,
merry-making, pleasure. (cf. kalípay).

_kóntra_, (Sp. contra) Against, in opposition to; to oppose, resist,
go against, counteract, run counter to, clash with, cross, conflict
with, beat--, run--, militate--, against, withstand, antagonize;
opposition, objection; opponent, enemy. Ang kaálwan kóntra sa
kaímot. Liberality is opposed to niggardliness. Indì ka magkóntra
(mangóntra) sa mga sógò sang ímo ginikánan. Do not go against
the orders of your parents. Ang mga nagakóntra (magapangóntra) sa
pagbulút-an magabatás sang sílot. Those that go against the law will be
punished. Nagakontrahánay silá. They are opposed to each other. They
are quarrelling or fighting. Madámò ang íya mga kóntra. He has many
enemies. (cf. bátok, bátò, kasúmpung, kaáway).

_kontráryo_, (Sp. contrario) Contrary; opponent, enemy, antagonist,
contestant. (cf. kóntra, etc.).

_kontráta_, (Sp. contrata) Contract, agreement, bargain; deed, document
(containing the terms of a contract, etc.). (cf. kasugtánan, katípan,
kaligonán).

_kontratísta_, (Sp. contratista) Contractor; one who gathers workmen
or farm hands.

_kontráto_, (Sp. contrato) Contract, stipulation, pact,
agreement. (cf. kontráta, kasugtánan).

_kontrinkánte_, (Sp. contrincante) Opponent, competitor, rival,
antagonist, adversary, contestant. (cf. kasúmpung, kaáway, kasánggà,
kóntra).

_koón_, (B) Say, speech, utterance; to say, tell, utter,
speak. Nagkoón tána (ginkoón na) nga----. He said that----. Ikoón mo
kaná nga----. Tell him that--. (cf. silíng, hámbal, púlong, súgid).

_kóot_, See kúut--to grope, etc.

_kópa_, (Sp. copa) Cup, goblet, wine-glass, vase, tea-cup, coffee-cup,
drinking cup, glass (of wine, etc.).

_kópal_, Lies, tales, inventions, stories, fibs, falsehoods,
prevarications, fabrications, untruths, fiction; to tell lies, make up
stories, utter untruths. Ginkópal lang níya inâ. He simply invented
that story or he told a lie. Kópal gid lang ang súgid nga iní. This
tale is a mere invention, or lie. Indì ka magkinópal. Don't tell
lies. (cf. butíg, bákak).

_kopálon_, Lying, telling stories, false, mendacious, deceptive,
misrepresenting, exaggerating much. (cf. butigón, bakákon).

_kópas_, (Sp. copa) Hearts, one of the four suits in card-playing.

_kopíta_, (Sp. copeta) A small cup or drinking vessel, liqueur-glass,
thimble-glass.

_kopón_, (Sp. copón) A large cup, goblet; ciborium.

_kopón_, (Sp. cupón) Coupon; cheque, draft, note, voucher.

_kóprak_, (Sp. copra) Dried coconut-meat, copra.

_kópras_, See kóprak.

_kópya_, (Sp. copia) A copy; to copy. Ikópya--or--kopyahá iní sa
líbro. Make a copy of this in the book--or--transfer this to the
register. (cf. huád, sáylo).

_korál_, (H) (Sp. corral) Fence, etc. See kodál.

_korál_, (Sp. coral) Coral. (cf. pagáng, kapagángan).

_korális_, (Sp. corales) A string of corals.

_korasón_ (Sp. corazon) Heart. (cf. tagiposóon, kasíngkásing).

_korbása_, See kalabása.

_korbáta_, (Sp. corbata) Cravat, tie.

_kórbot_, To do something with sudden jerks, get restless with
excitement, to puff, pull, draw, jump, curvet, etc. with quick
movements. Nagkórbot ang kabáyo sang paglágpok sang láta. At the sound
of the tin-can the horse suddenly began to jump. Kinórbot ang karabáw
sang paglubás sang áwto. The buffalo stampeded when the automobile
passed. Pakorbotá ang abáno mo, agúd índì mapatáy ang kaláyo. Puff
your cigar quickly, or it will go out. (cf. hubót).


_kordéro_, (Sp. cordero) Lamb, lambkin, young sheep.

_kordión_, (Sp. acordeon) Accordion.

_kordíso_, (Sp. corredizo) Groove, rut, canal, especially the groove
along which push-and-pull shutters move; a grooved beam or spar.

_kordón_, (Sp. cordon) Cordon, line of posts or guards, military or
otherwise, watching a certain district in time of public calamities,
revolutions, infectious diseases, or the like.

_koréa_, (Sp. correa) A girdle, belt, sash, cincture, surcingle,
especially one worn by a religious society or confraternity.

_koréo_, (Sp. correo) Post, mail; post-office.

_kórha_, Half of a gantang. Fifty kórha make a bushel (pásong) of rice.

_koridíg_, Stunted, undersized, dwarfish, kept down in
growth. (cf. arí-arí, agílagíl).

_koríkot_, To stir, twitch, bore with the finger, etc. Indì mo
pagkorikóton ang búhò sang ulúnan, agúd índì magdakô kag maggwâ
ang búrak. Don't bore your finger into the hole in the pillow, lest
it should enlarge and the cotton come out. (cf. kotíkot, kitíkot,
kolíkog, etc.).

_korikót_, Anything used for the operation "koríkot". (cf. kolikót).

_koríng_, Cat, puss, pussy, grimalkin, mouser. (cf. kutî).

_kóring_, To call a cat. Korínga ang koríng. Call the cat--or--shout
"kóring" to bring the cat here. (cf. míming).

_korisáw_, See kolisáw.

_korisóng_, See kolisóng.

_koríkot_, To wrinkle, form creases or lines. Ang pánit siníng
tigúlang nagakorítot. The skin of this old person is full of
wrinkles. (cf. kurínot).

_koritót_, Wrinkled, creasy, creased, lined; twisted, curled, (as a
pig's tail). (cf. kurinót).

_koritót_, A kind of small lobster. (cf. karitót, kiritót).

_kórnel_, (Sp. coronel) Colonel.

_kornetín_, (Sp. cornetin) Cornet; cornettist.

_kornísa_, (Sp. cornisa) Cornice.

_kóro_, (Sp. coro) Choir; line, row, tier, file, circle; to form a line
or circle, arrange in a line or circle. Magkóro--or--kumóro kamó. Form
a line or circle. Koróha ang mga bátà. Form (arrange) the children
in line. Make the children stand in line (in a circle). Pakoróha ang
mga bátà. Make the children line up. (cf. andána, ídas).

_korô_, (B) Curled, curly, woolly, crinkly (of hair; cf. kolóng).

_korô_, (B) To contract. See kolô.

_korô_, (H) To play with stones. See kodô.

_koró-kóro_, Dim. and Freq. of kóro.

_korokosó_, To rumple, etc. See karokosó.

_korokotón_, (B) See kolokotón. (cf. batikólon).

_koróna_, (Sp. corona) Crown, corona, coronet, fillet, diadem, circlet,
chaplet, garland, wreath; tonsure; to crown. Koronáhi ang hárà. Crown
the queen. Ginkoronáhan níla ang réina sa Flores de Máyo. They crowned
the queen of the "Flores de Mayo"--or--queen of the May. (cf. púrung,
purúng).

_koronél_, See kórnel.

_korpínyo_, (Sp. corpiño) Shirtwaist, short shirt or waist as worn
by women. (cf. kimóno).

_korsé_, (Sp. corsé) Corset, stays for women.

_kórta_, (Sp. cortar) To cut (clothes, etc.); to cut, chisel, fashion,
carve (wood or stone); a fringe or indentation, cut in a zigzag or
roundish pattern along the edge of a sleeve, etc., goffer, gauffer;
to curdle, coagulate. Nagkórta ang gátas. The milk curdled. Nagkórta
ang pásta, lúnang, etc. The paste, mud, etc. has become dry and
friable. (cf. básbas; bórlas; bágtik; gréka).

_kortákórta_, Dim. and Freq. of kórta. Nagakortákórta siá sing bató. He
is cutting stone. Maálam siá mangortákórta. He knows how to cut or
carve (stone, wood, etc.).


_kortaplúmas_, (Sp. cortaplumas) Knife, penknife,
pocket-knife. (cf. lansítas, igulúlut, íwà).

_kórte_, (Sp. corte) A cut, fit, the stuff necessary for a garment;
to cut, cut out, fit (in tailoring). Maáyo ang kórte sang íya mga
panápton. The cut of his clothes is good. Ang manugtábas nagakórte
na sang ákon delárgo. The tailor is cutting out the cloth for my
trousers. Iníng manugtábas maábtik mangórte. This tailor is an expert
cutter. (cf. tábas).

_kórte_, A piece of cloth measuring 2.50 m in length and sufficient
for an ordinary pair of trousers.

_kórte_, (Sp. corte) Court, tribunal, judgment-seat; a king's or
monarch's residence or retinue. Ang Kórte de Priméra Instánsya. The
Court of First Instance. Ang Kórte Supréma. The Supreme
Court. (cf. hokmánan, holokmánan).

_kortína_, (Sp. cortina) Curtain, blind; to curtain. Kortináhi
siá. Draw his curtain. Curtain him off. Pakortináhi siá. Provide
him with a curtain. Nagapangortína siá kon magtúlug. He uses a
curtain, when he goes to sleep. Ginkortináhan níya ang bátà, kay
may hángin. She drew the curtain on the baby, because there was a
draught. (cf. kúmbung).

_kórtso_, (Sp. corcho) Cork; clogs. (cf. bakiâ, kótso).

_kosî_, (H) To pinch, press or nip between the finger nails. Kosiá
siá. Pinch him. Kosií siá sa bútkon. Pinch his arm. Gindúmpug ko siá,
kay ginkosî níya akó. I hit him, because he pinched me. (cf. kodót).

_kosî_, (H) A little, a pinch, a small piece or amount.

_kosî-kósì_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of kosî. To tease and pinch each
other in play as children do.

_kosî-kósì_, To strip, divide or tear into thin strips,
shred, decorticate. Kosî-kosía ang páklang sang burí. Strip the
burí-stalk. Kinosîkósì na ang páklang sang burí. The burí-stalk is
now torn into strips. (cf. láknit).

_kosína_, (Sp. cocina) Kitchen; to make or provide a kitchen. Kosináhi
ang baláy mo. Get a kitchen built for your house. Kinosináhan na
man ang bág-o níla nga baláy. Their new home is now provided with a
kitchen. (cf. digamohán).

_kosinéro_, (Sp. cocinero) Cook.

_kosípad_, To pinch, twist or tweak, nudge, poke (another's legs,
ears, etc.). Kosipára (-áda), ang íya dalúnggan. Pinch and twist his
ears. (cf. kulípat, gurípat, guránit).

_kosípad_, To shell, shuck beans. (cf. kokót).

_kósmod_, To sulk, pout, frown, be sullen, look offended. Indì ka
magkósmod. Don't frown, sulk or pout. Ginkosmorán (-odán) níya akó. He
looked sullenly at me--or--he frowned at me. (cf. súngon, kolisáw,
súnggud, kúmud).

_kosmód-kósmod_, Dim. and Freq. of kósmod.

_kósnit_, To rend, tear to pieces, pull apart by force, rip. Kosnitá
ang papél, hénero, etc. Tear the paper, cloth, etc. to pieces. Kinósnit
níya ang ákon báyò. He tore my jacket. (cf. gísì, kosîkósì, láknit).

_kosnít_, Torn, rent; ripped. Kosnít na galî ang ákon báyò. Sín-o
ang nagkósnit siní? Why, my jacket is torn! Who tore it? (cf. gisî).

_kósò_, To rub, apply friction, abrade, massage, chafe, fret. Kosóa
sing maáyo ang ákon panápton sa (sang) habón. Rub my clothes well with
soap. Kinósò níya ang duhá níya ka dalúnggan. He rubbed both his ears.

_kosô-kósò_, To rub, rumple, tousle. Nagakosôkosoáy silá sang íla
bohók. They are rumpling each other's hair.

_kósta_, (Sp. costa) Cost, price, expense; coast, seashore; red yarn
or thread. (cf. bilí; baybáyon; bunáng).

_kostabuláryo_, Constabulary.

_kostóso_, (Sp. costoso) Costly, dear, expensive. (cf. maámbas,
gastóso, mahál).

_kostúmbre_, (Sp. costumbre) Custom, habit, manner,
usage. (cf. kinaanáran, kinabatásan, batásan).

_kostúra_, (Sp. costura) Suture, seam; sewing. (cf. tinahián).

_kotíkot_ To clean a hole, aperture, etc. by means of a small stick
or the like. (cf. kolíkog, kitíkot).

_kotíkot_, Throb, beat, pulsation; to throb, heave, palpitate,
pulse, to twist and wriggle as a worm, to throb with pain as a boil,
etc. Nagakotíkot ang sulúd sang ákon hubág. The inside of my boil is
throbbing with pain.

_kótkot_, Hole, cavity, grave, sepulchre; to excavate, dig--, scoop--,
out earth, etc. Akó ang makáli, ikáw ang makótkot. I will do the
digging and you will take out the earth. Imo kotkotón ang binayó
sa lusóng, kay ákon pagatáphan. Scoop out the pounded rice from the
mortar, for I am going to sift it. Kotkotá ang balás sa búhò. Take
out the sand from the hole. (cf. káli; búhò, lulúbngan).

_kótò_, To be dense, thick, crowded. Nagakótò lang ang táo sa
punsyón. There is a dense crowd at the banquet. (cf. kútò, gutúk).

_kóto_, Louse. (cf. botól, kúto).

_kotó-kotó_, A louse-like insect living in loose sand.

_kotó-kotó_, See bilógbilóg. Madámò ang kotókotó siníng bunáng. This
yarn is not smooth, is full of little lumps or knots (nodes).

_kotól_, To pick, pluck, gather, cull. Kótla ang búlak. Pluck the
flower. Kótli akó sing búlak. Pluck me some flowers. Ikotól akó ánay
siníng búlak. Please pick this flower for me.

_kotoníya_, (Sp. cotonia) A kind of rather rough cloth, dimity,
fustian.

_kotóy_, To tire, exhaust; tired, exhausted, stiff as from walking,
etc. Ginakotóy akó. I am tired. (cf. kápoy, kapóy, álay, pául, paúl).

_kótoy_, To ache, pain, be painful. Nagakótoy ang tiyán ko. I have
stomach ache.

_kotséro_, (Sp. cochero) Coachman, driver.

_kotsílyo_, (Sp. cochillo) Knife, table-knife. (cf. súndang).

_kótso_, See kórtso.

_kotsó-kótso_, To disparage, criticize adversely, detract, censure,
speak ill of, exaggerate wrongs or injuries suffered, belittle benefits
received, complain to others. Indì ka magkotsókótso. Don't speak in
disparagement of anybody. Indì mo akó pagkotsókotsohán. Don't censure
me--or--don't make unreasonable complaints about me to others. Anó
na man ang ginakotsókótso mo? What are you complaining about now?

_kotsyám_, A kind of rice. (cf. arabón).

_kredensyál_, (Sp. credencial) Credential; certificate of
cattle-registration.

_kristál_, (Sp. cristal) crystal; glass. (cf. kátyà).

_kristiáno_, (Sp. cristiano) Christian. (cf. kristohánon).

_krísto_, (Sp. Cristo) Christ.

_kristohánon_, Christian. (cf. kristiáno).

_krus_, (Sp. cruz) Cross; trial, suffering, difficulty. Pagpangurús-to
make the sign of the cross. (cf. sáng-an).

_krusamáno_, (Sp. cruzar las manos) With hands or arms folded or
crossed; to cross or fold one's hands or arms. Krusamanóha ang ímo
mga bútkon. Fold your arms. (cf. panimókò).

_krusipího_, (Sp. crucifijo) Crucifix.

_kuá_, What d'ye call them, etc. See kwan.

_kuán_, See kwan.

_kubág_, To float, swim on the surface. Ang tápas nagakubág sa
túbig. Coconut husks float on the water. (cf. kutáw, lutáw, utáwútaw,
kubáw).

_kubá-kubá_, (H) To throb, beat, palpitate, pulse. (cf. kumbákúmba,
tumbôtúmbò, kotíkot).

_kubátso_, Cowardice; to be or become a coward. (cf. tálaw).

_kubatsóhon_, Coward, poltroon; cowardly, pusillanimous,
timorous. (cf. matálaw).

_kubáw_, To float, swim, drift, move on the surface of. (cf. kubág,
kutáw).

_kúbay_, To form in line, file or row, line up; line, row, file,
tier. Magkúbay or simply kúbay kamó. Form in line. Nagakúbay ang mga
baláy sa siníng báryo sa toó kag sa walá sang dálan. The houses in this
village form rows (are in rows) to right and left of the road. Kubáya
ang mga bumulúthò. Line up the school-children. Pakubáya ang mga
bumulúthò. Make the school-children form a line. (cf. ídas, kóro).


_kubiérta_, (Sp. cubierta) The deck of a ship.

_kubiértos_, (Sp. cubiertos) Table-cutlery, spoons, knives and forks.

_kúbkub_, See kóbkob.

_kúbkub_, To hollow out, undermine, wash away, said especially of
water. Ginkubkubán ang bató sang túbig. The stone was undermined by
the water. Ginkúbkub sang túbig ang balás. The water washed away the
sand. (cf. áb-ab, kábkab, kádkad).

_kúbkub_, To bow down, incline, bend over, stoop, dip. (cf. kuúb).

_kúbo_, (Sp. cubo) The handle of a chisel, hammer or other tool;
socket, shaft- or axle-case; hub, nave of a wheel.

_kubúng_, Full of creases, creased, puckery, puckered, corrugated,
wrinkled, gathered, contracted into folds; to be or become creased,
etc. (cf. bokóng).

_kúbung_, A game in which two grasp each other's hand and try to
inflict pain by pressing the finger-nails into the flesh; he who
gives way first loses. Nagakubungáy silá nga duhá. The two of them are
busy at the game called "kúbung". (cf. ógbo--another game, where the
contestants try to bend down each other's arm; pákil--where they try,
in a sitting position, to bend the outstretched leg; tornílyo--where
the middle finger is made the victim). (cf. pangúbung).

_kubús_, Low, mean; sorry, poor, petty, paltry, unimportant,
insignificant, nonentity, inferior, not up to the standard,
of--little--, --small,--no--, --account,--importance. Kubús nga
táo. A man of mean origin, of little worth or influence. Sín-o sa
íla nga tátlo ang kubús sa pagdúmug, sa pagkabutáng, sa kataasón, sa
kaálam, etc. Which of the three is the least in wrestling, in wealth,
in height, in wisdom or learning, etc.? (cf. kulábus).

_kubyál_, To struggle, rear up, jump, curvet, make frantic efforts
(as a horse trying to get loose, etc. (cf. húblag).

_kúbyas_, To give a jerk, make a swift movement, step aside
quickly. (cf. págsi, dalî, líktin, líksi, likáw).

_kudál_, Fence, etc. See kodál.

_kúdang_, Screen, awning, shelter; umbrella. Kúdang sa
ínit. Parasol. (cf. páyong).

_kudángdang_, The red blossoms of the dápdap-tree.

_kúdaw_, To walk abroad under difficulties, as at night, during pelting
rain, in a raging storm or the like. Ngáa nga ikáw gid ang nagkúdaw
sa siníng óras? Why have you ventured to walk out by yourself at such
an hour? (cf. dúkaw).

_kudiápa_, A kind of plant, whose leaves and shoots are edible.

_kudiapáhon_, Pertaining to kudiápa; as plain or as flat as the leaves
of the kudiápa-plant; snub-nosed, flat-nosed. (cf. dapâ, kurapâ).

_kudingô_, Fool, ass, idiot, (cf. kólò, etc.); ugly to look
upon. (cf. sárot, laímnan, maláw-ay).

_kudís_, Of little use or value, poor, paltry, sorry, not worth much,
useless. Kudís siá nga táo. He is a worthless fellow. Kudís siá nga
pánday. He is of little use as a carpenter,--not much of a carpenter.

_kudís-kudís_, Dim. of kudís.

_kudískúdis_, To pretend to be against, refuse outwardly, object to
outwardly, professedly, apparently, seemingly, ostensibly, etc. See
bisyóbísyo, indîíndì, istíísti, etc.

_kúdlis_, Line, stroke, mark; to strike, line, mark, rub
against. Kudlisá ang pósporo sa káha. Strike the match on the
box. Kudlisí ang pápel sang lápis. Mark or line the paper with the
pencil. (cf. kúlit, kúdlit).

_kúdlit_, Line, stroke, mark made with something sharp or pointed;
to line, mark, sign with a chisel, pencil, brush, etc. Kudlití ang
tápì sang lápis. Mark the plank with the pencil. Ikúdlit ang pósporo
sa káha. Strike the match on the box. (cf. kúdlis, kúlit).

_kudlít-kúdlit_, Dim. and Freq. of kúdlit. Indì ka magkudlítkúdlit,
kóndì magsulát ka sing maáyo kag maáthag. Don't scribble, but write
well and clearly.

_kúdug_, (B) To tremble, shiver, quake, quail, shake with fear,
cold, etc. Ang báka nagakúdug sa katúgnaw. The cow is shivering with
cold. Pakudúga siá sang ímo sáble. Make him tremble with fear of your
sword. (cf. kúrug).

_kudyápa_, See kudiápa--a plant.


_kudyapáhon_, Pertaining to "kudyápa". See kudiapáhon.

_kudyápi_, A musical instrument, a lyre. (cf. sísta, banduríya,
rabél, etc.).

_kugâ_, To throttle, strangle, choke, suffocate, garrote, compress
one's throat. Kugaá--or--kúg-a siá. Throttle him. Gintámpà ko siá, kay
ginkugâ níya akó. I slapped him, because he seized me by the throat.

_kugán_, A scab, scar, cicatrix, cicatrice. (cf. pálì, pinalían).

_kúghad_, A noisy, impolite preparation for spitting; to hawk,
i.e. to force up phlegm (spittle) from the throat and eject it,
to cough in preparation for spitting. Indì ka magkúghad. Don't hawk
(spit) with unseemly efforts. Indì mo siá pagkugharán (-adán) sa íya
pagkáon, kay básì magalaút ang íya ginháwa kag magasúka siá. Do not
hawk during his meal, for he may be sickened and vomit. Nagkúghad
siá sing dugô. He coughed up blood. (cf. úghad, súgpà).

_kúgi_, Care, carefulness, heed, heedfulness, attention, zeal,
diligence; to do with care, diligence or circumspection, be careful
about, to take pains, perform--, carry out--, attend to--, with
care. Kugíhi iní. Do this with care. Ginakugíhan níya ang tanán nga
mga butáng sa sulúd sang baláy. She takes great care of everything in
the house. She is diligent in all her household duties. (cf. baláka,
ámlig, tátap, písan, úkud, íd-id).

_kugíta_, Octopus; vampire, shark, cheat.

_kúgmat_, Fright, terror, dread, fear, dismay, scare, alarm; to alarm,
strike terror into, frighten, scare, dismay, affright, terrify,
cause great fear or consternation. Ginakúgmat akó kon dumdumón ko
inâ. I am quite frightened when I think of it. Nagakakúgmat siá. He is
alarmed, scared, frightened. Amó ang naghátag sa íla sing kúgmat kag
kúlbà. That frightened and scared them. That struck terror into them
and filled them with a feeling of uneasiness. (cf. hádluk, hanguyús,
kuyús, lísang, makakulúgmat).

_kúgtong_, Octopus. (cf. kugíta). Also: a kind of fierce shark,
more dangerous than the "bagís".

_kugúd_, To rasp, scrape, shred or scoop out. Kugurá (-udá) ang
lubí. Scoop out the coconut-meat. (cf. oráod, kódkod, etc.).

_kúgus_, To bear, hug or carry in one's arms. Kugúsa siá. Carry him
in your arms. Ipakúgus sa íya iníng bátà. Give her this baby to carry
in her arms. (cf. kólkol, kalóngkong).

_kúhà_, (H) To take, take--away,--from,--away from,--off, remove,
fetch, seize, abduct, subtract; gain, get. Kuháa iníng mga pínggan
sa lamésa. Take these plates off the table. Kuháon mo ang ákon kálò
sa kwárto kag dálhon dirí. Fetch my hat from the room and bring it
here. Ginkuháan--or--kinuháan akó níya sing tátlo ka písos. He took
three pesos from me. Kuhái iníng tabungós sing ápat ka gántang. Take
five gantas out of this rice-basket. Anó gid man nga kapuslánan ang
saráng náton makúhà sinâ? What advantage can we gain from that? What
is the use of it? (cf. buúl).

_kuhâ-kúhà_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of kúhà.

_kuhâ-kuhâ_, (B) Fool, ass, simpleton. (cf. kolôkolô, etc.).

_kúhit_, To nudge, touch, pull slightly and withdraw the hand at
once, tear or strain at gently. Kuhíta siá. Nudge him. Kuhíti siá
sa íya bútkon. Pull him slightly by the sleeve or arm. (cf. káblit,
tándog, híkap).

_kuhít-kúhit_, Dim. and Freq. of kúhit.

_kúkik_, The cry of a flying fox, of a fruit bat or the like.

_kúkuk_, The cry of pigeons; to coo. (cf. kók-kok).

_kulábo_, Softness, flabbiness; to be or become flaccid.

_kulábò_, To eat coconut meat mixed with toddy. See kilábò.

_kulabóhon_, Soft, flabby, flaccid, tender, not strong. (cf. mahómok,
malúm-ok, tabonánà).

_kulábus, kulabús_, Insufficient, inadequate, deficient, wanting,
skimpy, scant, stinted, not enough, lacking, short, too little or
too small; to be insufficient, to not suffice, to come short of,
etc. Kinulábus kamí sing kwárta. We were short of money. Nagkulábus
ang súd-an. The side-dishes were too few or insufficient. Kulábus
gid ang íya ikasaráng sa amó nga palangakóan. He has far too little
ability for such an office. Kon kulabúson siá sang pálad----. If fate
is against him----. If he is unlucky----. (cf. kabús, kúlang).

_kuláhaw_, Superficial, pretended, sham, not hearty, not open or
honest, insincere, dissembling. (cf. pakuláhaw, pasamústra, alakápa).

_kulahús_, See kalahós.

_kulákig_, Bat. (cf. koláknit, etc.).

_kulámbot_, (H) Cloak, mantle, covering, cover, wrapping; to cover
or wrap oneself up, inwrap, enwrap, envelop, roll up in, swathe,
swaddle, lap, fold, muffle up. Kon magtúlug siá nagakulámbot sing
kápay. When he sleeps he wraps himself up in a blanket. Mangulámbot
ka sing hábul. Wrap yourself up in a blanket. Cover yourself with a
blanket. (cf. kúmbot, kulúmbot).

_kulámi_, To sneak, to take away by stealth, filch, purloin,
appropriate secretly. Sín-o ang nagkulámi sang ákon líbro? Who
took away my book? Kinulámi níya ang ákon kálò, bastón, etc. He
took away my hat, stick, etc. Kulamíha lang iníng páyong. Just take
this umbrella. Ginkulamíhan akó níya sang ákon báyò. He took away
(appropriated) my jacket. (cf. kúhà).

_kulámò_, To hurt, cause physical pain by pushing, grasping tightly,
striking, boxing, pinching, etc. Indì ka magkulámò sa íya. Don't hurt
him (physically). Kulamóa siá. Let him feel it (physically).

_kulámog_, The filmy formation of new skin around the edges of a wound
or boil, when it is beginning to heal and before a scab is formed;
to skin over. May kulámog na ang íya hubág--or--nagakulámog na ang
íya hubág. His boil is beginning to heal or skin over.

_kúlan_, See kólan id.

_kuláng_, Now and then, but rarely, used for kúlang. Ginakuláng ang
íya kinitáan. His earnings are not sufficient (for his needs).

_kúlang_, Less than required or expected, short, insufficient,
inadequate, not enough, too little, deficient, deficit; to lack,
fall short, be inadequate, etc. Kúlang iní. This is short--or--This
is too little. Kúlang gid inâ sa íla nga tanán. That certainly is
not enough for all of them. Nagkúlang ang bíno. There was not enough
wine. Nakulángan akó sing kwárta. I ran short of money. Pakulángi siá
sing limá ka dakô. Give him five centavos less. Pinakulángan níya ang
bilí sang líbro sing napúlò ka dakô. He lowered the price of the book
by ten centavos. Kúlang karón ang ísdà. There is at present a dearth
or scarcity of fish. (cf. kabús, kulábus).

_kuláng_, (B) To fell, hew down, cause to fall, lay low, throw
down. Kulangá ang káhoy. Fell the tree. Nakuláng na ang káhoy
sa dútà. The tree is now laid low on the ground. Ginkuláng sang
bágyo ang dìmaísip nga mga káhoy. The storm laid low innumerable
trees. (cf. púkan).

_kuláng-kúlang_, Dim. of kúlang.

_kuláng-kuláng_, Fool, foolish, half-witted, mentally deficient or
underdeveloped, not all there.

_kulanít_, Lean, thin, frail. (cf. kanít, kalamanít, níwang, hágpis).

_kulantrílyo_, (Sp. culantrillo) A kind of plant, maiden-hair fern.

_kulántro_, (Sp. culantro) Coriander, a plant with aromatic seeds.

_kúlap_, A film on the eye; cataract. (cf. bítlig).

_kulapâ_, Flatnosed, snubnosed. (cf. dapâ, kurapâ).

_kulápon_, Having a cataract or film on the eye. (cf. bitligón).

_kulasísi_, To interrogate, question, examine,
investigate. Ginkulasisíhan níya ang íya mga sinákpan kon sín-o sa
íla ang nagbúhat sinâ. He examined his subjects to find out who had
done it. (cf. pangusísà, pángkot).

_kuláta_, See kolata.

_kulátay_, To call the chickens together. (cf. kurátay).

_kúl-aw_, Bad, poor, unsatisfactory, not up to the standard or
reasonable expectations; to be or become bad, etc., chiefly applied
to crops. Kúl-aw ang pinatubás ko sa siníng túig. I had a poor
harvest this year. Nagkúl-aw iníng humáy. The rice turned out poorly,
yielding e.g. less than half a ganta of "bugás" for every ganta of
unhulled rice.

_kúlbà_, Nervousness, shyness, timidity, fear; to be nervous, shy,
timid, afraid, etc. Ginakulbaán siá. He is upset, unnerved.


_kulbâ-kúlbà_, Dim. and Freq. of kúlbà. Indì ka magpakulbâkúlbà. Don't
be shy or afraid. Don't get nervous.

_kúlban, kúlbon_, etc. From kulúb--upside down.

_kulébra_, (Sp. culebra) A sudden collapse or attack, often ending
in death.

_kúlì_, (H) To be slow, do slowly, weakly, with difficulty. Nagkúlì
siá maglakát, kay matámbok siá. He was slow in walking, for he is
so fat. Kon pakiáw ginadásig níla ang trabáho, ápang ginakúlì kon sa
inádlaw. They are quick at work when paid a lump sum, but slow when
they are paid daily wages. (cf. kúrì).

_kuliápis_, Young, tender, thin, in the first stage of development,
applied particularly to the camunsel-fruit, peas and beans.

_kuliápò_, (B) See kuliápis. (cf. kupús).

_kuligót_, See kulihót.

_kulihót_, Late, tardy, too late, behind time, not in time, after
or beyond the usual (proper) time, coming after the expected time;
to be late, etc. (cf. kuligót, atrasádo, hudiánan).

_kulínat_, To pinch, squeeze, twist (the ears, etc.; cf. gulínat,
gurípat, guránit, kulípat).

_kulípat_, To squeeze, pinch, twist, nudge, poke; to strike, beat,
thrash. Kinulípat ang bána sang íya asáwa. The husband was pinched
by (got a beating from) his wife. (cf. gulínat, gurípat, kosípad,
guránit).

_kulirô_, Worn out, old, useless, without value, fake, sham, bogus,
counterfeit, false (of money). Kulirô nga kwárta. False money, money
that is not accepted as legal tender, being counterfeit or too much
worn. Kulirô nga balóta. A false ticket or vote.

_kulít_, A kind of bird. (cf. kurít).

_kúlit_, (H) See kúdlit. Walâ siá magpadalá sa ákon bisán sing isá
ka kúlit. He did not send me as much as one line.

_kulítis_, A kind of thorny plant with edible leaves.

_kulitút_, Wrinkled, etc. See koritót.

_kúlpa_, (Sp. culpa) Guilt, sin, fault, culpability, blame, crime,
wrong. (cf. salâ, sayúp).

_kúlpà_, To shrink, shrivel, contract, diminish, condense, reduce,
wane, settle, become small or smaller, lessen, decrease, grow less,
dwindle. Kinmúlpà ang humáy. The rice shrank. Nagkúlpà ang dútà sa
búhò. The earth in the hole settled, became compact and consequently
apparently less. (cf. kúpus).

_kulúb_, Upside down, wrong side up, bottom up, face downwards,
topsy-turvy, inverted; to turn upside down, etc. Kulúb ang
pínggan. Sín-o ang nagpakulúb sinâ? The plate is turned upside
down! Who turned it over? Pakúlba ang báso. Turn the glass bottom
up. Ginpakulúb níya ang baúl. He turned the trunk upside down. Kinúlban
siá sang íya sakayán. His boat turned turtle. (cf. sulî, balískad;
hayáng, kayâ--to face upwards, etc.).

_kulúg-an_, Strangling, throttling, choking, suffocating; garrote
(capital punishment); the neck, throat. (cf. kugâ).

_kuluhít_, (H) Anything made use of for the action of "kúhit"--to
nudge, etc.

_kulukínggan_, A kind of mollusk resembling a snail; a kind of a
flowering plant.

_kululánan, kululanán_, Cradle, crib. (cf. kúlan).

_kulúmbot_, See kulámbot.

_kulumúron_, (H) Murmuring, grumbling, complaining, complaint; to
murmur, complain. Anó na man ang íya kulumúron? What complaint has
he to make now? Nagkulumúron siá sinâ or tungúd sinâ. He grumbled or
murmured at that. (cf. kúmud).

_kulúng_, Curled; to curl. (cf. korô, kolóng).

_kulús_, (B) To shrink, shrivel, become compact, settle, pack, grow
less in bulk. Nagkulús ang kóprak. The copra shrank. (cf. kúpus,
kúlpà).

_kulútlan_, (H) Place or point of a stem or stalk where a flower,
etc. has been, or is to be, plucked. (From kotól). (cf. ilipoán).

_kuluyáb_, (H) A fan, anything used to fan a fire, etc. (cf. kuyáb,
táyhop, taláyhop).


_kúlyap_, The sharp, fine steel edge of a knife or weapon; to make
very thin, to sharpen, hone, whet. (cf. báid; kulyápis).

_kulyápis_, See kuliápis-thin.

_kumalagkô_, (H) The thumb. (cf. kamomóo).

_kumalíngking_, The little finger. (cf. kamalíngking, tingayón,
tingáytíngay, atingayón).

_kumári_, See komári.

_kúmba_, To throb, palpitate, beat fast. Nagakúmba ang íya
tagiposóon. His heart is throbbing.

_kumbá-kúmba_, Dim. and Freq. of "kúmba"--to throb,
etc. (cf. kubákubá).

_kúmbis_, A weave, a particular method of weaving wickerwork,
especially applied in weaving small plates, sieves, etc. of bamboo
splints; to weave, interlace, intertwine, entwine. Kinúmbis nga pagrára
(paglála). Weaving according to the kúmbis-method. Metaphorically: Walâ
sing madámò nga kúmbis. Easy. Without much ado. Without--fuss,--many
requirements. Isá ka buluhatón nga madámò sing kúmbis (kulukúmbis). A
difficult, intricate piece of work. (cf. lála, rára, habúl; pahitôhítò
rikobíkos).

_kúmbò_, A cake made of flour mixed with sugar and then fried.

_kúmbot_, (H) Cloak, coat, mantle, cover, wrapper; to wrap up with,
put on, etc. See kulámbot. Ikúmbot (ipangalúmbot) mo ang hábul sa
ímo láwas. Wrap the blanket round you. (cf. pangalúmbot, pangulúmbut).

_kúmboy_, (Sp. combo) Table-cruets, cruet stand, a stand for fruit
and sweets.

_kumbóya_, Partner, etc. See kambóya.

_kumboyahán_, Company, firm, business, trust, stock-company.

_kúmbung_, Curtain; to curtain off, draw or use a curtain. Kumbungí
akó. Curtain me off--or--Draw a curtain around me. Kumbungón ko lang
iníng hénero. I will make a curtain of this cloth. (cf. kortína).

_kúmkum_, To hold fast within the hand, to grasp, grip tightly
with closed fingers. Kumkumá sing maáyo ang kwárta, agúd índì
madágdag. Grasp the money tightly, lest it should drop. Pakumkumí ang
ímo aihádo sa íya mga ginikánan sing limá ka písos. Give the parents
of your godson five pesos to hold for him.

_kúmpad_, To shell, husk, shuck (beans, maize, etc.). Kumpará ang
kadiós, maís, etc. Shell the kadiós-peas, the corn, etc. (cf. kokót,
pangokót).

_kumpári_, See kompári id.

_kúmpay_, Fodder, grass, forage, provender; to feed, give fodder to
animals. Kumpayí ang kabáyo. Feed the horse.

_kumpáyan_, A field for producing fodder, zacate-field. (cf. kúmpay).

_kumpliányos_, (Sp. cumpleaños) Birthday. (cf. kinataóhan).

_kúmpul_, Maimed, crippled, disabled, mutilated, lamed, docked,
lopped, cropped, having a part or limb cut off; to maim, cripple,
disable, dock, mutilate, lame. Ginkumpulán sang buyóng ang íya nga
kamót. The robber maimed his hand. Nakumpulán ang ímo tiíl. Sín-o ang
nagkúmpul? Your foot is crippled. Who was it that crippled it? Kúmpul
ang íya nga bútkon. His arm is crippled, cut off, only a stump being
left. (cf. kímpul).

_kúmud_, See kómod--to sulk, etc.

_kumún_, Common; privy. See komún.

_kúmung_, To squat, sit down in katinkátin-fashion. May nakítà silá
nga táo nga nagakúmung sa idálum sang baláy. They saw a man squatting
under the house. (cf. kúung id. and more in use than kúmung).

_kúmus_, To knead, compress, squeeze, crumple within the hand. Kumúsa
ang almidón, linúgaw, hípon, etc. Compress or knead within the hand
the starch, rice-porridge, hipon-fish, etc. (cf. kúmkum).

_kúna_, (Sp. cuna) Cradle. (cf. abóy-abóy, batóng, duyándúyan).

_kúnà_, A congenital blemish or mark on the body, birth mark,
mole. (cf. álum).

_kunád_, (B) Limping, halting; to limp, halt, walk with a limp, walk
haltingly. Nagakunád siá. He is limping. Kunád siá. He has a halt in
his gait.

_kúnat_, To go or be slow, require much patience or labour. See
kánat id.


_kúndal_, A kind of savoury banana. (cf. túndal, karintóndan, térna).

_kundíman_, A native song and dance; kind of red cloth. (cf. kondíman
id.).

_kunína_, After some time, later on, in the future. Ang mga kabatáan
karón amó ang mga manugdumála sang bánwa kunína. The children of the
present will be the leaders of to-morrow--or--of the future.

_kúnkun_, To shrink, dwindle, grow less, contract, fall
off. (cf. kúpus, kúlpà, búhin).

_kúnlà_, Syllable; to speak brokenly, spell syllable by syllable.

_kunól_, To cease, stop flowing, be interrupted, run dry, to shrink,
dwindle. Nagkunól gid kaáyo ang mga negósyo. Business came to a
standstill (was greatly handicapped or interrupted). (cf. kúntà,
kúlpà, kúpus).

_kúnop_, A cover or cloak for the back, mantle, cape; to cover the
back with any kind of material as a protection against the sun,
cold or rain. Kunópi ang likód mo, kay may tún-og. Cover your back,
for there is a heavy dew. (cf. kúmbot, kulámbot, kulúmbot).

_kúnsad_, Descent, coming down; to descend, come down, particularly
used in connection with spirits descending from above. Nagkúnsad ang
Diós nga Espíritu Sánto sa mga Apóstoles. The Holy Ghost descended
upon the Apostles. Ang kúnsad (pagkúnsad) sang Diós nga Espíritu
Sánto. The descent of the Holy Ghost.

_kunsadán_, See kunsarán.

_kunsarán_, (H) Foundation, base; foot of a mountain, foot-hills. Sa
kunsarán sang búkid. At the foot of the mountain. (cf. kúnsad).

_kúntà_, (H) A particle implying a possibility, hope, wish or
desire for the future and regret for the past: Would, should, maybe,
perhaps, peradventure, likely; it would be, it were, would to God
that, let us hope; it would have been, might have been, etc. Maáyo
kúntà kon--. It were well if----. Maumpawán pa man siá kúntà. He may
recover yet; let us hope that he will recover. Maáyo kúntà kon amó inâ,
ápang----. Dápat kúntà nga amó inâ, ápang----Would to God it were
so, but----. Ay, matahúm gid kúntà kon ímo nabúhat inâ sádto ánay,
ápang ánhon mo karón, kay walâ mo pagbuháta? Oh, it would have been
so nice if you had done that in the past, but what can you do now, as
you have not done it then? Malúyag akó kúntà magtámbong dídto. I would
like to be present there. (cf. kuntánì, úntà, untánì, ráad, dáad).

_kúntà_, To stop flowing, dry up, cease to flow; shrink,
dwindle. (cf. kunól).

_kuntánì_, See kúntà.

_kúnus_, To become enfeebled, get weak, lose freshness or
energy. Nagakúnus ang ginháwa ko, kay ginagútum akó, kay bág-o pa lang
akó nagáyo sa balatían, kay ginakulbaán akó, etc. I feel quite weak,
for I am hungry, for I have but lately recovered from a sickness,
for I am unnerved, etc.

_kunús-kúnus_, Dim. and Freq. of kúnus.

_kunút_, To fold, plait, make plaits in clothes, to kilt; fold, plait,
doubling. Kunutí--or--kúnti ang bestído mo, ang sáya mo, ang pakô,
ang sótana, etc. Make plaits in your frock, your skirt, in the sleeve,
in the cassock, etc.

_kunút-kunút_, Dim. of kunút. Madámò ang mga kunútkunút sa íya
nawóng. His face is full of wrinkles.

_kúnya_, (Sp. cuña) Quoin, wedge; to wedge in, secure by a
wedge. Kunyahí ang arádo. Drive a wedge into your plough. (cf. písak).

_kunyáda, kunyádo_, (Sp. cuñada,--o.) Sister-in-law,
brother-in-law. (cf. bayáw).

_kúnyag_, Surprise, excitement, sudden joy or astonishment; to shake or
tremble with joy or pleasure, be surprised or astonished. Nagakúnyag
siá sa kalípay, kay may bág-o siá nga bestído kag madalî na lang
ang pándut. She is quite excited with joy, for she has a new
frock and the feast-day is near. Nagkulúnyag silá sang pagbáton
níla sang amó nga balítà. When they received that news they were
(pleasurably) surprised. Ang íya nga pagdaúg nagpakúnyag sa íya mga
ábyan. His victory gave great joy (pleasure, satisfaction) to his
friends. (cf. kibút).

_kúpa_, To mate, tread, copulate, cover, breed, applied to birds. Ang
mungâ ginakupáhan sang sulúg. The hen is being covered by the
cock. Ang mga píspis nagapangúpa. The birds are mating. (For other
animals kásta is mostly used).

_kúp-an_, From kupô--to cling to, etc.

_kúpang_, A hank of thread or yarn. (cf. ágpang, labág).

_kúpkup_, To clasp, hug, stick--, cleave--, hang on--, hold tight--,
hold fast--, to, as a lizard to a wall, a child to its mother,
etc. Nagakúpkup ang bátà sa likód sang íya ilóy. The child is clinging
to its mother's back. Kupkupí akó, kay ginatugnawán akó. Cling
to me, for I feel cold. Tan-awá iníng padér nga ginakupkupán sing
madámò nga mga tagútò. Look at this wall with many lizards clinging
to it. Pakupkupá lang ang balágon sa palápála. Just let the creeper
grow up the trellis. (cf. kápkap, kalápkap, kupó, kabúd, pangalápkap).

_kúpì_, To cross the legs. See kípì.

_kupî-kúpì_, Dim. and Freq. of kúpì. Also: To gather, draw or pull
together one's dress, to tuck or press in the skirt between the
knees, or the like. Magkupîkúpì (mangupîkúpì) kamó, agúd mahapús ang
pagági nínyo sa tungâ sang madámò nga mga táo. Draw your clothes
tight around you in order that you may easily slip through the
crowd. (cf. kipîkípì).

_kupitón_, (Derived from the Sp. copíta) A large drinking cup;
a small basket with wide meshes similar to a "bándì" or "alát",
but having a rather narrow mouth.

_kúpo_, (Sp. cupo) Quota, share; to share in, go shares (in), to
participate, particularly in a wager or stake; to bet, lay, lay a bet,
wager, to stake. Kupóhi akó sing pisítas. Bet me a peseta--or--put
up a peseta against my peseta.

_kupô_, To hang on, stick or cling to, adhere to. Ang tokô nagakupô
sa díngding. The gecko is clinging to the wall. (cf. kúpkup id).

_kúpog_, (B) To be anxious, be in a hurry to, crave after, long for,
want very much. Nagakúpog siá sa pagdúmug, sa pagbúthò, sa paglakát,
etc. He wants very much to wrestle, to go to school, to march or go
away, etc.

_kupón_, See kopón.

_kupóy_, Short-tailed, with a short, docked or cut-off tail,
bob-tailed. Kupóy ang ámon idô, manók, etc. Our dog, cock, etc. is
bob-tailed.

_kúpus_, To shrivel, contract, lessen, dwindle, go down,
grow-less,--small,--smaller. Nagkúpus na ang hubág mo? Has your
swelling (boil) gone down? Ang áhaw magakúpus. Newly harvested rice
will shrink. (cf. kulús, kúlpà).

_kupús_, Shrivelled, shrunken, dwindled. Kupús nga kakáw. A shrunken
or shrivelled cacao-fruit. (cf. kúpus).

_kúra_, To spread or throw amongst, to scatter. Ginkuráhan níya ang mga
bátà sing kwárta. He scattered some coins among the children--or--he
threw some money among the children.

_kúra_, (Sp. cura) Parish-Priest; care of souls; to take care of souls
or to be or become Parish-Priest. Sín-o ang nagakúra sa ínyo? Who is
your Parish-Priest? Ginakuráhan kamí ni Fuláno. Our Parish-Priest is
N.N. Nagkúra siá ánay kag ugáling nagobíspo. He was Parish-Priest at
first and then he became Bishop.

_kurágmang_, To push, run or rush against impetuously. Nakibút
akó, kay ginkurágmang akó sang idô. I got a shock, because the
dog rushed against me. Kuragmangá si nánay mo. Run quickly to your
mother. (cf. karágmang id., but kurágmang is the more usual form).

_kurapâ_, Flatnosed, snubnosed. (cf. kulapâ).

_kuratán_, One who is in a hurry, is impatient, wishes to do at once
whatever his heart is set upon. (cf. kurátkurát).

_kurát-kurát_, To be in a hurry, impatient, impetuous. (cf. kuratán).

_kurátsa_, A native folk dance. (cf. likî, tirána, kamantógol).

_kúrì_, (B) To be slow, difficult, laborious, hard, ticklish, requiring
patience and hard work, etc. See kúlì.

_kuribúng_, (B) Quiet, tranquillity, calmness, calm; quiet, tranquil,
calm; to be quiet, etc. See pakuribúng.


_kuriít_, To wrinkle one's face, make grimaces, make faces, etc. See
kolisáw id.

_kurínot, kurinót_, To form wrinkles or creases, to
wrinkle. (cf. korítot).

_kurinót_, Wrinkle, crease; wrinkled, creased. (cf. kulitút, koritót,
kuripót).

_kuripót_, Wrinkle, crease; wrinkled; stingy, close,
miserly. (cf. koritót, kurinót; maímot).

_kúris_, A stroke made with a pencil and the like, a line, a scratch,
a score; to line, mark, score, scratch lightly with a pointed tool or
instrument. Sín-o ang nagkúris sang papél? Who made these scratches on
the paper? Kinurísan sang símsim ang ákon bútkon. My arm got scratched
by the bamboo-branches. Ikúris lang ang tigíb sa tápì. Simply mark
the board with the chisel. (cf. kúdlit, kúdlis, kúlit, kúrit).

_kúrit_, See kúlit.

_kurít_, See kulít.

_kuritót_, See koritót--wrinkled, etc.

_kúrso_, (Sp. curso) Course; way, turn, direction (of a ship, vehicle,
etc.); to loosen the bowels, cause diarrhoea. Kinúrso akó sang báboy
nga kináon ko kagáb-i. I got diarrhoea from the pork I ate last night.

_kursunáda_, (Sp. corazonada) Presentiment of luck, confidence or faith
in something. Mapatád akó sa hárì, kay may kursunáda akó sinâ. I will
bet on the King (of cards), because I have faith in him.

_kúrsus_, To give or cause diarrhoea. Kinúrsus siá. He had an attack
of diarrhoea. (of kúrso).

_kúrug_, See kúdug--to shake, quiver, tremble, shiver; to vibrate.

_kurúg-kurúg_, Dim. and Freq. of kúrug. To tremble, vibrate.

_kurukúbo_, (B) To flap the wings, etc. See kóbo, kobókóbo.

_kurukutúk_, (B) To cluck, call the chickens together, said of a
hen. Ang mungâ nagakurukutúk. The hen is clucking. (cf. karakaták).

_kurúm_, (B) To cause to shiver with fever, etc. Ginakurúm siá sang
tákig. He is shivering with a cold fever.

_kurúng_, Cage, pen, sty, hen-roost, aviary, hen-coop,
chicken-run. (cf. tángkal, which is used exclusively of a pigsty).

_kúrung_, To shake, tremble, etc. See kúrug, kúdug.

_kurúpog_, (B) To attack, assault, set upon, assail, fall
upon, go for. Ginkurúpog níya akó. He attacked me. Indì mo siá
pagkurupógon. Don't set upon him.

_kurútay_, To call chickens together at feeding time by repeating
loudly "grrr". Kurutáya ang mga manók. Call the chickens together. Indì
siá makahibaló magkurútay. He does not know how to call the chickens
together.

_kuruyáb_, (B) Fan. See kuluyáb. (kuyáb).

_kusá_, (B) Rough, blunt of speech, rough-spoken, uncivil, uncourteous,
unceremonious, rude, coarse. Kusá siá sing hámbal. He is rude of
speech--or--He speaks bluntly or harshly.

_kusáhos_, Meat cut in thin strips and dried; jerked beef; to cut
in thin strips. Kusahósa ang kárne. Cut the meat in thin strips
(and dry it). Kusahósi akó sing báka. Cut up for me some beef into
thin strips. Ikusáhos akó ánay siníng búgsò nga kárne. Kindly cut
this piece of meat in thin strips for me. (cf. kasáhos, but "kusáhos"
is more commonly used). (cf. tápa--to slice meat; dried sliced meat;
ugá or binulád--dried fish).

_kúsam_, To chew, mumble, eat with closed lips. Kusáma lang ang
súman. Chew the "súman" (with closed lips). (cf. úsang, úsap--chew,
masticate).

_kusamód_, To pout, sulk, etc. Anó ang ginakusamód mo? Why are you
sulky? See kósmod.

_kúsdong_, To scowl, frown, look sour or sullen. (cf. kísdong, kúsmud).

_kusganán_, Strong, powerful, mighty. (cf. kúsug, isganán, gamhánan).

_kusî_, See kosî.

_kusí_, A multicoloured, parrot-like bird, which however cannot talk.

_kúskus_, To pull--, tear--, drag--, down or off; to twang,
touch, brush, strike (the chords of a musical instrument, or the
like). Kuskusá ang gitára. Strike the guitar. Maálam galî siá magkúskus
sang sísta. He even knows how to play the sistrum or guitar. Kuskusí
ang bunáng. Rub (brush) the yarn.

_kúskus_, To comb--, curry--, groom--, a horse or the like.

_kúskus-balónos_, Tearing (pulling) off balónos-vines, i.e. a hard
and useless work. Much ado about nothing. Balónos nga walâ sing
kúskus. Easy work (job). Without much ado.

_kúsmud_, See kósmod--to sulk, pout, look offended, etc.

_kusól_, A kind of grass.

_kústa_, Red yarn. See kósta.

_kúsò_, See kósò--to rub.

_kusúg_, Muscle, flesh, brawn, meat; strength, power, might, bravery.

_kúsug_, To be or become strong, robust, stalwart, strapping, brawny,
sturdy, sinewy, mighty, powerful, puissant, potent. Kútub sang pagáyo
sang íya balatían nagkúsug siá liwán. Since his recovery from an
illness he has become strong again.

_kusúg_, Hard, stiff, dry; shrunk, cold, chilled; to be or become hard,
chilled, etc. Iníng maís mabúdlay podporón, kay kusúg. It is difficult
(or tiresome) to crush this corn, for it is very hard. Pasilónga
ang báka, agúd índì magkusúg sa ulán. Put the cow under shelter,
lest it should get chilled in the rain.

_kútà_, Fort, fortress, prison, jail; to imprison, put in jail. Yanáng
táo nga tampalásan dápat nga dákpon sang polís kag kutáon. That rascal
should be arrested by the police and put in jail. (cf. pamakurán,
bilanggóan, karsíl, húnong, bilánggò).

_kuták_, To cackle; cackling. Ang mungâ nagakuták. The hen is
cackling. (cf. kurukutúk--to cluck).

_kuták-kuták_, Dim. and Freq. of kuták.

_kutál_, Loose, shaky, wobbly, not firmly set or secured. (cf. hutál).

_kútal_, To get loose, shake, lack firmness, wobble. Nagakútal ang
ákon ngípon--or--kutál ang ákon ngípon. My tooth is loose. (cf. hútal).

_kutál-kútal_, Dim. and Freq. of kútal. (cf. hutálhútal).

_kútam, kutám_, To smack one's lips; to talk, prate, prattle. Indì
ka magkútam. Don't smack your lips. Fig. Don't talk about it. Keep
silence about it. (cf. támsak, tákam).

_kutám-kútam_, Dim. and Freq. of kútam.

_kutána_, Almost exclusively used in the freq. form
"pangutána"--to ask, inquire, solicit information. Mangutána
ka sa íya. Ask him for information. Anó ang ginapangutána
mo? What is it you wish to know? What are you inquiring
about? Pangutánhi--or--pangután-i siá. Interrogate, question or
interpellate him. Pangutánha--or--pangután-a siá. Ask him. Inquire
of him. (cf. pakiána, pamángkot, pángkot).

_kútap_, Film, cream, skin, etc. on the surface of a liquid; film,
cataract on the eye; to become filmy or form a film. Iníng gátas my
kútap. This milk has a film of cream. Ginakutápan ang íya matá sing
maputî. His eye is affected with a white cataract. (cf. kúlap, bítlig).

_kutápon_, Filmy, etc. from kútap. (cf. kulápon, bitligón).

_kútaw_, To mix a dry powdered substance with a liquid, as flour,
sugar, cement, starch, sand, etc. with water or the like. Kutáwa ang
almidón. Soak the starch. Mix the starch with water. Kutáwi akó sing
arína sa pásta. Mix for me some flour with water for paste. Ikútaw akó
siníng tayóbong. Please, dissolve (mix) this tayóbong in (with) water.

_kutáw_, To float, remain on the surface. (cf. kubág, utáwútaw).

_kutáw-kútaw_, Dim. and Freq. of kútaw--to mix with water, dilute. Indì
nínyo pagkutáwkutáwon iníng talapuánan sing mga táo nga dílì hamílì
kag matárung ang íla katuyoán. Don't allow into this society any men
who have no honest or upright intention.

_kutî_, (B) Cat, puss, pussy, kitten, mouser. Kutî nga
tigúlang. Grimalkin, old cat. Kutî nga kapón. Gib-cat. Kutî nga
laláki. Tom-cat. Kutî nga babáye. Tabby cat. (cf. kuríng).

_kúti_, Bustle, hustle; to bustle, hustle, be active (in performing the
duties of a household). Dáyon gid lang may ginakúti siá sa baláy. She
is always bustling about something in the house.

_kutibáw_, To disturb, stir up, excite, interfere with. Ayáw kutibawá
ang putyúkan kon índì ka buút kutúton. Don't disturb the bees, if you
don't like to be stung. (cf. labúgay, súdyot, pasilabút, pakitarakáng).

_kutíkut_. To touch, pinch, stir. (cf. kotíkot, kolíkog, kilíkog).

_kutíkúti, kutí-kutí_, Dim. and Freq. of kúti. Anó ang ginakutíkutí
mo? What are you so busy about? What are you doing?

_kutîkútì_, Anything bearing some resemblance to a cat; a tip-cat
(a toy and game played by children); the young tender fruit of the
koló--tree and the young jack-fruit, so called from having some
resemblance to a cat.

_kutí-kutíhon_, Bustling, hustling, busybody, meddlesome, curious,
inquisitive. (kúti).

_kutím_, A disease that attacks dogs and pigs; mange, scurvy.

_kutimón_, Affected with "kutím", mangy, scabby. Ang may kutím
ginatawág nga kutimón. One infected with the mange is called mangy.

_kutimóy_, Small, undersized, dwarfish, stunted, kept back in growth,
pygmean. (cf. putót, aríarí, agílagíl).

_kutíng-kúting_, To draw, pull, tear at (as cats); to practise on,
play with annoying perseverance any stringed musical instrument. Pírme
gid lang siá nagakutíngkúting sang piáno, gitára, biolín, etc. He
is constantly hammering away at the piano, playing the guitar,
violin, etc.

_kutíplong_, (B) A very little, a trifle, an exceedingly small
amount. Kutíplong lang nga humáy ang ginhátag níya sa ákon. He gave
me only a very small amount of rice. (cf. púdyot, kusî, tikî).

_kutisádo_, (Sp. cotizado) Quoted, listed (of prices, etc.).

_kutisasyón_, (Sp. cotización) Quotation, price-list, current price.

_kutkuták_, To cackle. See kuták, kutákkuták id.

_kúto_, Louse. (cf. túma; botól--the mother-louse; kayúmad--a young
louse; lusâ--the eggs of lice, a nit).

_kútò_, To increase, add, augment, swell; be crowded, packed, squeezed
together. Nagakútò lang ang mga táo sa simbáhan. The people in church
are becoming crowded, (are ever increasing in numbers). Nagkútò pa
siá gánì sa paghámbal. He added to what he had said--or--he still
continued talking. (cf. dúgang, kótò).

_kutón_, (Sp. coton) Printed cotton; shirt-waist, a short shirt
(woman's).

_kutóng_, To stop flowing, said of milk. (cf. kunól).

_kutós_, Hot-tempered, bad-tempered, choleric, irascible, getting
angry on the slightest provocation. Kutós siá nga táo. He is very
hot-tempered. (cf. putóng, pikón, tarádyon).

_kutóskutós_, Dim. of kutós. Andamí ang paghámbal mo sa íya, kay siá
kutóskutós sing pamatásan. Be careful what you say to him, for he
has a rather hot temper--or--he is somewhat irascible. (cf. pikón).

_kútoy, kutóy_, See kótoy, kotóy.

_kutsába_, (Probably a corruption of the Sp. ochava) A small
bowl, cup or vessel for drawing liquids from jars and pots or the
like. (cf. otsába).

_kutsára_, (Sp. cuchara) Spoon; shovel. (cf. irós, irirós).

_kutsarón_, (Sp. cucharon) A large spoon; ladle.

_kútub_, From; since (time). Kútub sang pagtúga sang Diós sang
kalibútan túbtub karón. From the time that God created the world till
now. Kútub sádto----. From or since that time----. Kútub sa (sang)
magamáy nga mga káhoy túbtub sa mga dalágkò----. From the small trees
to the large----. All the trees, whether small or large,----.

_kutúd_, Boundary, line, rule; ruler (for drawing straight lines,
etc.).

_kútut_, A sting; to sting (of insects). Kinutútan akó sang putyókan. I
was stung by a bee. (cf. sugúd).

_kutyángkot_, Various, divers, sundry, several; an assortment or
collection containing a variety of things. (cf. yangkótyángkot).

_kuúb_, (B) With bent head; to bow or bend the head, stoop, hang the
head in shame, incline the body forwards and downwards. Nagakuúb ang
íya úlo. His head is bent. Nagpakuúb siá sang íya úlo sa dakô nga
huyâ. She hung her head in great shame. Magpakuúb ka sang ímo láwas,
kay ang ganháan manobô. Stoop down for the door is low. (cf. dukô).

_kuúl_, Snail. (cf. poól, ígi).

_kuúm_, A handful; small quantity or number. (cf. kúum).

_kúum_, To take a handful, grasp with the hand; a handful, as much
as one can hold within the hand with closed fingers. Kuúma ang ákon
bútkon, kay maálay. Grasp and feel my arm, for it is stiff.

_kuún_, (B) To say, tell, speak; word, saying, report, utterance. Kún-a
tána. Tell him. Kún-an mo tána nga----. Tell him that----. Anó man
ang kuún na? What did he say? (cf. koón, silíng, hámbal, súgid, púlong.

_kúung_, To sit down, squat on the floor. (cf. kúmung, katínkátin).

_kuúng-kúung_, Dim. and Freq. of kúung. Indì ka magságad magkuúng-kúung
kag maglibánglíbang sa bátà. Don't always sit on the floor and attend
to (play with, fondle, hug, etc.) the baby.

_kúut_, To grope, feel for, fish out with the hand, put one's hand or
arm into a hole, or the like. Kuúta ang kwárta sa pálhuk, ang ítlog sa
búhò, etc. Fish out the money from the pocket, grope for the egg in
the hole, etc. Kuúti akó sing sigarílyo sa bólsa mo. Dig down into
your pocket and give me a cigarette. Ikúut akó ánay siníng búhò,
básì nangítlog dirâ ang mungâ. Please feel in this hole, maybe the
hen has laid an egg there.

_kuyáb_, To fan. Kuyabí akó. Fan me. Kinuyabán níya ang kaláyo sang
kalálaw. He fanned the fire into flame with the "kalálaw". (cf. kayáb,
kuluyáb, kuruyáb).

_kuyáb-kúyab_, Dim. and Freq. of kuyáb. Also: to inflame, incite,
instigate.

_kuyábug_, A young pigeon or dove. (cf. kayábug).

_kuyábut_, To adhere firmly to, stick to, cling to; to take hold of,
pull, drag. (cf. kóbot, kapút, bútong).

_kúyad_, Shrunk, shrivelled, wrinkled; to shrink, shrivel. (cf. kúpus,
kupús, kúlpà, pangayúmkum, pangayúgpus, kulús).

_kuyámpad_, To run, scamper off or to and fro. See kuyápad id.

_kuyámpad_, Flat-faced or square-faced, not round.

_kúyang_, To bring forth, produce, put out, set out or forth, exhibit,
display, bring to light. Ikúyang ang mga pagkáon sa lamésa. Put the
food on the table. Ginkuyángan akó níya sang íya álì nga tabákò. He
put before me his choice cigars. He produced for me the cigars he
prefers to all others.

_kuyáp_, A fit, swoon, especially an epileptic fit, epilepsy. Ginaabút
siá sang kuyáp. She has an epileptic fit, (has an attack of epilepsy).

_kuyápad_, To walk or run about swiftly, hurry to and fro. Anó
na man ang ginakuyápad mo? Why are you running about in such a
hurry? (cf. kuyámpad).

_kuyápad, kuyapád_, Flat nosed or square-faced, not round. (kuyámpad
id.).

_kuyáphaw_, Unconventional, frivolous, not respectful (in manners,
gait, etc.); lacking grace or beauty, common-place, plain-faced,
homely, not very pleasant to look upon. Kuyáphaw siá nga táo. He
is unconventional in his manners. He is very plain. He has rather
homely features.

_kuyapíd_, Small, shrivelled, stunted, shrunk, below normal size. Indì
akó magbakál sing mahál sang ímo mga páhò, kay madámò sa íla ang
kuyapíd. I won't pay a high price for your mangoes, because many of
them are shrunk or below normal size. (cf. kupús, kuliápis, kutimóy).

_kuyápin_, Lyre, flute. (cf. kudiápi).

_kuyapón_, Pertaining to, or subject to, epileptic fits. (cf. kuyáp).

_kuyáput_, To grasp, grip, take hold of. (cf. kápyot, kapút, úyat).

_kuyáw_, To shun, avoid, dislike, have nothing to do with, keep away
from, keep aloof, withdraw, especially applied to a woman who shuns
her husband or who shuns the society of men in general. Ginakuyawán
siá níya. She shuns him. (cf. aklihís, likáw).

_kuyáyha_, A kind of flying lizard that is very injurious to
coconut-palms and other plants, flying dragon.

_kúymi_, Treasurer, keeper, guardian, preserver; to preserve, keep,
guard. Kúymi-bánwa--Municipal Treasurer. Kúymi-puód. Provincial
Treasurer.

_kuyúg_, Shaky, unsteady; to be or become shaky, unsteady, weak,
slow, feeble. Nagakuyúg siá sa paglakát, kay malúya pa siá tungúd sang
balatían nga íya nga ginágyan. He walks slowly for he is still weak
from the illness he has passed through. (cf. kúlì, lúyò, lúya, húyang).

_kuyúg-kúyug, kuyúg-kuyúg_, Dim. and Freq. of kuyúg. Also: to reel,
stagger.

_kuyúm_, To contract, shrivel, shrink, wither, (of leaves etc.;
cf. kúpus, kulús, kúlpà, láyà).

_kuyúng-kúyung_, To move, stir, make a noise. (cf. lihók, líhok,
gióng-gíong, húlag, íwos, híos; gamó, gáhud).

_kuyús_, Pen, quill, plume, a long strong feather in the wing of
a bird.

_kuyús_, Surprise, shock, sudden fright, start; sudden, without
warning, unprepared; to startle, surprise, shock. Nagpakuyús siá
sa ákon sang íya pagabút sa baláy sa tungâ sang gáb-i. He gave me a
surprise when he arrived home at midnight. Kuyús nga kamatáyon. Sudden,
unprepared death. (cf. panguyús).

_kwadérno_, (Sp. cuaderno) Composition-book, note-book.

_kwádra_, (Sp. cuadra) Stable, horse-stable.

_kwádro_, (Sp. cuadro) Square; frame, picture-frame; picture, painting.

_kwáho_, (Sp. cuajo) Rennet, maw, especially the yellowish membrane
of a chicken's crop which is often used as a remedy for boils,
ulcers, etc.

_kwáko_, A smoking pipe, tobacco-pipe. (cf. sánsoy).

_kwan_, A slipshod way of supplying a word or name one does not
know or remember for the moment; Mr. So-and-So, what d'ye call 'em,
thingummy, thingumbob. Also used as a verb. Diín si Kwan? Where is
Mr. So-and-So? Dî mo pagkwanón ang kwan, kay básì magkwán----. Don't
do what do you call it to what is its name, for the result may be I
don't know what----.

_kwánto_, (Sp. cuanto) How much. (cf. pilá).

_kwarénta_, (Sp. cuarenta) Forty. (cf. kap-atán).

_kwarenténas_, (Sp. cuarentena) Quarantine.

_kwarésma_, (Sp. cuaresma) Lent, lenten fast.

_kwárta_, (Sp. cuarta) Coin, cash, money, wherewithal; one
fourth, the fourth part; to buy. Kwartahí akó sing mantíkà. Buy
me some lard. Nagapakwárta ikáw siníng ísdà? Are you selling this
fish? (cf. pílak).

_kwartél_, (Sp. cuartel) Barracks, quarters for soldiers, police or
the like, prison, jail, detention-station.

_kwartíyo_, (Sp. cuartillo) The fourth part of the old Spanish real,
about three centavos Philippine money.

_kwárto_, One fourth, quarter; room, habitation, chamber,
apartment. (cf. hulút).

_kwátro_, (Sp. cuatro) Four. A las kwátro. At four o'clock. (cf. ápat).

_kwélyo_, (Sp. cuello) Collar; neck. (cf. kolár, kolíntas).

_kwími_, See kúymi--treasurer.




L


_l_, This letter is pronounced as in English. Variously combined
with vowels it is frequently made use of in the Visayan Dialect
to form adjectives, nouns and plural verbal forms, e.g. bumulúthò,
pumalaháyag, kalalát-an, sululátan, isulúlat, nagilinúm silá, nagilísol
silá, nagdaláyaw silá, nagailinútud silá, etc. (Búthò, paháyag, láut,
sulát, inúm, ísol, dáyaw, útud, etc.).
Many terms that in Hiligáynon contain the letter "l" have the letter
"r" instead in Hiniráya, or Binukídnon, e.g. walâ--warâ, ílog--írog,
dalága--darága, malayô--marayô, lángsì--rángsì, etc.

_láang_, Snare, noose, loop; to ensnare, etc. (cf. lábang).

_láas_, To pursue, run after, chase. Ang manók ginaláas sang
idô. The dog is running after the chicken. Laása ang báboy. Run
after the pig. Palaási ang kánding sang idô. Send the dog after the
goats. Ginláas akó níya, ápang walâ siá makaábut sa ákon. He chased
me, but could not catch me. (cf. lagás).

_laás-láas_, Dim. and Freq. of láas. Also: A fugitive, run-away,
loafer, vagabond. (cf. tiyógtiyóg).

_láaw_, (B) To watch, observe, mark, keep an eye on, look out of
a window, or the like. Nagláaw silá sa íya túbtub nga nagkábus
ang íya likód. They watched him till his back disappeared (in
the distance). Laáwa siá sa bintánà. Keep an eye on him from the
window. (cf. lántaw, gáwa, bántay).

_labá_, (Sp. lavar) To wash clothes; to beat, strike, slash, drub,
lash, whack, wallop. Maglabá ka sang naúg. Wash the garment. Lábhi
(labahí) sing maáyo ang ákon mga ulús. Wash my clothes well. Ilabá
akó ánay sang ákon báyò, kay may kadtoán akó. Kindly wash my jacket
for me, for I have to go out. Ari na dirí ang linábhan mo. Your wash
or laundry is here. May lalábhan ikáw? Have you any clothes to be
washed? Ginlabahán akó níya sang íya bastón sa likód. He struck me
on the back with his stick. Labahí ang kabáyo sang látigo. Lash the
horse with the whip. (cf. búnak; búnal, bálbal, bákol, etc.).

_lábà_, (H) To be, make or become long, to lengthen. Sugponí ang
kalát, agúd maglábà. Tie another piece to the rope to lengthen
it (lit. that it may become long). Labáa ang kalát. Lengthen the
rope. Labáa ang pagútud sang biníklan. Cut off a long piece of the
split bamboo. Nalabáan akó siníng delárgo. These trousers are too
long for me. (cf. lábug).

_labábo_, (Sp. lavabo) Lavabo; wash-stand, wash-basin, wash or
toilet-table. (cf. planggána, palanggána, labadór).

_labád_, To pass by or through, flit past, cross. Naglabád siá sa ákon
baláy nga dáw hángin. He passed by my house like the wind. Nalabadán
(nalabarán) ang ákon painóíno sang panghunâhúnà nga----. The thought
crossed my mind that----. Ilabád ang áwto sa plása. Drive the auto
through the public square. (cf. labáy).

_labáda_, (Sp. lavado) Laundry-work, wash, laundry, clothes washed
(linábhan) or to be washed (lalábhan).

_labád-lábad_, Dim. and Freq. of labád. Indì ka maglabádlábad sa ámon
atubángan. Don't pass to and fro in front of us. (cf. labáylábay).

_labadór_, (Sp. lavador) A wash-stand, washhand-stand, washhand-basin,
wash-basin, laver. (cf. labábo, planggána).

_lábag_, To twist, turn, screw, wring, wrench. Karón labágon ko ang
líog mo. In a moment I will wring your neck. Ilábag akó sang ákon mga
linábhan. Kindly wring the wash for me. Indì ka makalábag sinâ. You
cannot twist that. (cf. lúbag, pugâ, lúbid).

_labág_, A twist, turn; twisted, wrung, wrenched; a hank (of yarn,
etc.).

_labág-lábag_, Dim. and Freq. of lábag. Indì malabáglábag ang íya
sinâ nga kamatuóran. The truth of this cannot be twisted, i.e. no
one can deny this truth.

_labáha_, (Sp. navaja) Razor. Patalumá ang ákon labáha. Sharpen my
razor. (cf. nabáha).

_labák-labák_, Shower, volley (of stones, rifle shots, etc.); to
volley, clatter, patter. (cf. árak, bárak, barákbarák).

_labán_, More than half, majority, the larger part or share; more,
greater, larger (of quantity or numbers); to be, do, etc. more, exceed,
surpass, outdo. Ang labán sang ákon humáy ginbalígyà ko na. I have
sold more than half of my rice already. Ihátag mo sa íya ang tungâ sang
tinápay, índì ka maglabán sa íya--or--índì mo siá paglabanán. Give him
half of the bread, don't keep the larger share for yourself. Ginlabán
níya ang paghátag sa kay Pédro. He gave Pedro more. Nalabanán akó
níya sing duhá ka páhò. He got two mangoes more than I did.

_labandéra_, (Sp. lavandera) Washer-woman, laundress. (cf. mamumunák).

_labandéro_, (Sp. lavandero) Washer-man, laundry-man. (cf. mamumunák).

_lábang_, To ensnare, catch, rope, tie or intercept with a rope. (The
ends of the rope are held by two men, who, on the approach of the
animal, throw the rope under its neck and then quickly change places
so as to encircle the animal's neck with the rope). Maglábang ka
sang kabáyo--or--labánga ang kabáyo. Catch the horse by means of a
rope. (cf. lábay).

_lábang_, To take within one's range, encroach upon. See ábang.

_labangán_, Snare, noose; fetter, shackles; line, boundary, front,
fighting line; trenches. (cf. lábang).

_láb-as_, Fresh, uncooked, unsalted, raw; to be fresh, etc. (of
meat, fish, vegetables, etc.). Láb-as pa iníng ísdà? Is this fish
fresh? Nalab-asán akó siníng hípon, kay daw nagapisíkpísik pa kon
tan-awón. This hipon-fish looks fresh to me, for it looks as if it were
still moving. Indì mo pagkán-on ang kárne nga láb-as (hiláw). Don't
eat raw meat. Walâ mo paglagáa sing maáyo iníng unúd, kay daw láb-as
pa (hiláw pa). You did not boil this meat well, for it tastes almost
raw. (cf. hiláw).

_lab-ásan_, Any receptacle for raw or uncooked provisions. Alát nga
lab-ásan--a basket for holding fresh fish. Also: Fishing boat, a boat
used in buying fresh fish from the fishermen at sea. (cf. láb-as,
lab-asíro, lalab-ásan, ralab-ásan).

_lab-asíro_, A dealer in--, a vender (vendor) of--, fresh fish, etc.;
fish-monger, (cf. láb-as and the Sp. suffix -ero).

_labatíba_, (Sp. lavativa) Enema, clyster, syringe; to give or apply
an enema. Labatibáhi siá. Give him an enema. (cf. ayúda, kalíya).

_labaúng_, Depression, hole, low-lying land. (cf. limpásong, libaóng).

_labáw_, Over, above, higher, taller, excelling, exceeding; to surpass,
exceed. Nagalabáw sa simbáhan iníng kawáyan. This bamboo is higher than
the church. Nalabawán akó níya karón sa kataasón. He is now taller
than myself. Ipalabáw ang áton hayáhay sa íla nga bandéra. Put our
flag above their banner--or--raise our flag to a greater height than
their banner. Si Fuláno labáw sing dungúg sa kay Pédro. N.N. is more
famous than Peter. Indì ka magpalabáw. Don't be stuck-up or haughty.

_lábaw_, To go over, cross an elevation or height. Naglábaw ang bató sa
atóp sang baláy. The stone went over the roof of the house. Nalabáwan
sang bóla ang kodál. The ball went over the fence.

_lábay_, To girdle--, ringbark--, a tree. Labáya ang páhò, agúd
maglúmpaw. Ringbark the mango tree so that it may wither.

_labáy_, To pass, flit through; go by. Naglabáy sa ákon painóíno
nga----. The thought flitted through my mind that----. (cf. labád,
lubás, lígad).

_labáy_, A polite excuse for interrupting a conversation or for
introducing a new topic. Labáy man ang ákon, sán-o ka pa dirí? Excuse
me for interrupting, when did you arrive here?

_lábay_, To catch or ensnare by means of a rope. See
lábang. Labáya--labánga.

_labáy-lábay, labáy-labáy_, Dim. and Freq. of labáy. Also: to
pass to and fro, shake from side to side, brandish, flourish,
wave. Nagalabáylábay siá sang íya bastón. He is waving his stick
(as a signal). Ginlabáylabáyan níya kamí sing binángon. He brandished
(shook, flourished) a bolo at us (as a threat). Ang bátà nagalabáylábay
sa ámon luyó, kay buút nga hatágan sang ámon kalanónon. The boy is
circling around us, because he would like to be given some of our
eatables. (cf. balábad, barumbáda).

_labáy-labáy_, Changeable, capricious; erratic, fickle, variable,
ever changing the--, or introducing a new--, subject. Labáylabáy
ang íya sugilánon. His conversation is erratic, ever changing and
changing about.

_lábhag_, Weal, bruise, mark of a whip or the like; to form a weal,
leave a mark or weal. Naglábhag sa láwas níya ang ági sang bilogón. The
stroke of the rod left a mark upon his body. Nalabhagán siá sang
búnal. He has the marks of a whipping on him. Búnal nga walâ sing
lábhag. A whipping without weals i.e. anything that severely hurts
the feelings or sensibilities without bodily pain. (cf. labúd).

_lábhan_, From labá.

_lábhang_, The larger fragments of rice-husks or rice-chaff separated
from the grain by pounding, bran; the smaller fragments are called
"líntok" and both together "upá".

_labhangón_, Full of, or mixed with, chaff called "lábhang". Bugás
nga labhangón. Rice mixed with chaff.

_labí_, More, most, very much, in a higher or highest degree,
exceedingly, especially, to exceed, surpass. Labí nga maáyo--or--labíng
maáyo nga----. It is best--or--it would be best if----. Malúyag man
siá magpadáyon sang íya pagtoón sa Ilóngílong, ápang labî pa gid sa
Manílà. He wants to continue his studies in Iloilo, but he would
much prefer to do so in Manila. Maghigúgma ka sa Diós labí sa nga
tanán. Love God above all things. Ang mga labíng lutáw nga táo siníng
bánwa----. The most prominent people in this town----. Sín-o sa íla
nga duhá ang labíng but-ánan? Which of the two is more prudent? Ang
íya nga kagayón daw sa dílì malabihán. It seems as if her beauty
can scarcely be surpassed. Maáyo nga magdúaw ka sa íya, labí na gid
kay----. It would be well for you to visit him, especially as----. Ang
labíng madalî, labíng maáyo. The sooner, the better. Ang labíng
malíp-ot nga hámbal amó ang labíng maáyo. The shorter the speech the
better. (cf. kapín).

_lábiaw_, To thin out, etc. See lábyaw.

_labihánon_, Eminent, special, chief, preferential, excellent,
foremost, privileged. (cf. labí).

_labí-lábi_, Dim. and Freq. of labí. Also: A foetus or embryo
miscarried during the early stages of development. (cf. palabílábi--to
be haughty, stuck up, etc.).

_lábiog_, To flick, flip, etc. See lábyog.

_labít_, The string of the tongue, fraenum linguae, the fold or
membrane that binds down the tongue.

_labít-lábit_, The wattle (of fowls, etc.).

_láblab_, To wash away, undermine, eat away, etc. See áb-ab, kábkab id.

_lábni_, To take, seize, appropriate. Ginlábni níya ang ákon
líbro, káy dúmdum níya nga íya. He took my book, thinking it was
his. Nakalábni siá sang lápis. He seized the pencil. (cf. lábnit,
sábnit, kúhà). N.B. Lábni has also at times the meaning of "lámang"--to
take something by mistake thinking the object taken to be one's own.

_lábnit_, To snatch, seize furtively or stealthily. Labnitá ang kálò
níya. Snatch his hat. (cf. sábnit).

_lábnog_, A kind of plant. Its leaves are used as a remedy for
headache.

_lábnok_, A plant whose soft young shoots are edible like those of the
"salámyog."

_lábnot_, To draw or pull out with a jerk, jerk out, grab, grasp,
seize with some force, take hold of suddenly and swiftly. Labnotá
ang bastón. Grab the stick. (of gúnut, hábnus, húnus).

_labô_ A blow, stroke, slash (of any sharp-edged instrument);
to strike, scotch, smite, slash, cut. Ilabô sa idô ang ímo
binángon. Strike the dog with your bolo. Laboá ang mán-og. Scotch
the snake. Ginlaboán níla iníng tápì, sing makátlo, kay makítà pa
ang tátlo ka ági. Sín-o balá ang naglabô? They made three cuts
in this board, for the three marks can be seen still. Who can
have made those cuts? Pinatáy siá sang buyóng sa isá ka labô sang
talibóng. He was killed by the brigand with one stroke of his heavy
bolo. (láb-on--laboón).

_labó_, To be or become tasty; savoury (of squashes and tubers, etc.;
cf. rabó id.).

_lábo_, To dye, steep in colour. (cf. lúgum, húlum).

_láb-ok_, A sip, draught, dose, mouthful of liquids; to sip, take
a draught. Maginúm ka lang sing isá ka láb-ok. Just take a sip or
draught. Nagláb-ok siá sing bíno kag naglakát. He sipped some wine
and went on his way. Palab-oká siá sang ímo tubâ. Give him a mouthful
of your toddy. Ipaláb-ok mo sa ákon yanáng ilímnon. Let me taste that
beverage. (cf. tígsim).

_labó-labó_, Striped, alternate (of colours); to alternate colours
(in dyeing cloth, etc.). (cf. lábo).

_labôlabô_, (B) Dropsy. (cf. palanghubág, palamanóg).


_labôlaboón_, (B) Dropsical.

_láb-on_, (H) Cont. of laboón from labô. Láb-a (láb-on mo) siá. Smite
or slash him.

_láb-on_, To spread over, cover, extend, (cf. lámbon, lúkup, húmlad).

_láb-on_, To put down in disorder, litter the floor, etc. See háb-on.

_láb-ot_, To reach, etc. See dáb-ot.

_labóy_, Loose, slack, not tight, not taut; to loosen, get loose,
slacken. Naglabóy ang páha ko. My belt got loose. Húgta ang páha mo,
agúd índì maglabóy ang sárwal mo. Tighten your belt, lest your trousers
should get slack. Laboyí ang higót sang dúyan, kay támà katáas. Let out
the rope of the hammock, for it is too high. Nalaboyán ko ang kalát. I
loosened the rope. Laboyí ang kalát, kay támà katáning. Slacken the
rope, for it is too tight. Ilabóy akó ánay siníng higót. Please loosen
this string for me.

_lábra_, (Sp. labrar) To strike, cut, hew down; dress, trim, carve,
hew. Labrahí ang káhoy sang binángon. Trim or dress the wood with the
bolo. Wásay ang ilábra mo sa káhoy nga pulukanón nga halilígyon. Use
a hatchet to trim the tree that is to be cut down and made into a
post. Ginlabrahán níya siá sang talibóng. He smote him with a large
bolo. (cf. básbas, labô).

_lábtan_, From lábut.

_lábtik_, A flick, flip, stroke, blow, hit; to flick, flip, strike,
lash, whip, beat. Ginlabtikán siá níya sang bulunál. He struck him
with the whip--or--He gave him a flick of the whip. Labtikí siá
bangúd sang maláut nga íya nga ginhímò. Let him smart for his wicked
deed. Indì mo siá paglabtikán sang matalúm mo nga dílà. Don't lash him
with your bitter (sharp) tongue. Nabáton níya ang tátlo ka lábtik. He
received three strokes. Metaphorically: To give to understand, hint
at. Linabtikán níya si Fulána sang íya gúgma. He gave Miss N.N. an
inkling of his love for her. (cf. lábyog, búnal, hámpak, hánot).

_lábtog_, Blister, pustule. (cf. líbtug, libutúg, láp-ok).

_lábtog_, Chopped, minced, hashed; to be converted into
hash. Palábtog--to chop up, mince and mix. Kárne nga pinalábtog. Minced
meat. Hash.

_lábtoy_, Weak, feeble, slow; to become weak, etc. Naglábtoy siá sa
pagpangabúdlay, kay nagmasakít siá. He became too feeble for work,
because he had been ill. Ginalabtoyán akó sang íya nga pangaláptan. He
seems to me too weak to work. In my opinion he is too feeble to do
his job. (cf. lúyà, lúya).

_lábud_, Sediment, dregs, lees, grounds (of liquids); the last
of a series, as the very last child in a family; to form dregs,
etc. Nalabúdan (-úran) ang salúd sang tubâ. The receptacle for
collecting toddy is full of sediment. (cf. lágtok).

_labúd_, Weal, wale, mark (of a whip or the like); a streak, stripe (of
two threads or fibres); to streak, stripe, mark with stripes. Ilabúd
sa kabáyo ang látigo. Labudí (-urí) ang kabáyo sang látigo. Give the
horse the whip. May labúd ang íya nga písngi. There is a weal on his
cheek. Búnal nga waáy labúd. A whipping without weals, i.e. a severe
scolding, adverse criticism, etc. Ang sámay sang ákon patádyong isá
gid lang ka labúd nga sedalína, ápang ang íya sang patádyong ni mánang
duhá gid ka púlò ka labúd nga sedalína. The stripes in my skirt consist
of only two silk threads, but those in the skirt of my eldest sister
consist of forty silk threads. Butangí ang ákon báyò sing duhá ka
labúd nga mapulá. Put two red stripes into my jacket. (cf. lábhag,
lábtik, sámay, guráy).

_labúd-labúdon_, Full of dregs or sediment; streaked,
striped. (cf. lábud, labúd).

_lábug_, (B) To be, become or make long. See lábà id.

_lábug_, A kind of plant.

_labúg_, To cook some kinds of fish, that otherwise would be
unpalatable, by first boiling them, then tearing off or shredding the
meat, adding various vegetables or spicy ingredients and at last frying
the whole mixture in lard with some addition of water or sauce. Labugá
ang pági. Cook the pagi-fish by the labúg-method. Nakakáon akó dídto
sing linabúg nga bagís. I ate there some shark (cooked in the manner
described above).

_labúg_, (B) A kind of basket, clothes basket. (cf. lágban).

_labúgay_, To stir, move about, mix. Kon magság-a ka sang áwang
labugáya ánay ang túbig. When you clean out the well, stir the
water first. Labugáyi ang káwà sang siménto. Mix the cement in
the cauldron. Labugáyon mo ang ápog sing máayo, agúd matúnaw sing
saláma. Stir the lime well to dissolve it evenly. (cf. labutáw).

_labúg-lábug_, Dim. and Freq. of lábug--to be long, etc.

_labúg-labúg_, A kind of beetle (that is very destructive to the
branches of the coconut palm, etc.); a leaf-miner. (cf. bagángan).

_láb-un_, See láb-on.

_lábut_, Connection with, concern, interest, implication, business,
relation, having to do with; to be implicated, have a connection
with, have to do with, etc. Anó ang lábut mo sinâ? What have you
got to do with that? What business is that of yours? Walâ áko sing
lábut sinâ. I have nothing to do with that. That does not concern
me in the least. Nalábtan (nalabútan) akó sang íla nga kasábà. I
was involved in their lawsuit. Palábta siá sang panublíon nínyo. Let
him have a share in your inheritance. Ipalábut mo sa íya ang isá ka
báhin sang malápad nga dútà. Let him have a part of the extensive
grounds. Lábut pa----. Over and above----. Besides----. Apart
from----. In addition to----. Waláy lábut nga----. Notwithstanding
that----. However----. Though----. (cf. pahilabút, pasilabút,
kalabtánan, úmid, daláhig).

_labutáw_, Mixture, disorder, confusion, agitation; to mix, stir, put
one's finger into a liquid, agitate, wade or walk about in water,
to disturb. Ginalabutáw mo ang sabáw, ha? Samói, ápang índì mo
paglabutawón. You have your fingers in the sauce, heh? Mix it (with
your food), but don't put your finger in it. Ang mga bátà nagalabutáw
sa túbig. The boys are wading or walking in the water--or--splashing
about in the water. Indì mo paglabutawón ang túbig sa batíyà sang
mahígkò mo nga tiíl. Don't put your dirty feet into the water in the
large wash-basin. Ipalabutáw lang sa mga bátà yanáng danáw. Just let
the children play or splash about in that puddle (pool) of water.

_labút-labút_, Dim. and Freq. of lábut--connection with, etc.

_labút-lábut_, The inner skin, whitish in colour, of bamboo; the
"labútlábut" is as thin as paper and can easily be stript off fresh
bamboo split in half; membrane, tissue (whether animal or vegetable).

_lábwak_, Growing well, getting tall; to grow well or tall. Iníng
bátà nagalábwak. This child is growing well. Nalabwakán akó sa íya. It
seems to me that he is growing tall.

_lábyaw_, To thin out, dilute, make watery (of liquids). Ginlabyawán
níya sing túbig ang tínta. He watered the ink. Labyawí ang
almidón. Thin out the starch. Linabyawán ko iníng sópas, kay
támà kalapúyut. I put some water into this soup, for it was too
thick. Ilábyaw sa sabáw iníng túbig. Put this water into the sauce
to thin it out. (cf. lángyaw, básyaw).

_lábyog_, A stroke, slash, cut, flip, flick with something pliable,
as a whip, a flexible rod, etc.; to strike, flick, flip, beat, slash,
lash, cut; to shake loose, knock down, drive off. Labyogí siá sing
makaduhá sang bulunál. Give him two strokes with the whip. Ilábyog sa
báka iníng kagíngking. Flick the ox with this bamboo branch. Pinalábyog
siá níla sa íya nga palangakoán. They drove him out of office. They
procured his removal from office. (cf. lábiog, lábtik, búnal, hánot,
hámpak, lipát).

_lábyog_, To hurl, fling, throw, cast. (cf. bálang, pilák, habóy).

_ládag_, To step into, walk through or over mud, a field, etc. Ládag
ka lang sa talámnan, kay támà kadálum ang lúnang sa dálan. Simply
walk over the field, for the mud on the road is too deep. (cf. túdag,
tádag, tásak).

_ladág-ládag_, Dim. and Freq. of ládag. To stumble--on,--upon,--into.

_lád-ang_, To become weak, flat, light or vapid,
lose--strength,--flavour,--bouquet. Naglád-ang ang bíno, lánggaw, etc.,
kay walâ pagsungsungí ang botílya. The wine has lost its flavour,
the vinegar has lost its strength, etc., because the bottle is not
corked. Naladangán akó siníng serbésa. It seems to me this beer has
gone flat. (cf. táhaw, táb-ang).

_ladás_, To stroll, walk to and fro, loiter, linger. (cf. lágaw).

_ladás-ládas_, Dim. and Freq. of ladás. (cf. lagáwlágaw).

_ladáy_, (B) To pass, go, flit by, roam, ramble. Nagladáy siá sa
plása. He passed along the public square. Ginladayán níya ang luyó
(tupád, atúbang) sang ámon baláy. He passed our home, went past our
house. (cf. lubás, labáy, ladóy, duyán).

_ladáy-ladáy, ladáy-láday_, (B) To pass to and fro, walk about
aimlessly, loiter. Anó man ang ginaladáyláday nínyo dirí sa atubángan
sang ákon bálay? Why are you walking to and fro in front of my house?

_ládgad_, To inflame, chafe, gall, irritate, heat, loosen the skin by
scratching, pinching, rubbing, etc. Naládgad ang íya pánit, kay kinálot
níya. His skin was inflamed, because he scratched it. Ladgadá (-ará)
ang pánit. Heat the skin (by rubbing, or the like). Indì mo pagkalóton
sing lakás ang katúl mo, kay kon maládgad ang pánit mo, magalápad
ang katúl. Don't scratch your "katúl" (kind of eczema) too much, for
if the skin becomes inflamed, the "katúl" will spread. (cf. dús-il,
pák-it, taís).

_ladína_, The feminine of ladíno.

_ladíno_, (Sp. ladino) Cunning, cute, tricky, expert, sharp,
sagacious, resourceful, clever, adroit; boaster, braggart,
chatterbox. (cf. antígo, batíd, sagád, anád, sampáton, maábtik;
buraán, wakalán, babáan).

_ládlad_, To open, spread out, extend, lay (a carpet, table-cloth,
etc.), hold out or show to; cast (a net). Iládlad ang sápyaw. Cast the
fishing net. Ladladá (-ará) ang amákan. Spread the bamboo mat. Ladladí
akó sing baníg. Spread a sleeping mat for me. Iládlad ang mga siód sa
talúnan. Spread the traps over the forest. (cf. bulád, húmlad, áy-ay).

_ladô_, The wild pigeon.

_ladóy_, To ramble, loiter, loaf, walk about aimlessly, etc. See ladáy,
duyán, lagáwlágaw, landólándo, haráyháray, tiyógtiyóg).

_ladóy-ladóy_, Dim. and Freq. of ladóy.

_ladrón_, (Sp. ladron) Thief, robber, gangster, brigand, spoiler,
depredator, marauder, freebooter, bandit, footpad. (cf. makáwat,
maniníkas, lág-it, agóng, kawatán, buyóng, tukî, tiópì, makáwtì).

_láè_, Adultery. See láyì.

_lágà_, (B) To boil or to cook in water (meat, vegetables, peas and
beans, tea, etc.). Lagáa ang kárne, balátong, mónggo, etc. Boil the
meat, the beans, the monggo, etc. in water. Lagái akó sing isá ka
búgsò nga kárne. Boil a piece of meat for me. Ilágà akó ánay siníng
kadiós. Please to boil these black peas for me. Ilágà iníng túbig
sa tsa. Boil the tea in this water. (cf. laúya, lapó, tanók, bukál,
lútò, ráhà).

_lâgâ_, (H) See lágà id. Maglâgâ ka sing tsa. Make some tea. Làgaí
akó sing tsa. Make some tea for me.

_lagâ_, Dark yellow, brown, especially of hair, auburn; to become
brown or dark yellow. Naglagâ ang íya nga bohók. Her hair turned
brown. Lagâ ang íya nga búngot. His beard is dark yellow. Nalagaán
akó sang íya nga bigóte. It seems to me that his mustache is brown.

_lagábung, lagabúng_, The noise of stones, etc. flopping,
dropping to the ground; to flop, drop or fall to the ground with
a crash. Naglagábung gid ang mga lubí nga nahúlug. The coconuts
fell down with a thud. Nagalagábung ang mga bató nga nadágdag
sa busáy. The stones dropped down the precipice are making a
thundering noise. Sang paggubâ níla sang padér naglinagábung ang mga
bató. When they demolished the wall, the stones came crashing to the
ground. Palagabúnga ang mga bató. Make the stones come down with a
crash. (cf. lágbung).

_lagák_, Loose, slack, not taut. (cf. halúg, hugák, tugák, katál).

_lagák_, Dropsy of the testicle or scrotum, hydrocele;
testicle. (cf. lagáy, pántog; búl-ug).

_lagâ-lágà_, Dim. of lagâ--brown, auburn.

_lagâ-lágà_, Dim. and Freq. of lágà--to boil. etc.

_lagá-lága_, A winged ant, especially the termite or white
ant. (cf. ragárága).

_lagámak_, To crack, crash, etc. See ragámak, ragáak.

_lágang_, A kind of sea-shell.

_lagaón_, Things to be boiled or that should be boiled, especially
said of peas and beans. May lagaón ikáw nga ginabalígyà? Have you
any peas or beans for sale? (cf. lágà; talangkúnon).

_lagápak, lagapák_, The noise of falling waters, the tramping of
horses, etc; to roar, thunder, clatter, clap, slap, etc. Naglagápak
ang mga láta nga nahúlug sa hágdan. The cans that fell down the stair
made a clatter. Nagalagápak ang túbig sa busáy. The water is falling
over the precipice with a noise like thunder. Magalagápak ang mga tápì
sang táytay kon maágyan sing kabáyo nga nagatúwad. The boards of the
bridge resound when a horse passes over it at a gallop. Tinámpà níya
siá nga lumagápak (lumagapák) ang íya guyá. He slapped him that his
cheek resounded with the blow. (cf. lágpak).

_lagápok, lagapók_, The noise of a book, board, sheet of iron,
etc. falling flat; to clap, flop, slap, plump, slam. Naglagápok ang mga
tulún-an nga nadágdag sa estánte. The books that fell down from the
case slammed on the floor. The books fell down from the case with a
bang. Diín ang hulút nga ginalagapókan? Where is the room from which
the noise comes? (cf. lágpok, linagápok).

_lagárì_, (H) A saw; to saw, cut with a saw. Lagaría ang káhoy. Saw
the wood. Lagaríi akó sing pilá ka tápì. Saw a few planks for
me. Ginlagarían níla sing káhoy ang idálum sang baláy. They sawed wood
on the ground-floor of the house. Ilagárì akó ánay siníng káhoy. Please
saw this wood for me.

_lagás_, To pursue, run after, chase. Lágsa (lagasá) ang mga
kánding. Chase the goats. Iníng idô maábtik maglagás sang talunón. This
dog is clever at chasing wild pigs. Ilagás akó ánay sináng mga karnéro
nga nagsulúd sa ámon pamulákan. Please run after those sheep that
have entered our garden. Awát man lang ang íya paglagás sa bátà,
kay walâ níya maabúti. His chase after the boy was of no avail,
for he could not catch him. (cf. láas).

_lagasák, lagásak_, To clatter, patter, clap, slap. (cf. lágsak,
tagasák, lagápak).

_lagás-lágas_, Dim. and Freq. of lagás. Iníng idô dáyon gid lang
nagalagáslágas sang mga karnéro. This dog is always running after
sheep.

_lagás-lágas_, Gland.

_lagátik, lagatík_, The noise made by the rattling of keys, the ticking
of many clocks, or the like. Nagalagátik ang mga lyábe sa íya nga
pálhuk. The keys are rattling in his pocket. (cf. lágtik, tíngting).

_lagátok, lagatók_, A cracking or crackling noise; to snap,
crack, crackle. Nagalagátok ang íya mga lutalutáhan. His joints
are cracking. Magpalagátok ka sang ímo mga túdlò. Snap your
fingers. (cf. lágtok).

_lágaw_, To wander about, roam, stroll, take a walk. Diín na man
siá nagalágaw? Where on earth is he strolling now? Lagáwon ta ang
umá. Let us go to, or around, the field. Lagáwan ta ang umá. Let us
take a stroll in the field. Malúyag siá maglágaw sa latagón. He likes
to wander about in the open fields. (cf. lagúyaw).

_lagáw-lágaw_, Dim. and Freq. of lágaw. Also: a loafer, vagabond,
idle stroller, tramp. (cf. landólándo, tiyógtiyóg).

_lagáy_, Testicle. (cf. pántog, lagák).

_lagáy, lagáy-lágay_, Very little, a small amount. (cf. isót, tikî,
diótay).

_lágban_, A clothes-basket. (cf. lagúb).

_lágbung_, Crash, thud, thump of a stone, etc. falling to the
ground. (cf. lagábung, lágpok).

_lágbus_, Young, tender, flexible, soft (of leaves, plants,
etc). (cf. línghod, mánghud, lanúbò, lámhad, lamháron, bataón).

_lágbus_, Past, gone by, former. (cf. lígad, lúmbus, talikód, lapás,
lubás).

_lágdà_, Slowness; slow; to do slowly, leisurely, one by
one, at intervals, with interruptions or pauses. Bagtingá sing
lágdà--or--lagdaá ang bágting. Ring the bells slowly, not continuously,
with some interval between each stroke or peal. Lagdaí ang minatáy
sing bágting. Ring the bells slowly (toll the bell) for the dead
person. Lagdaí ang báyò sing búnak kag ugáling tahión mo. First wash
the jacket carefully and then sew it. (cf. lágway, hínay).

_lágdas_, To do to excess, go too far, do or go beyond what is intended
or required, to overdo, overstep the mark, pass the limits. Naglágdas
ang íya paglakát, kay nagtálang siá sa dálan. He went too far,
because he missed the road. Indì mo paglagdasón ang ímo paglakát,
pagkáon, pagpangabúdlay, etc. Don't walk too far, eat too much,
work too hard, etc.

_lágdas_, To pass, go by, be over; to recede, turn back, flow back
(of the tide, etc.). (cf. ladás, ladáy, lubás; hunás).


_lágday_, Slowness; to take one's time, be slow, to go easy, take it
easy, dilly-dally. Naglágday na ang karabáw, kay nabúdlay. The buffalo
has become slow, for it is tired. Lagdayá lang ang ímo buluhatón. Just
keep going in performing your duties. Ginlágday gid níya ang íya
pagdáro. He did his ploughing at a very leisurely pace. (cf. lágdà,
lágway, hínay, búndul).

_lágdò_, Sediment, dross, deposit, lees, dregs sticking to the bottom
or sides of a receptacle. Also verb. Nalagdoán ang botílya sang
lánggaw. Some dregs of vinegar stuck to the bottle. Tinloí ang botílya
sang lágdò. Clean the bottle of the lees (of wine). (cf. lábud).

_lágdos_, Half-cooked, half-raw, underdone, insufficiently prepared;
to be underdone, etc. Naglágdos ang kán-on, kay balotanóg gid
lang ang paglútò mo. The rice was half-raw, for you did not cook it
thoroughly. Indì mo paglagdosón ang tiníg-ang. Don't underdo the rice,
(cook it thoroughly). (cf. bútud, balotanóg, alibútdan).

_lághap_, To seek, search or look for, try to find, hunt for. Laghapá
ang pányò ko nga nadúlà. Go and look for my lost handkerchief. Laghapí
akó sing bulúng. Try to find or get some medicine for me. Ilághap akó
ánay sang ákon tulún-an. Kindly find the book for me. (cf. sághap,
pangítà).

_lághay_, Mixture, blend; to mix, mingle, blend. Laghayí ang kárne
sing ísdà, ang húmáy sing maís, ang mónggo sing áhus, etc. Mix meat
with fish, rice with corn, monggo with garlic, etc. (cf. lakót, sámò,
símbog, símpon, lákay, sákot, sakót, lamód).

_lághit_, To be strewn about, lie about in confusion or disorder, be
all over the shop or higgledy-piggledy. Nagalághit gid lang dirí ang
mga naúg. The clothes are just lying about here higgledy-piggledy. Indì
mo paglaghitón (pagilághit) ang ímo mga sángkap. Don't let your things
lie about in disorder. Indì mo paglaghitán ang ságwà sang ímo mga
halampangánan. Don't leave your playthings lying about the drawing
room. (cf. dúm-ok).

_laghít-lághit_, Dim. and Freq. of lághit. Pinalaghítlághit lang
níla ang mga síya sa hulút. They put the chairs into the room
higgledy-piggledy.

_lághong_, Jangle, discord, cacophony, aloud, inharmonious, harsh,
disagreeable, discordant, jarring sound or noise, as of a cracked
bell, a broken musical instrument, a croaking voice, etc.: to emit
such a dull, inharmonious sound. Ang íya nga tíngug nagalághong. He
has a croaking voice. Anó ang ginahalinán sináng lághong? Where does
that noise come from? Nalaghongán akó siníng dáyon nga pagbágting sang
linggánay. That constant ringing of bells jars upon my ears. Indì mo
pagpalaghongón ang ímo tíngug. Don't cultivate a strident voice.

_lághong_, To murmur, complain, say "haw", "hem", "hum", "humph" in
protest, disapproval or dislike. Indì ka maglághong kon agdahón ikáw
sa pagtámbong sa íla nga tábad. Don't hem and haw, if they invite
you to their banquet.

_lághuy_, Murmur, sigh, chirp, twitter; to murmur, sing, chirp, sigh,
rustle, twitter, said of rustling leaves, of insects, of birds, etc.

_lági_, (B) Quick, at once, immediately, without delay, with
great despatch; surely, precisely, without questioning; always,
constantly. Kádto ka dídto lági. Go there at once. Búl-a lági ang
pinutús ko dirâ sa ságwà. Be quick and fetch my parcel from the
drawing room. Akó lági ang ímo ginahán-an kon anó ang mahanabô. You
always blame me for everything. (cf. gilayón, dalî).

_lág-i_, A weir, a kind of bamboo-netting as used in fish-traps
(fish-corrals) called punút, etc. Also verb. Walâ pa malag-ihí ang
punút. The fish-trap is not yet provided with netting. Ilág-i iníng
kawáyan kag hípgid sa punút. Use this bamboo and hipgid-fibres to
make a netting for the fish-trap.

_lágid_, To sharpen, put an edge on, whet, hone, strop, grind. Lagída
(-íra) ang kotsílyo. Sharpen the knife. Lagídi akó sang ákon
nabáha. Hone the razor for me.

_lág-id_, See lágid. (cf. báid).

_lagidán_, Hone, whetstone. (cf. bairán).

_lagí-lági_, (B) Dim. of lági. Sónda silá lagílági. Follow them
quickly.

_lágio_, To run away, flee, take flight, take to flight, escape,
take to one's heels, make off, beat a retreat, turn tail, bolt,
skedaddle. Naglágio (nalágio) siá. He ran away. Si Fuláno pinalagiohán
sang íya nga sologoón. His servant ran away from N.N. Indì ka maglágio
(malágio), kay walâ gid man sing katalágman. Don't make off, for there
is not the least danger. (cf. lágyo, palágyo; palágyo is more in use
than the simple lágio).

_lagirán_, (H) Whetstone. See lagidán.

_lágis_, To trim, dress, clean, smooth (rattan, bamboo,
etc.). Lagísi (lágsi) ang kawáyan, uwáy. Trim the bamboo, dress the
rattan. (cf. águs).

_lágit_, To enter deep, sink deep, penetrate, permeate,
pierce. Naglágit sa ákon tagiposóon ang íya nga láygay. His sermon
sank deep into my heart. Nalagítan ang ákon dúghan siníng matám-is
nga kalantáhon. This sweet song went to my heart. Ang kanámit siníng
mga kalan-ónon nagalágit sa ákon kaugatán. The deliciousness of this
pastry penetrates my whole frame. (cf. salópsop, salúgsug, látum,
tudúk, húgum, húpug, kágit, lúgit, dulút).

_lág-it_, Sneak, cheat, trickster, impostor, swindler; to cheat, trick,
do, swindle, sneak, steal, defraud, deceive. Lág-it nga táo. A sneak
or swindler. Ginlág-it níya akó. He tricked me, cheated me. Indì mo siá
paglag-itán sang íya kwárta, índì mo paglag-itón ang íya kwárta. Don't
do (swindle) him out of his money, don't sneak his money. (cf. hásò,
agóng, tíkas, káwat, etc.).

_lág-it_, To rub or strike, as a match. (cf. lágid, lág-id, bág-id).

_lag-itón, lag-íton_, To be rubbed or struck against something else;
a match.

_lágkaw_, To move, change one's place of abode, transfer one's
residence, shift camp, lead a pastoral or nomadic life. Ang mga "áti"
nagalágkaw. The aborigines called "Ati" change their place of abode
i.e. they lead a nomadic life. Ginalagkawán níla yanáng bakólod. They
transferred their abode to yonder hill.

_lágkay_, Mixture, etc. See lákay.

_láglag_, To demolish, exterminate, destroy, annihilate. Laglagá
silá nga tanán. Exterminate them all. Iláglag iníng agás sa mga
ánay. Use this kerosene to destroy the termites. Amó iní ang kalóg
nga linaglagán níla sang mga lúkso. This is the ditch in which they
destroyed the young locusts. Ginláglag sang mga buyóng ang búg-os
nga minurô páti ang íya sinâ nga mga pumulúyò. The brigands destroyed
the whole village with its inhabitants. (cf. búngkag, gubâ, pápas).

_lágnà_, To foretell, prophesy. (cf. tágnà id.).

_lágnat_, (H) A slight cold or catarrh; to produce a catarrh,
etc. Ginalágnat akó. I have a slight cold. Ginpílit siá sang íya
mapíntas nga agálon nga magkádto sa umá bisán malágnat ang íya
láwas. He was forced by his cruel master to go (work in) to the farm,
even although he was suffering from a cold. (cf. hilánat).

_lágnay_, To roar, rush, rustle, murmur (of wind, flowing water,
etc.); to snore. (cf. hugánas, dagáas, hulágok).

_lágnoy_, To take, seize, appropriate (without the knowledge of the
owner). (cf. lámang, kúhà, ángkon, lág-it).

_lágnoy_, To walk through or over (unceremoniously). Indì nínyo
paglagnoyón ang humáy. Don't walk over the rice. (cf. latás, ládag,
etc.).

_lagó, lágo_, Worm, dew worm. (cf. lalágo).

_lágo_, A roll of cloth containing usually five yards. Pilá ka lágo
ang binakál mo? How many five-yard rolls of cloth have you bought?

_lagô_, Dirty, soiled, stained. (cf. bulingón, damák, sáprat, etc.).

_lág-ok_, A sip, draught (of liquids). See láb-ok id.

_lagô-lagô_, Dim. of lagô. Also: To wriggle or writhe in mud, dirt,
etc. Nagalagôlagô gid lang ikáw sa hígkò. You look very dirty. You
are covered with mud, dirt, soot or the like.

_lagóndo_, Depression, hole, mud-hole, worn out parts in roads,
etc. (cf. libaóng, linggáhub, linggálhub, danáw).

_lagóng_, A kind of large fly.

_lagóng-lágong_, Dim. of lagóng. Also: Double-chinned, very fat;
the folds of fat around the neck and chin of very stout persons;
dewlap, wattle. (cf. labít-lábit).

_lagóng-lagóngan_, One who is very fat or has a double chin,
etc. (cf. lagónglágong).

_lagón-lágon_, See lagónglágong.

_lagón-lagónan_, See lagóng-lagóngan.

_lagóntad_, Depression, etc. See lagóndo. Also: difficult, tiresome,
rough (of roads or the like).

_lágot_, To creak, squeak, emit a sharp grating noise, as cart-wheels,
rusty locks and hinges, etc. (cf. ígot, ígong).

_lágpak_, A splash, the noise made by a liquid being spilled or poured
out with some force; to splash. Ang túbig nga ginbásia mo naglágpak
sa bató. The water you poured out splashed on the stone. (cf. lagápak).

_lágpang_, To cook meat by roasting it over coals or a low fire, then
shredding or tearing it into strips and serving it mixed with vinegar
or water and chili. Lagpangá ang manók. Prepare the chicken according
to the lágpang-method. Lagpangí akó sing kárne. Cook some meat for
me in the lágpang-manner. Nakatiláw akó kaína sing linágpang. A short
while ago I tasted meat prepared in lágpang-fashion.

_lágpat_, To guess, conjecture, infer, suppose, assume, surmise,
divine, believe, dare say, think. Lagpatá kon anó ang sulúd sang
kamót ko. Guess what is inside my hand. Indì akó makalágpat kon anó
ang mahanabô. I cannot think what is going to happen. Nalagpatán níya
ang maáyo nga patubás siníng túig. His conjecture that this year would
bring a good harvest was right. He happened to have a good crop this
year. (cf. máiom, pakót, bántà).

_lagpatánon_, Riddle, puzzle; to play at riddles, give riddles to
solve. (cf. lágpat).

_lágpì_, To rap, flip, fillip, strike or slap with the finger-tips or
in any similar way. Si nánay naglágpì sang íya guyá. Mother slapped his
face (with her finger-tips). Ilágpì sa íya ang sinélas. Slap him with
the slippers. Lagpiá ang íya ilóng. Tap his nose. (cf. tápdas, támpà).

_lágpik_, To stick, adhere to, as mud, paste, dust, etc. Ang pintúra
nagkalágpik (nalágpik) sa íya nga sárwal. Ang íya nga sárwal nalagpikán
sang pintúra. The paint stuck to his trousers. (cf. dokót).

_lágpit_, (B) The spring of a trap; a spring-trap, gin, snare
with a spring-noose, springe; to wedge in, squeeze tight, jam,
compress, pinch, flatten, catch, squash, crush. Sang pagtakúp níya
sang baúl nalágpit ang ákon kamót. When he put the lid on the trunk,
my hand was jammed. Andam ka, agúd índì malágpit ang ímo túdlò sang
ganháan. Look out (Be careful), lest your finger should be caught in
the door. Lagpitá ang tabákò. Press the tobacco-leaves smooth. Butangán
mo sing lágpit ang báboy. Set a spring-trap for the pig. (cf. ipít,
ipíip, lígpit).

_lágpok_, Slap, clap, slam, flop, noise of a falling book, board,
etc.; to flop, bang, etc. to the floor. Naglágpok ang tulún-an sa
tulungtúngan. The books banged on the table. Indì ka magpalágpok
sang tápì--or--índì mo pagpalagpokón ang tápì. Don't slam the board
down. (cf. lagápok).

_lágsak_, Sound, tune, strain, noise; to sound, slap, clap,
clatter. Ari na ang mga musikó. Sa dílì madúgay saráng na kamó
makasaútsáut sa lágsak sang lánton. The musicians are here. Soon you
can dance to the sound of music. (cf. lágtik, huní, lagásak).

_lágsam_, To trespass, etc. See láksam.

_lágsan, lagsanáy_, etc. From lagás--to run after, pursue.

_lágsaw_, Deer. (cf. usá).

_lágsì_, To tear into fibres, strip (hemp, piña, maguey, etc.). Lagsiá
ang lánot. Strip the hemp. Lagsií akó sing pínya. Get ready some
piña-fibres for me. (cf. láknit).

_lágsik, lagsíklágsik_, To jump, fly off, be propelled,
etc. (cf. lásik, lasíklásik, ágsik, ásang).

_lagsík-lágsik_, Spread here and there, extended, sporadic; to spread,
break out in different places (of diseases, revolutions, etc).

_lágsing_, A shrill loud sound, high-pitched or strident voice,
falsetto; to be strident, shrill, high-pitched, squeaky. Naglágsing
na ang íya tíngug. His voice has become shrill. He sings falsetto
now. Nalagsingán akó sang íya nga tíngug. He seemed to me to sing
falsetto. His voice sounded shrill to me. (cf. tágsing).

_lágtang_, A kind of vine with large, beautiful leaves. It is used
as a fish poison for killing or stupefying fish; to stun, stupefy
(fish). (cf. túba).

_lágtas_, To pass straight through, walk over, etc. See
latás. (cf. lágdas).

_lágtì_, Brightness of white colour; very white, dazzling white,
candent; to be or become dazzling white, etc. Naglágtì na ang íya
nga báyò. Her dress has become dazzling white. Nalagtián akó sang
íya nga bestído. Her frock appeared to me dazzling white. Lágtì gid
ang delárgo níya. His trousers are perfectly white. (cf. putî).

_lágtik_, Tick, click, ticking; to tick, as a watch, to click, as
a trigger, etc. Makabatî ikáw sang lágtik sang relóh? Can you hear
the ticking of the watch or clock? Ang relóh nagalágtik. The watch
is ticking. (cf. lagátik).

_lágting_, Clink, chink, clang, clank, tinkle, jingle; to tinkle,
jingle, clink, chink, clang, clank. Ang súndang kon mahúlug
magalágting. If the knife falls down it will clink. Lagtingí silá sing
pínggan, agúd magkarí, kay humán na ang panyága. Jingle or clink the
plate for them, that they may come, for dinner is ready. Palagtingá
ang pínggan, agúd íla mabatián. Clink the plate so that they can hear
it. (cf. tíngting).

_lágting_, Strong, tough, firm; experienced, an old hand at
it. (cf. matíngting, mabákud, mapág-on, mahúnit, hámrus, malíg-on;
batíd, anád, sagád, antígo).

_lágtok_, Dregs, sediment, settlings, grounds, lees (of liquids,
smoking pipes, etc.). Nalagtokán ang ákon sánsoy. My pipe is foul.

_lágtok_, To crack, crackle, emit a sound as of knuckles or joints
strained to the snapping point. Nagalágtok ang íya túdlò kon
butóngon. His finger cracks, if pulled. (cf. lagátok id.).

_lagtók-lágtok_, Dim. and Freq. of lágtok. Also a kind of beetle that
emits a crackling sound, when touched.

_lágtom_, Dark, black (of boots, etc.); dark green, luscious (of
leaves, etc.); to be black, luscious, etc. Ang humáy nagalágtom na,
kay naulanán. The rice is growing well now (is dark green), for
it has had rain. Nalagtomán akó siníng mga tanúm. These plants look
luscious to me, appear to me to be in a very flourishing condition. Kon
magbakál ka sing panápton nga maitúm, pilíon mo ang malágtom, índì
ang mabúdhaw. If you buy black clothes, choose very black ones and
not such as are a rusty black. (cf. dulúm, itúm).

_lágtoy_, Weak, feeble, slack, losing strength. (cf. lúyà, lúya,
labóy, lábtoy).

_lágtub_, Crash, clank, clash, noisy collision (as of arms, etc.);
to clash, etc. (cf. lágtok, lágbung).

_lagúb_, Weal, stripe, streak, mark or trace of the stroke of a whip or
the like. Lábtik nga waláy lagúb. A flick without a weal. (cf. labúd).

_lágub_, Full, replete; saturated, imbued. Lágub siá sa mánggad, sa
katámad, etc. He is full of wealth, laziness, etc. i.e. he is very
rich, very lazy, etc. (cf. tugúb, lábo).

_lagúlad_, To wander, roam, stroll, rove, go, pass from place
to place. Linagúlad níya ang amó nga dútà humalín sa katúndan
túbtub sa sidlangán. He passed through that territory from West to
East. (cf. ági, lagúyaw, laguyáwan, lagáwlágaw).

_lagúmba_, A loud noise, thud, thump, bang, howling,
roaring (of waves, etc.); to make a great din or noise,
etc. Nagalagúmba--or--nagalinagúmba ang dalágkò nga mga balúd nga
nagabúnal sang hunásan. The huge waves beating against the beach are
making a noise like thunder,--are roaring,--are making a thundering
noise. (cf. lágbong, lagábong).

_lagúndaw_, To hoax, play a practical joke on somebody, trick. A,
ginalagúndaw man lang nímo akó. Ah, you are only playing a joke on
me. Indì ka maglagúndaw sa ákon. Don't play me a trick. (cf. íntò).

_lagúnday_, A kind of plant.

_lagúndi_, A shrub-like plant. (cf. lagúnday).

_lagúring_, A kind of beetle similar to the cockchafer or May-beetle.

_lagúyaw_, To travel, go for a walk, take a constitutional, go on a
walking tour, make a trip, wander abroad, roam about, ramble, take a
stroll, spend a holiday. Kahápon naglagúyaw kamí sa búkid. Yesterday
we made a trip to the mountain. Anó ang ginalagúyaw mo? What are you
travelling about for? Laguyáwi lang nínyo ang ákon palangúmhan. Just
take a stroll to my farm. (cf. lágaw, lugáyaw, panglaguyáwan, etc.).

_laguyáwan_, A trip, constitutional; travelling, going abroad; to
travel, etc. (cf. lagúyaw, paliwálíwa).

_lágwak_, To snore. (cf. hulágok, hurágok).


_lágwas_, To overflow, cover. (cf. lángbas, kápan).

_lágway_, Slow, etc. See lágday. (cf. hínay, búndul).

_lagwáyan_, A bamboo mat for drying rice upon, etc. (cf. alugáyan,
amákan).

_lagwérta_, (Sp. huerta) Garden. (cf. hardín, pamulákan).

_lagwertéro_, (A Visayan derivation from the
foregoing). Gardener. (cf. mananánum).

_lágyo_, To flee, etc. See lágio.

_láhab_, Gain, profit, advantage, emolument; to gain, profit, have an
advantage, derive an emolument. Magpanikasúg ka gid, agúd magláhab ka
sa ímo palangitán-an. Make a great effort to get some profit out of
your transactions or business. Nakaláhab siá sing duhá ka mángmang. He
made (gained) two pesos. Ginlahában níya akó sing támà. He got too much
profit out of me. Nagláhab siá sang tábad dídto. He took advantage of
the banquet there i.e. he ate well or heartily. (cf. sáplid, ganánsya).

_láham_, To touch, feel. Laháma siá. Touch him. Lahámi siá sa
bútkon. Touch him on the arm. (cf. híkap, kúhit, káblit, etc.;
ipangaláham, káham).

_laháng_, A large plate or dish of clay or earthenware used for
serving food in, etc. (cf. bandehádo).

_láhap_, To cut in pieces, etc. See líhap. (cf. láplap).

_láhas_, To run wild, be or become wild. (cf. ilá, iláhas).

_láhas_, To creep, crawl or pass through a fence, etc., as pigs and
other animals. (cf. lusút, sóhot).

_lahás, láhas_, To trespass, intrench on, encroach upon, invade; to
be audacious, impertinent, daring. (cf. ahás, káhas, dahás; sáklam,
sakám, hámham, sabán, láksam).

_lahát_, All, everything. This term seems to be of Tagalog origin
and is often used in the phrase "bágay sa lahát"--fit for everything,
experienced, handy in every way. Siá amó ang táo nga bágay sa lahát. He
is a very handy man, fit for any job, accomplished in many ways,
an all-round man. (cf. tanán).

_láhay_, To howl, bark (of dogs). Ang idô nagaláhay. The dog
barks. Ginláhay (ginlaháyan) akó sang idô. The dog barked at
me. (cf. tághol, úwang, ngúrub).

_lahî_, A knife, a sharp cutting instrument. (cf. urutúp, garanás,
súndang, kotsílyo).

_láhid_, To give a hint or clue, hint at, mention, insinuate,
intimate. Lahídi (-íri) siá. Give him a hint.

_lahíd-láhid_, Dim. and Freq. of láhid. Ginlahídlahídan (-íran) níya
akó nga makádto siá buás sa ága sa Ilóngílong. He threw out a hint
to me that tomorrow morning he is going to Iloilo. (cf. palahídláhid,
itínítin).

_láhin_, Ripe, mature, seasoned; to ripen, be ripe (of
nuts especially). May lubí ka nga láhin? Have you any ripe
coconuts? Nagaláhin na ang mga lubí dirâ. The coconuts there are
ripening, maturing. Iníng lubí nalahínan na sang íya mga búnga. This
coconut-palm has ripe fruit.

_láhob_, (H) To warm and soften, make flexible or pliable by
heat. Lahóba ang búyò. Soften the búyò-leaf by warming it. (cf. hálub
id.).

_lahób_, (H) Softened, made flexible by warming. See halúb. Also:
swollen, suffused with blood or the like. Lahób gid ang písngi níya
nga tinámpà ni Fuláno. His cheek that was struck by N.N. is swollen.

_lahóg_, A joke, jest, fun; to joke, jest, make fun, fool, play with,
quip. Indì ka maglahóg sa mga butáng nga nahanungúd sa relihión. Don't
crack jokes about things pertaining to religion. Lahogá lang siá. Tell
him some jokes. Indì mo akó paglahogán sang ímo hámbal. Don't talk
to me in jest. A, índì ka magpáti sinâ, kay linahóg gid lang inâ ni
Fuláno. Oh, don't believe that, for N.N.--only said it in joke,--was
only joking. (cf. tíaw--to tease, ridicule).

_lahóg-láhog_, Dim. and Freq. of lahóg. Ginalahóglahógan níla ang
polítika. They are making fun of politics. (cf. tiáwtíaw).

_lahóg-lahogán_, A jester, clown, buffoon.

_lahón_, To roast corn on the cob over live coals. Lahoná or lánha ang
maís. Roast the corn on the cob. Maís nga linahón. Corn roasted in the
husks. Linahonán níya akó sing maís, kay nasáyran níya nga ginapasulabí
ko ang maís nga linahón sa binóog kag tinanók. She roasted some corn
on the cob for me, because she knew that I prefer it prepared in this
way to the ordinary roasted or boiled corn. (cf. bóog, íhaw--to roast
shucked corn; tanók--to boil in water corn, bananas, etc.).

_lahón_, To continue, go farther than intended, do moreover or
besides, do something more, continue to work on some other job,
etc. Ang túyò ko nga makádto sa Ogtóng lámang, ápang naglahón akó sa
Ilóngílong. I had the intention of going only as far as Oton, but I
went on to Iloilo. Ginlahón mo pa gid sang sadól ang isá ka báhin
sang pamulákan? Did you really hoe over one more garden-plot? Kon
matápus ang ímo buluhatón lahoní akó. When you have finished your
work, assist me in mine. (cf. dáyon; N.B. The other lahón (to roast
corn in the husks) is probably the same term and can be explained
by the circumstance that it implies a continuous process, the corn
being plucked and roasted at once without removing the husks).

_lahóng_, See lahón--to continue, etc.

_lahóng_, An opening, outlet, vent, passage through, exit or egress
(on the other side); to have an opening through or an outlet on the
other side. Ang búhò nga iní may lahóng sa pihák sang baláy. This
hole has an outlet behind the house. Iníng gíab sa padér nagalahóng
sa dálan. This hole in the wall passes through to the road. Ang ibán
nga mga búhò índì lahóng, índì maglahóng or walâ sing lahóng. Some
holes have no outlet on the other side. (cf. lápus, lapús).

_láhus_, Quick, expeditious, speedy, by a short-cut; to do something
quickly, expeditiously, in less than ordinary time, speedily, with
speed. Láhus nga trabáho. Expeditious work. Lahúsa gid ang paglútò
sang manók. Cook the chicken quickly. Nagaláhus lang siá sang íya mga
buluhatón, sang íya pagsulát, pagtahî, etc. He performs his duties,
his writing, his sewing, etc. expeditiously. Lahúson mo lang ang ákon
panápton, kay may kadtoán akó sa buás. Get my dress ready at once,
for I have to go out to-morrow. (cf. dalî, dalî-dálì, dagúndon).

_láhus_, To look for on the spur of the moment, try
to--find,--obtain,--get--, at once. Nagaláhus siá sing kwárta. He is
trying to get some money. Nagláhus siá sing manók, asín, páhò, etc. He
tried to obtain at once some chicken, salt, mangoes, etc. Ginlahúsan
níya si Fuláno sing humáy. He quickly got some rice for N.N. Lahúsi siá
sing tabákò. Find him some tobacco or cigars (without delay). Iláhus
mo akó ánay (Paunáhi akó sing madalî) sing duhá ka písos. Please
advance me two pesos at once. (cf. húsà, ságap, sághap, lághap).

_lahús_. To pass through, percolate, strain, filter through. Nagalahús
ang kapé sa salaán. The coffee passes through the strainer. Palahusá
ang tsá sa salaán. Filter the tea through the strainer. (cf. sálà,
tahús).

_lahús-láhus_, Dim. and Freq. of láhus. To do rather quickly; pay only
a short visit to, etc. Ginalahúsláhus lang níya ang Manílà. He is just
passing through Manila, is not tarrying there or staying long. Duáwa
silá bisán lahúsláhus lang ang ímo pagdúaw--or--bísan sing lahúsláhus
lámang. Pay them a visit, even if it is a very short one.

_laímnan_, (B) Bad, ugly, nasty, disagreeable, annoying,
jarring. (cf. límnan, láin, maláin, maláut).

_láin_, To be or become bad, worsen, deteriorate, degenerate; to be
or become sick, ill, to faint, swoon. Nagláin ang íya batásan. His
behaviour has changed for the worse. His character (habits) has (have)
degenerated. Nagláin ang íya ginháwa. He swooned, had a fainting
fit, lost consciousness, his condition has become serious, or the
like. Ang nalaínan sang ákon buút amó----. What--grieves me,--I find
fault with, is----. Magaláin inâ kunína. It will turn out bad in
the end. Sing makadámò ang mga talapuánan nga maáyo sing kamunóan
nagaláin sa katapúsan. Often societies that start well have a bad
ending. Indì pagigkaláin sang ímo buút kon----. Don't take it ill
(amiss), if----. (cf. láut).

_laín_, Different, not the same, altered, changed; to become different,
to alter, vary, change. Naglaín na ang duág sang íya báyò. The
colour of his jacket has changed. Lainón mo ang ímo batásan. Change
your manners or habits. Ginlaín níya ang íya baláy, sulát, etc. He
changed his house, letter, etc. He made some changes or alterations
in his house, letter, etc. Lainí akó sing baláy. Build a different
house for me (i.e. one that is not an imitation or likeness of
another). (cf. túhay).

_laíng_, Dirt, filth, any foul or waste matter, as mud, dust,
sweepings, rubbish or the like; to be or become dirty, soiled,
etc. Iníng salúg naglaíng sa mahígkò nga sapín sang mga dumulúaw. This
floor has got dirty from the dusty boots of the visitors. Dílì
nínyo pagpalaingón ang salúg sang simbáhan. Don't dirty the
church-floor. (cf. raíng; dágtà, hígkò, bulíng, músing, rigám).

_laín-láin_, Dim. and Freq. of láin and laín. Nagalaínláin ang íya
ginháwa. He gets unconscious at intervals. He feels quite bad at
times. Nagakalaínláin ang búlbul sang kapispísan. The feathers of birds
differ, vary, are not the same in size and colour. Ang nagakalaínláin
nga kahimtángan sang mga táo. The various conditions or occupations
of men.

_laís_, Boar; genital; whoremonger; panglaís--to be
lewd. (cf. butakál).

_laís_, To push, toss, shove, thrust. Ginlaís siá sang karabáw sa púnò
sang páhò. The buffalo tossed him against the trunk of the mango tree.

_lakâ_, Spaced wide asunder, with plenty of space between, thin; to be
or become wide apart. Ang maís naglakâ, kay madámò ang napatáy. The
corn grew sparsely, for much of it died. Lakaón ukón garotón námon
ang pagpánggas sang kadiós? Shall we plant the cadios-peas wide apart
or near together?

_lákad_, To step over, climb over, cross a fence, etc. Lakáda,
lakádi (lakára, lakári) ang kodál. Step over the fence. Indì akó
makalákad dirí kay matáas. I cannot get over here, for it is too
high. (cf. lákbang, lákbay, lákdang, lákday, báklay).

_lakadán_, A sort of stile or low fence easily stepped over by grown-up
persons, but high enough to stop small children and animals; fender,
guard. (cf. lakarán id.).

_lakád-lákad_, Dim. and Freq. of lákad--to step over something, etc.

_lakáng_, A step, pace, stride; to step, pace, stride. Maglakáng ka
sing makalimá. Take five steps. Lakangí ang kinitáan sang tápì. Walk
along the board-seam. Lakangá lang ang kalóg. Just step over the
ditch. Lakangí lang ang kalóg. Walk along the ditch. (cf. tikáng).

_lák-ang_, A step, etc. See lakáng.

_lakarán_, (H) Stile, fender, guard. Butangí ang ganháan sing lakarán,
agúd índì makagwâ ang mga bátà. Put a fence across the door, so that
the children cannot go out. (cf. lakadán).

_lakás_, Excessive, exorbitant, extravagant, to excess, superabundant,
profuse, too much, overmuch, more than enough, beyond the proper
limit, unreasonable, immoderate; to be or do to excess, etc. Lakás
man inâ. That's really too much. Indì ka magkáon sing lakás, kay
maláin inâ sa láwas mo. Don't eat too much, for it is bad for your
health. Naglakás na ang bilí sang humáy. The price of rice has grown
exorbitant. Nalakasán akó sang íya nga ginhámbal, ininúm, kináon,
etc. He talked, drank, ate, etc. too much for my taste. Sa lakás
nga pangabúdlay nagbalatián siá. Due to excessive work he fell
ill. (cf. támà, masiádo, dúro, lám-ag).

_lakát_, (H) To go, start out, walk on foot, foot it, trudge,
tramp, hike, march, pace, step; travel; go away, leave; be current
or passing. Lakát (maglakát) ka na. Go now. Lákta (lakatá) ang
Ilóngílong. Go to Iloilo (on foot). Lákti (lakatí) iníng dálan. Walk
along this road. Lináktan níla ang bág-o nga dálan. They took the
new road. Walâ níla pagalákti ang dálan sang katarúngan. They are
not walking the road of righteousness. Naglakát na siá. He has
gone (away). He has left. Palákta siá. Make him go. Let him go (on
foot). Send him away. Ang túig (búlan) nga nagalakát. The current
year (month). Ang bilí nga nagalakát. The current price. (cf. pánaw,
lúmbus, kádto, laláktan, lalákton).

_lakát_, Course, way, method, manner; condition, state of affairs,
juncture, situation, pass. Ang tanán nga mga butáng nagasunúd sang
lakát sang íla kinaugálì. Everything follows the course of its
nature. Sa karón nga lakát sang panahón----. At this juncture----.

_lákay_, A mixture, admixture, adulteration; to mix, intermingle,
adulterate. Ang makán may lákay nga kalúbad. Ang makán nalakáyan sing
kalúbad. The macan-rice has an admixture of calubad-rice. (cf. símbug,
lakót, lágkay).

_lákbang_, To step--, walk--, climb--, cross--, over. Lakbangá
(lakbangí) ang kodál. Climb over the fence. (cf. lákad, lákbay,
báklay).

_lákbay_, To go or pass over a ridge, mountain,
etc. Lakbayá--or--lakbayí ang búkid, bakolód, etc. Cross over the
mountain, hill, etc. (cf. báklay).

_lákbut_, A flick, stroke; to flick, strike, beat, lash. (cf. háplak,
lápdus, búnal, lámpus, etc.).

_lákdang_, To step over, etc. See lákad, lákbang, lákbay.

_lákday_, See lákdang.

_lákdug_, To hinder, impede, obstruct. (cf. pugúng, pamalábag).

_lákhò_, Smothered laughter; to laugh and quickly make an effort to
suppress the laughter. Naglákhò siá. He burst out laughing, but at
once suppressed his laughter. (cf. lámhò).

_láki_, Man, male, masculine. (cf. laláki).

_lakí_, Grandfather. (cf. úlang, úyong, abuélo, lólo;
bayí-grandmother).

_lakí-láki_, Dim. of láki. Also: A piece of bamboo tied firmly to a
weak or broken carrier's pole, in order to strengthen it; splints for
a broken limb. May lakíláki ang íya nga tuángtuangán. His carrier's
pole is strengthened by an added piece of bamboo.

_lakíp_, Enclosed, inclosed, included, attached, joined to; to
enclose, comprise, attach, include. Lakíp siní ginapadalá ko sa
ímo ang----. Enclosed I am sending you the----. Walâ siá maglakíp
sa sulát sang íya nga laráwan. He did not put in the letter his
picture or photo. Ilakíp sa sulát mo ang bálus nga nabáton mo sa
kay Fuláno. Enclose in your letter the answer you have received from
N.N. Lakíp ang pagkáon. Board included. Free board. (cf. sulúd).

_láklak_, To lap, lick up, swill, guzzle, gulp, gobble, swallow
down, eat and drink, as dogs and pigs, etc. Ang báboy nagaláklak
sang damóg. The pig gulps down its swill. Ang túbig siníng
pínggan ginlaklakán sang idô. The dog lapped water from this
plate. (cf. hábhab, hákhak).

_láknad_, To extend, spread, disseminate, propagate, become or make
general. Nagláknad na ang pamalaúd sa búg-os nga bánwa. Dysentery
has now spread all over the town. May dakô nga katalágman nga ang
pangolerá magaláknad pa sa ibán nga bánwa. There is great danger of
the cholera spreading to other towns. Iníng puód nalaknadán (-arán)
na sang maáyo nga panghunàhúnà nga binanwahánon. A good civic spirit
has disseminated itself over this province. (cf. aláplag, lápta,
rápta, etc.).

_láknib_, To pile, stack, arrange in order. Laknibá ang mga tápì. Pile
up the boards. Laknibí akó sináng mga tápì. Stack those boards for
me. Nalaknibán níla sing tápì ang idálum sang baláy. They piled
up boards on the ground-floor of the house. Iláknib akó siníng mga
papél. Please put these papers in order for me. (cf. aníb, kamáda).

_láknit_, To tear asunder, tear off, separate, take away, pull apart,
strip off fibres or the like. Laknitá ang pakláng sang burí. Tear
the stalk of the buri-leaf into fibres. Laknití akó sing pilá ka
pakláng. Tear a few stalks into fibres for me. Iláknit akó siníng
pakláng. Please tear this stalk into fibre for me.

_lakón_, To cheat, deceive, appropriate more than one's share,
seize or take unlawfully, usurp, embezzle. Ginlakonán akó níya sing
limá ka písos. He cheated me to the extent of five pesos. Ginlakón
níya ang ákon kwárta. He embezzled or appropriated my money. Indì mo
paglakonón ang íya nga umá. Don't cheat him out of his land, don't
seize his land or part of it. (cf. lakúm, labán).

_lakót_, Mixture, mingling; to mix, mingle, intersperse, put in. Iníng
maís may lakót nga humáy--or--iníng maís naláktan sang humáy. This
corn is mixed with rice. Ginláktan níya ang sabáw sing áhos. He mixed
the sauce with garlic. Ginlakót níya ang áhos sa sabáw. He put garlic
into the sauce. Indì mo pagláktan ang ímo hunâhúnà sing babáe, agúd
índì madupág ang ímo pagtoón. Don't occupy your thoughts with women,
lest your studies should be interfered with. Ilakót iníng kalámay sa
bíno tínto, agúd magtám-is. Put this sugar into the red table-wine
to sweeten it. (cf. sámò, lákay, símbug, sákot).

_lákot_, To mingle incongruous ideas, talk inconsistently, ramble. Ang
búang nagalákot sang íya hámbal. The fool's talk is rambling--or--A
maniac or lunatic talks about incongruous things. (cf. sála).

_lákre_, (Sp. lacre) Sealing-wax; to seal with, or put on,
sealing-wax. Timbrehí ang lákre. Stamp the sealing-wax. Lakrehí ang
putús. Put some sealing-wax on the envelope. (cf. alákre).

_láksà_, Ten thousand. Isá ka gatús ka láksà. One million. Duhá ka
láksà. Twenty thousand.

_láksam_, To overstep, transgress, trespass, encroach, exceed,
surpass, go beyond the limit. Maningúhà ka gid, agúd ang ímo nga
kinitáan magláksam sang ímo nga hinguyáng. Do your best, and see that
your income exceeds your expenses. Nagláksam siá sang ákon dútà. He
encroached or trespassed on my land. He took part of my field. Indì mo
paglaksamón (-án) ang talámnan sang ibán. Don't trespass on another's
field. Don't appropriate fields belonging to another. (cf. sabán,
hámham, lámlam, sakáb, sakám, sáklam).

_láksaw_, Deer. See lágsaw.

_láksaw_, Tall, high (and slender); to be or grow tall,
etc. (cf. lántyog, matanús, matáas).

_láktan_, From lakát--to walk, etc.; also from lakót--to mix.

_láktaw_, To pass over, miss, skip, garble. Sang pagbása níya
nakaláktaw siá sing isá ka dinalán (ginlaktawán níya ang isá ka
dinalán). When he read he skipped a line. (cf. lúkhò, lúthò, lubás).

_laktáw-láktaw_, Dim. and Freq. of láktaw. Indì ka maglaktáwláktaw sang
ibán nga mga minítlang, kóndì basáha sing lángkoy kag maáthag. Don't
pass over some syllables, but read in a continuous and distinct
manner. (cf. lukhô-lúkhò, luthôlúthò).

_láktud_, A short cut, bee-line; to take a short cut, do something
in less than ordinary time or with less effort. May láktud nga dálan
pakádto dídto? Is there a short cut to there? Laktudá (-urá) lang
(ang paglakát mo). Simply take the short cut--or--Make a bee-line for
it. Laktudí lang ang umá. Go straight over the field. Sugíri akó sing
láktud sang marágtas sang ímo kabúhì. Tell me in short the history
of your life.

_laktúdan, laktúran_, A short-cut, straight road, bee-line. Kon may
laktúdan laktudón gid náton ang paglakát. If there is a short-cut,
let us take it.

_lákub_, To cover, spread--, extend--, fold--, over. (cf. lúkup).

_lakúb-lákub_, Eyelid. (cf. ilalakúb, ilalangúb).

_lakúm_, To cheat, deceive, defraud. See lakón.

_lákwat_, To raise, lift (the foot preparatory to walking,
etc). Lakwatá--or--ilákwat ang tiíl mo kag maglakát. Lift your foot
and walk. (cf. hákwat--to lift loads, etc.).

_lákwid_, To twist or turn round, twine, entwine. Lakwidá sang kahíg mo
ang íya kahíg--or--ilákwid ang kahíg mo sa íya kahíg. Twist your foot
round his (in wrestling or the like). Lakwidí siá sa íya batíis. Get a
twist round his leg. Lakwirá, lakwirí--lakwidá, lakwidí. (cf. sálbid,
lámbid, kámbid).

_lála_, (H) To weave, make wickerwork. Laláha ang kálò, amákan,
etc. Weave the hat, the bamboo-mat, etc. Laláhi akó sing tátlo ka
bílog nga malíndog. Weave for me three large rice-containers (of
bamboo). Kahibaló ka maglála? Can you make wickerwork? (cf. rára).

_lála, la-la_, Tonic sol-fa, solmisation, solfeggio; to sing
to the syllables do, re, mi, fa, so, la, si; sing la-la, sing
a lullaby. Laláha (la-láha) ánay ang mga nóta. Sing first the
notes by solmisation. Anó na man ang ginalála mo? Dáyon gid lang
ikáw nagalála. What are you solfaing for? You are always singing
la-la. Sín-o ang ginalaláhan mo? Whom are you singing the lullaby
to? Laláhi ang bátà. Sing to the baby a lullaby. (cf. láylay,
lánglang, lánton).

_lálà, lâlâ_, To strip, separate (meat from the bones, etc.); to cut
in pieces, dissect, disembowel; to drop, fall off (as withered leaves
or the like). (cf. ál-al; dágdag; pamutáputá, bósbos).

_lála_, To be cruel, treacherous, insidious (of diseases; cf. malála).

_lalab-ásan_, Fishing boat, fish basket. See
lab-ásan. (cf. ralab-ásan).

_lalábhan_, Dirty linen, things to be washed, clothes for the wash,
the wash. (cf. linábhan, labáda).

_lalagaón_, What is to--, what should--, be boiled; peas, beans,
tubers. (cf. lágà, lagaón).

_lalagarián_, Sawmill. (cf. lagárì).

_lalaghápon_, What is to be sought or looked for; difficult to
encounter, scarce, rare, seldom. (cf. lághap).

_lalágo_, Worm, dew-worm. (cf. lágo, lagó).


_lalak-ángon, lalakángon_, What is to be--, can be--, should
be--, reached by a step or two; near, within reach, easy to
step--down,--over,--across. (cf. lák-ang, lakáng).

_laláki_, Man, male; lover, paramour, correspondent. Magpakalaláki
ka. Be a man. Be brave. Act the man. Be manly. (cf. babáe,
babáye--woman; kalalakín-an).

_laláktan_, (H) Way, distance, route, road to be travelled over,
march, tramp, hike. (cf. lakát, lalákton). Also: What is to be,
or should be, mixed, etc. (cf. lakót).

_lalaktánan_, March, walk, stroll, hike, journey, road or way to be
gone or travelled over. (cf. laláktan, lalákton).

_lalákton_, Walk, hike, tramp, march, route, way to be gone over
(on foot). (cf. laláktan, lakát).

_lalá-lála_, Dim. and Freq. of lála--to sing a lullaby; to solfa,
etc. Daláyon gid lang siá nagalalá-lála sang dumáan nga "Ilí-íli
duyáyan, ibutáng si akáy sa dúyan". She is constantly singing the old
lullaby: "Ilí-íli duyáyan, put the darling into the "duyan" (hammock)".

_lalámpus_, (H) Club, cudgel, stick, cane, rod, piece of wood,
etc. used to strike or beat with. (cf. lámpus, bulunál, balálbal).

_laláng_, Contrivance, means, machination, design, scheme, plot; to
contrive, bring about, find means of doing something, etc. Sa laláng
sang----. Through the work or power or influence of----. Makalaláng
ka sa paghákwat siníng mabúg-at nga bató? Can you contrive or find
a way to lift this heavy stone? Lalangí ang pagbukás sang ganháan,
kay nadúlà ang lyábi. Open the door by some other means, for the key
is lost. (cf. raráng, pahítò, patúga, padihótan, etc.).

_lalangkágon_, (H) What is to be--expected,--worried about,--longed
for; desirable, looked forward to expectantly. (cf. lángkag).

_lalangóyan_, (H) Swimming pool, pond. (cf. langóy).

_lalantáwan_, (H) Observation-post, watch-station, lookout,
observatory. (cf. lántaw, bantáyan).

_lalantáwon_, (H) What is to be or should be watched; a spectacle,
show, sight, view.

_lalantípan_, Place where something is perfected. Lalantípan sang
púlong. An academy of language and literature; philology. (lántip).

_lalaó, lala-ó_, (B) Mud, slush, soft mire: to be or become muddy,
miry. Naglalaó ang dálan, kay madámol ang ulán. The road has become
muddy, because there has been a heavy rain. Mabúdlay ang paglakát
kon madálum ang lalaó. It is tiresome to walk, when the slush is
deep. (cf. lúnang).

_lalapakón_, What is to be, or should be, trodden or trampled upon;
despicable, contemptible, unworthy of consideration. (cf. lápak).

_lalás_, To tear, pull, drag off by force (vines, creepers,
etc.). Maglalás ka sang balágon--or--lalasá (lálsa) ang balágon. Tear
off the vine. Lalasí ang bató sang kadéna de amór. Tear the kadena
de amor away from the stone. Ginlalás gid lámang sang mga buyóng
ang matahúm nga mga kortína sa balatonán. The robbers pulled down by
force the beautiful curtains in the reception-room. Ilalás sa atóp
nga kógon iníng kawáyan nga may singít. Pull down the cogon-roof with
this bamboo that has a hook attached to it. (cf. káskas).

_lalatahán_, Factory for canning preserved fruit, meat, fish, etc. Ang
amó nga duóg patindogán níla, konó, sing lalatahán sang mga búnga sang
káhoy. On that spot, they say, they are going to build a factory for
canning fruits. (cf. láta, lalatahón).

_lalatahón_, To be canned or preserved in tins; fruit, vegetables,
meat, fish, etc. ready, fit or suitable for canning. (cf. láta).

_laláw_, Deep mourning, sorrow, grief; to wear mourning (dress),
wear black; be in mourning over the death of some near relative, be
in black or in widow's weeds. May laláw siá--or--nagalaláw siá. He is
mourning. Indì siá magsáut kay laláw níya--or--nagalaláw siá. He does
not dance, because he is in mourning. Sín-o ang ginalalawán mo? For
whom are you wearing black (or mourning) dress? (cf. lúto).

_lalawigán_, (H) Field or pasture where cattle, etc. are allowed
to roam freely or are tied with a long tether; meadow, grass-land,
grazing ground; a place or island far away. (cf. láwig).


_lálay_, A lullaby; to put--, lay--, a baby in a hammock or cradle
and sing a lullaby, sing a baby to sleep. (cf. yáyay, lála).

_lalím_, Taste, savour, flavour, tang; ingredient, element; to taste,
savour. Nakalalím akó sang kanámit sang úbas. I tasted some delicious
grapes. Ipalalím ko sa íya iníng bibíngka. I shall let him taste this
bibinca (a kind of rice-cake). Walâ siá sing lalím. He is an insipid,
annoying, disagreeable fellow. Ang amó nga mga lalím sang áton pagkáon
nagapabákud sang láwas. Those elements in our food give strength to
the body. (cf. dímdim, sámsam, sagámsam, idilímdim, panákot).

_lális_, To disobey, contravene, leave unobserved, pay no heed
to, violate, transgress, infringe, be insubordinate; to gainsay,
disregard. Indì ka maglális sang sógò sang ímo ginikánan. Do
not disobey the orders of your parents. Indì mo paglalíson ang
gintúgon níya sa ímo. Don't neglect to carry out the order he
entrusted to you. Ginlális níya ang íya agálon--or--ginlális níya
ang sógò sang íya agálon. He paid no heed to the command of his
master. Kamatuóran nga dílì malális----. A truth that cannot be
gainsaid (disregarded)----. (cf. lápas, lípas: himutíg).

_lálsan, lálson_, From lalás.

_lalúd_, (B) Dregs, sediment, settlings, lees. (cf. lábud, lágdò).

_lalúg_, See lalúd, lábud, lágdò.

_lalúgay_, Intestinal worm, taenia, tapeworm. (cf. lúgay, solitáryo,
bítok, bítos).

_lálung_, Now and then used as verb instead of lalúng--to
cripple. (cf. rárung).

_lalúng_, Crippled, seriously injured, wounded. (cf. pilasón).

_lalúng_, (H) To wound, injure seriously, cripple. Nalalúng siá
sa pangawáyan. He was wounded in the war. Indì mo paglalungón ang
karabáw sang ímo binángon. Don't injure the buffalo with your bolo. Ang
pagawáyan amó ang ginalalungán sang madámò nga mga mangangawáy. On the
field of battle many soldiers are wounded. Ang mga lalúng íla gindalá
sa bulúlngan. They carried the wounded to the hospital (cf. pílas).

_lámà_, To scratch, cut, graze (with a sharp-edged piece of wood,
bamboo or the like). Nalámà ang bútkon ko sa bagákay. My arm got
scratched by a bagákay-reed. Anó ang nakalámà sang ímo batíis? What
gave you that cut in the calf of your leg? (cf. gábà, báklis, balíkas,
pákris, etc.).

_lámà_, To hustle, despatch quickly, be or do--in a
hurry,--carelessly. Lamáa lang ang pagbúnak, paglútò, etc. Hurry the
wash, cook quickly, etc.

_lamâ_, To break, crush. Nalamâ or nálmà ang isá ka nahót nga kawáyan,
kay nalapákan sang káro. A piece of bamboo was crushed, for the cart
passed over it. (cf. lumâ which is more in use, pusâ, báak, búung).

_lamádà_, To talk glibly, flippantly, talk nonsense; bosh,
trash, absurdity. Indì ka maglamádà sa ákon--or--índì mo akó
paglamadáan. Don't talk nonsense to me. (cf. lamásang, lásang,
puriákot, piríkat).

_lám-ag_, (B) Too much, excessive, immoderate, extravagant, beyond
measure; to be excessive, do something to excess. Indì ka magpalám-ag
sang hámbal. Don't talk too much. Lám-ag kabúg-at iní sa ákon. This is
too heavy for me. Nalam-agán akó sinâ. That is too much for me. I have
had more than enough of that. Ginpalam-agán akó níya sang buyáyaw. He
surpassed himself in swearing at me. (cf. támà, lakás, masiádo, dúro).

_lamá-lamá_, To suspend judgment, have one's doubts about, doubt,
hesitate, feel some apprehension or fear. Indì ka maglamálamá, kay
matúod gid ang sinúgid ko sa ímo. Don't have any doubts now, for what
I have told you is perfectly true. Ginalamálamahán níya inâ. He is
in doubt about that. He is apprehensive about it. (cf. duhádúha).

_lamâlámà_, Dim. and Freq. of lámà. Also: To harrow. Indì pa ánay
paglamâlamáon ang talámnan, kóndì daróhon pa sing makaduhá. Don't
harrow the field as yet, but go twice more over it with the plough.

_lámang_, Only, just, simply, merely, solely, barely, but, excepting
that, not more than. Indì lámang kay (Indì lámang nga)----,
kóndì----. Not only----, but----.

_lámang_, To do or take something without more ado, without
investigation, believing the object taken to belong to oneself. Indì
ka maglámang sang ákon nga sángkap. Don't take, or make use of,
my tools without permission, don't say: "I'll just (lámang) take
them". Ginlamángan ko ang ímo tulún-an, kay dúmdum ko nga ákon. I took
your book thinking it was mine. Kon maglakát ka buás sa ága pa gid,
mutáron mo sing maáyo ang mga kálò sa saláb-ítan; básì malamángan
mo ang ákon kag madalá mo sa malayô mo nga kaladtoán. When you leave
early to-morrow morning, have a good look at the hats on the hat-stand;
for otherwise you might get hold of mine and take it along on your
far journey. (cf. lábni).

_lamanít_, Lean, skinny, thin, spare, emaciated. Lamanít nga báka. A
skinny cow. Naglamanít siá sa lakás nga pangabúdlay. He has become
lean through overwork. (cf. pánit, kalamanít, maníwang, hágpis).

_lamáno_, (Sp. la mano) To salute by shaking hands, shake hands,
grasp the hand, welcome. Maglamanoháy kamó. Shake hands. Lamanóha,
siá. Shake hands with him--or--Welcome him. (cf. abíábi).

_lamás_, (Sp. amasar) To knead, make dough. Lamasá ang arína. Make
dough of the flour. Lamasí akó sing isá ka sáko nga arína. Make dough
of a sack of flour for me. Natigána (naáman, nahándà) na balá áng
arína nga ilamás (malasahón) ko sa tinápay? Is the flour ready that
I shall make into dough for bread? (cf. mása).

_lámas_, To rub, scrape, massage. See rámas. Also: to handle roughly,
beat.

_lamásang_, Nonsense, twaddle, bosh, absurdity; to drivel, talk
nonsense, etc. See lamádà id.

_lámat_, (H) To be or become dim, see indistinctly. Nagalámat
ang panúluk ko. My eyesight is getting dim. (cf. rámat; bulánon,
mabinulánon).

_lamát-lamát_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of lámat. Nagalamátlamát na ang
íya itulúluk. His sight has become a little dim.

_lamáw_, To grope with the hand in slush, mud, dirty water, etc. Lamawá
ang kasíng nga nagkádto sa danáw. Grope for the spinning top that
went into the pool. Lamawí akó sang lansítas nga nahúlug sa tulúgban
sang karabáw. Grope for my knife that fell into the buffalo wallow.

_lamawán, lamáwan_, A pit or pool, where offal, dishwater, etc. are
usually disposed of (as near a kitchen); kitchen-sink. (cf. lamáw;
ulaán).

_lámay_, Dry banana-leaves. (cf. rámay).

_lamayó_, Dried fish, sun-dried fish (salted or without being salted).

_lamayó_, To be or become rather hard or dry, but not very dry; to
be pliable or damp. Ang kusáhos walâ gid mag-ugá, kóndì naglamayó
lang. The slice (of meat) has not become thoroughly dry, but only
slightly so. Hálus naglamayó ang mga panápton nga inamidolán pinúnpun
ko, kay daw matupâ ang ulán. As soon as the starched clothes were
slightly dry, I gathered them in, because it looked as if it was
going to rain.

_lámba_, To strike, beat, drub, thrash, throw, push. Ginlámba níya
siá sa díngding. He threw him against the wall or partition. Ilámba
siá sa salúg. Throw him to the ground. Lay him low. Knock him
down. Ginlambahán níya akó sing lalámpus. He drubbed me with a stick
or club. (cf. lámpus, bálbal, búnal, etc.).

_lámbang_, To intercept, catch, stop, thwart. See lámbat.

_lámbas_, Inundation, flood; to inundate, overflow, cover,
flood. Ang subâ naglámbas sang ámon dútà. The river inundated our
land. Linámbas sang túbig ang ámon talámnan. Our rice-field was
flooded, (cf. lángbas).

_lámbat_, To intercept on the road, stop, halt, bar or block the way,
preclude the passage of, obstruct the progress of. Lamhatí siá sa
dálan. Stop him on the road. Naglámbat siá sa ákon or linambatán níya
akó. He intercepted me on my way. He prevented me from proceeding on
my way. (cf. sámbat, bálag, pamalábag; bánggà, bángan).

_lámbat_, Guard, keeper, watchman (especially in various games). Sín-o
ang lámbat ukón bántay dídto? Who is the guard or keeper there?

_lámbat_, (H) Band, cross-stripe. Ang dúghan níya may lámbat nga
mapulá. Across his breast there was (is) a red stripe or band.

_lámbay_, To intercept, stop on the road etc. See lámbat, puút, bálag,
sámbat, bánggà, bángan. Lambayí siá. Intercept him (on the road).

_lámbid_, To twist or turn round, put round, trip up with one's
foot. Lambirí (-idí) siá. Trip him up. Ilámbid sa íya ang ímo
tiíl. Twist your foot round him. Lambirá ang tiíl mo. Cross your
legs. (cf. kámbid, lákwid, sálbid).

_lambíki_, (Sp. alambique) Still, distillery; plant for manufacturing
intoxicating drinks.

_lámbing_, To secure, bind, fasten; to grip, grasp, grapple
with. (cf. lámbid, kámbid, lákwid, sálbid).

_lambiráy, lambíray_, To become entangled, get twisted; twist
around each other. Naglambiráy ang písì. The string became
entangled. (cf. lámbid).

_lámbit_, To mention, relate, refer to. Anó gánì ang ginlámbit
níya? What did he really refer to? Lambití siá sa nahanungúd sang
pagpatíndog sang ákon baláy. Talk to him about the building of my
house. Ang nalámbit sa hitáas----. What was mentioned above or
before----. The above mentioned----. The aforesaid----. Indì ka
maglámbit sinâ sa íya. Don't mention that to him. Don't tell him of
that. Ilámbit sa íya nga----. Tell him that----. Ngáa man nga walâ
mo pagilámbit inâ sa ákon nga dáan? Why did you not mention that to
me before? Why didn't you tell me beforehand? (cf. sámbit).

_lámbò_, Healthy vitality, lustiness, growth, development; to grow
well or fast. Nagalámbò iníng kawáyan, kabáyo, táo, etc. This bamboo,
horse, man, etc. is growing well. Walâ sing pagkalámbò (walâ sing
nagalámbò, malámbò) ang mga (sa mga) dútà nga kigás. Nothing grows
well on arid or desert ground (soil). Kalámbò siníng mga tanúm! How
well these plants grow!

_lámbo_, A fish-hook. (cf. tagâ).

_lámbun_, Manure, fertilizer. (cf. abóno).

_lámbun_, To loosen the earth, dig up the ground around a plant,
to hill plants. Lambuní ang talóng. Loosen the earth around the
eggplant. Hill the eggplant. (cf. pahábok).

_lambunáwon_, Dim, misty, not bright, covered with clouds (of the
moon); dim, weak, not sharp (of eyesight). (cf. bulánon, mabinulánon).

_lámbung_, Shadow, shade; to give shade to, etc. Nalambungán siá sang
madábung nga páhò. He was in the shadow of the dense foliage of the
mango-tree. Walâ magalámbung sa íla painóíno ang kasubô. No sorrow
beclouds their thoughts. (cf. hándong, háron).

_lámbung_, Cape, mantle, cloak, shawl, covering for the shoulders
(of women). (cf. kúnop, kúmbot).

_lámbut_, To reach, overtake, attain, obtain. Nalámbut ko siá sa
dálan. I overtook him on the road. Indì akó makalámbut sang laráwan
nga sa díngding. I cannot reach the picture on the wall. (cf. ábut,
dángat, dáb-ot).

_lamésa_, (Sp. la mesa) Table. (cf. tulungtúngan, látok).

_lámgod_, Poor, unproductive, barren, sterile (of soil, etc.). See
lánggod id. Iníng mga punâ (pinunâ) sang dútà pulús mga maáyo gid
nga walâ sing pagkalámgod. These plots of grounds are all excellent
and contain no barren soil.

_lámhad_, Young, immature; to be young, tender, immature.

_lamháron_, Immature, inexperienced, greenhorn, young. (cf. bag-óhan,
lágbus, payaón, lanúbò, bataón).

_lámhit_, An inflammation of the eyelids, the lower eyelids being
particularly liable to this irritating, if not dangerous, disease;
gummy secretion of the eyes; blearedness.

_lamhitón_, One affected with lámhit, pertaining to lámhit.

_lámhò_, To giggle, smile, make an effort to suppress any
sudden impulse to laugh, break out into a smile and suppress
it at once. Naglámhò siá. He smiled, but then looked serious at
once. (cf. lákhò).

_lamî_, Taste, flavour, savour. (cf. lalím, dímdim).

_lamî_, Soft, flabby, impressionable, yielding to slight pressure;
to be soft, etc. Naglamî na gid ináng kapáyas; índì na akó kaúyon
sinâ. This papaya has become quite soft now; I do not like it any
more. Lamî iníng kárne. This meat is soft. (cf. hómok, lúm-uk, yamî).

_lamíg_, Fresh, cold, chilly; to be or become cold. Naglamíg na
ang bángkay. The corpse is cold now, has become cold. Ginalamigán
akó siníng tiémpo. I am feeling cold in this weather. Nalamigán akó
kahápon. I felt cold yesterday. (cf. búgnaw, túgnaw, ramíg).

_lamígas_, Shelled peas and beans.

_lamî-lamî_, Dim. and Freq. of lamî. Also: to eat with little or no
appetite. Paundangá na ang bátà, kay nagalamîlamî. Stop feeding the
baby, for it has no appetite.

_lamína_, (Sp. lámina) Picture, illustration, print. (cf. laráwan,
estámpa).

_lamínday_, Slow, weak, feeble; to do slowly, etc. Lamínday ang íya
paglakát, pangabúdlay, etc. He walks, works, etc. slowly. Nagalamínday
siá sa pagkáon--or--lamínday siá sing pangáon. He is a slow
eater. Naglamínday ang karabáw, kay nabúdlay. The buffalo is slow,
for it is tired. (cf. ágday, búndul, pákok, hínay, lágday, etc.).

_lamitá_, To include, take with, put together with. Sang paghímos mo
sang ímo maléta nalamitá mo man ang ákon báyò. When you were making
ready your handbag, you put in also my jacket. (cf. lakíp, lámang).

_lámlam_, To grasp, seize, take firm hold of. Lamlamá ang
pagúyat sang ímo kaláptan. Take a firm grasp on what you
hold. Lamlamí--or--palamlamí ang báso sang kamót mo. Grasp the
glass firmly with your hand. Ilámlam ang kamót mo sa pínggan, agúd
índì makapalús. Hold the plate firmly in your hand, lest it should
slip. Ipalámlam ang págbo sa baláyan. Join the rafter firmly to
the girder. Ginlámlam níya ang isá ka báhin sang ákon umá. He took,
seized or usurped, part of my field. (cf. hámham, samál, sabán, etc.).

_lámnog_, A kind of branchless plant.

_lamód_, Mixture, addition, ingredient; to mix with, add to. May
lamód nga maís ang ínyo kán-on? Has your rice an admixture of
corn? Iníng tsokoláte may lamód nga maní. This chocolate is mixed
with peanuts. Lamodí (-orí) ang bugás sing maís. Mix the rice with
corn. Ilamód iníng balúnggay sa tinóla. Put these balúnggay-leaves
into the sauce. Lamodá (-orá) ang mónggo kag kadyós. Mix monggo--and
cadios--peas together. (cf. lakót, sámò, símbug, lángkay, lákay,
símpon, etc.).

_lám-od_, To swallow greedily, devour, gulp down. Indì mo paglam-odón
ang tinápay. Don't eat bread so greedily. Naglám-od gid lang siá
sang ságing nga walâ níya pagusánga. He swallowed the banana without
chewing it. (cf. lámon, halúnhon, subád, síbà, sibád; lam-odá,
lam-odí--lam-orá, lam-orí, etc.

_lamógò_, Soiled, stained, dirty; to be or become soiled (through
perspiration, long use, dust, etc., particularly applied to
clothes). Lamógò ang ákon báyò. My jacket is soiled. Naglamógò ang
ákon sárwal. My trousers became dirtied. (cf. lagôlagô, hígkò, etc.).

_lamók_, Mosquito. (cf. namók).

_lamokón_, Full of mosquitoes; pertaining to mosquitoes. (lamók).

_lamón_, Quite blind, stone-blind, blind in both eyes, bereft of sight,
sightless; to be blind, etc. Lamón siá. He is quite blind. Naglamón
siá. He went quite blind. (cf. butá; bulág--blind in one eye,
half-blind, one-eyed).

_lámon_, To put a whole piece into the mouth; to swallow, devour, bolt
(down), gulp down, gobble up. Indì mo paglamónon (paglúmyon) ang kárne,
kóndì usángon mo ánay sing maáyo. Don't gulp down the meat, but chew
it well first. Ginlámon sang pakâ ang lalágo. The frog gobbled up the
dew-worm. Dinakúp sang mán-og ang pakâ kag lamónon. The snake caught
the toad and gobbled it up. Ang singgálong makalámon sing pisô. The
fox can swallow a small chicken whole. (cf. lám-od, tukúb, sibád,
lamóy, tulún, halúnhun, subád, panagítlon).

_lamón-lamón_, Dim. of lamón. Nearly blind, seeing obscurely,
half-blind, purblind.

_lám-os_, (H) To bespatter, besprinkle, cast upon. Nalám-os akó
sang lalaó. I got bespattered with mud. Sín-o ang naglám-os sang ímo
guyá? Who bespattered your face? Linam-osán níya ang ákon báyò sing
ápog. He sprinkled lime on my jacket. Indì mo pagilám-os sa íya iníng
kapáyas nga dunút. Don't throw this rotten papaw at him. (cf. ásik,
ásang, wisík).

_lamóy_, (B) To swallow, gobble, devour. Indì ka magpalígos dirâ,
kay básì lámyon ka sang buáya, bagís, etc. Don't bathe there, for
a crocodile, shark, etc. may devour you. (cf. lámon, tulún, síbà,
halúnhun, lumóy).


_lampagák_, A slut, slattern; sluttish, slatternly, slovenly, untidy,
dressed up like a scarecrow, (said especially of women).

_lampanó_, Growing well, developing finely, becoming strong and
tall. Lampanó nga tabákò, tubó, táo, etc. Well-growing tobacco,
finely developing sugar-cane, a person growing tall and strong, etc.

_lampará, lámpara_, (Sp. lámpara) Lamp, light. (cf. sugâ, íwag,
kapáwà, solô, sánag, tínghoy, kínke).

_lamparónes_, (Sp. lamparones) The king's evil, scrofula.

_lámpas_, To reach, arrive at, make, actually come to. Indì akó
makalámpas sang Ilóngílong túbtub sa panyága. I cannot make Iloilo for
dinner. Lampasá gíd ang Ogtóng túbtub maghápon. Try to reach Oton by
evening. Ginalámpas siníng sakayán ang Ilóngílong kag Négros sa duhá
ka táknà. This boat covers the distance between Iloilo and Negros
within two hours. (cf. lángpas).

_lampáso_, (Sp. lampazo) A mop, swab, cloth; to mop, wipe, rub with a
wet cloth, swab. Lampasóhi ang salúg. Mop the floor. Wipe the floor
with a wet cloth. Ilampáso iníng lapát sa lamésa. Use this rag to
wipe the table with. Nalampasóhan na ang tanán nga mga hulút. All
the rooms have been swabbed. (cf. dágnas).

_lámpaw_, To put--on,--over,--above,--on top of. Ilampaw ang binókbok
sa láta. Put the powdered (rice) on top of the tin. (cf. sámpaw).

_lampáwan_, A form or mould, usually of wickerwork, used in the
preparation of various rice-cakes, especially púto. (cf. putohán).

_lampayát_, A pet, one desirous of being caressed or played with;
to wish to be fondled, petted or taken much notice of. (cf. paánggà;
lapíng-it, laping-itán).

_lámpin_, Swaddling clothes, swaddling band; to swaddle. Lampiní ang
bátà. Swaddle the baby. Lampinón ko gid iníng bunáng. I shall make
swaddling-clothes of this yarn. Ilámpin iní sa bátà. Swaddle the baby
with this. Pinutús níya ang bátà sa mga lámpin. She wrapped the baby
in swaddling clothes.

_lampingásan_, Wicked, villainous, rascally, mean, shameless; a
scoundrel, villain, rascal, a man without honour or virtue, a base
wretch; to be or become villainous, etc. Naglampingásan na ang madámò
nga mga táo, kay walâ silá pagtóo kag walâ pagsapák sang mga sógò sang
Díos. Many men have become very wicked, because they have no faith
and pay no heed to God's commandments. (cf. banyágà, tampalásan,
waláy, huyâ, etc.).

_lampírong_, A kind of sea-shell. (cf. báy-ad, tipáy).

_lampitás_, Very touchy, sensitive, apt to take offence and cry on
the slightest provocation. (cf. ámog, bingít, mabingít, pawíkan).

_lampitáw_, An observer, spy, secret service man, detective; to spy
upon, observe closely, keep one's eye on. Lampitawá ang mga mamumugón
sa umá kon mapísan silá sa pagpangabúdlay. Keep your eye on the
workmen in the field and see whether they work hard. Maglampitáw ka sa
kaáway--or--lampitawá ang mga kaáway. Spy upon the enemy. Lampitawá
ang íla mga gího kag húlag. Watch their plans and movements. Dinakúp
níla ang lampitáw kag pinatáy. They caught the spy and killed
him. (cf. tíktik).

_lampitús_, Joking, jesting, making fun; jocularity, facetiousness;
a joker, jester, clown, buffoon, one who is jocose and makes others
laugh at his jokes. (cf. uslitón, uslitán, lahóglahogán, langás,
alakáyo, etc.).

_lámpong_, Young, tender, soft, immature. (cf. lanúbò, lágbus,
malúm-ok, mahómok, etc.).

_lampúas_, (H) To vanish, disappear, dissolve, disperse; to pass,
go beyond, reach and move on. Nagalampúas na ang asó. The smoke is
clearing off. Ginapalampúas na sang ádlaw ang mga gál-um. The sun is
dispersing the clouds. Walâ pa siá makalampúas sa ikaduhá ka púlò ka
pagsukát. He has not yet passed his twentieth birth-day, (he is not
yet twenty years old). (cf. púas; lámpas; lápas, ligad, lubás).

_lámpus_, To strike, beat, drub, cudgel, cane, knock, whack, wallop,
whop, rap, tap, hit, club. Ginlampusán níya si Fuláno sing inútud nga
kawáyan. He struck N.N. with a piece of bamboo. Ilámpus mo sa báboy
iníng bastón. Hit the pig with this stick. Throw this stick at the
pig. (cf. lámba, bálbal, etc.).


_lampúwas_, See lampúas.

_lampúyang_, A kind of plant. It is used as a remedy for boils,
swellings, etc.

_lamuhát_, To do in and out of season, do at all times, please
oneself. (cf. yamuhát, yapákyapák).

_lamúsut_, To be squashed, crushed to pulp, flattened. Nalamúsut
(naglamúsut) ang tanáng nga kapáyas, kay nalapákan ko. That overripe
papaw was crushed to pulp, when I stepped on it. (cf. ramúsot).

_lamutî_, Blister; to form blisters. Napásò ang bútkon ko kag
naglamutî. My arm got scorched or scalded and blisters rose on
it. (cf. láp-ok).

_lána_, (Sp. lana) Wool, fleece, woollen manufacture. Dilána (Sp. de
lana)--woollen, made of wool, flannel.

_lána_, Oil, especially coconut oil. (cf. súmpa, ugásip, gatâ,
latík, laná).

_laná_, To make oil, extract oil from coconuts. Lanahá iníng mga 
lubí. Make oil from these coconuts. Lanahí akó sing duhá ka 
botílya (nga lána). Make two bottles of coconut oil for me. 
Diín si Fuláno?-- Nagalaná siá. Where is N.N.?--He is making 
coconut oil.

_lána_, To oil, treat with oil, ingratiate oneself with. Lanáhi 
ang mákina (makiná) sa tahî, agúd magtánlas. Oil the sewing 
machine in order that it may run smoothly. Maglána ka sa íya--, 
Lanáhi siá--, agúd pasúgtan níya ikáw. Oil him, i.e., ingratiate 
yourself   with him, so that he may allow you to have your will. 
(cf. laná).

_lanáb_, A slight rise in a river; to rise a little. Nagalanáb man
lang ang subâ. The river has risen a little. (cf. búlus, dalódò, bahâ).

_lánag_, To surfeit, feel nausea, loathe. Nalánag siá sang
tulíngan. The tulíngan-fish made him sick. He is surfeited with
eating tulíngan-fish.

_lánag_, To be wet, moist, damp, soaked.

_lanág_, A piece of wet, moist, well-watered ground; moist, wet,
well-watered. May lanág kamí sa ámon palangúmhan. We have a piece of
well-watered ground in our farm. (cf. longasóg, hagubhúban).

_lán-ag_, A crack, chap, fissure in the skin (due to exposure to
water in planting rice, washing clothes, etc.); to form cracks or
fissures. Naglán-ag ang batíis ko sa panálug sing haroán. I got my
calf covered with fissures on account of groping for haroán-fish in
the water. Nalan-agán ang tiíl níya sang tánum. The skin of his foot
cracked from planting rice. Ang labandéra may lán-ag sa kamót. The
washerwoman has chapped hands--or--has chaps on her hands. (cf. litík,
balanâ, etc.).

_lanahán_, Oil-bottle, receptacle for coconut-oil, oil-vase,
oil-cruet. (cf. laná).

_laná-lána_, Dim. and Freq. of laná. To oil; to soap, flatter,
ingratiate oneself with. Sagád siá maglanálána sa kay Fuláno. He is
an adept at flattering N.N. (cf. hapúlas, apóhap, dalôdálò, etc.).

_lánas_, To take within one's range, devour by spreading, extend to and
destroy (of fire); to overflow, inundate, cover (of water). Ginlánas
sang kaláyo ang ámon baláy. The fire spread to our house and
destroyed it. Bantayí sing maáyo ang ímo baláy, agúd índì malánas
sang kaláyo. Watch your house well, lest the fire should take it
within its range, (lest the fire should reach it). (cf. ábang, ánas;
lámbas, lángbas).

_lanát_, To covet, look longingly or wistfully upon, stare at with
greedy eyes. Ang mga matá níya nagalanát sa mga páhò. His eyes are
looking longingly at the mangoes. Ginalanatán sang mga matá sang bátà
ang matám-is nga kalanónon. The boy is staring with greedy eyes at
the sweet pastry. Indì nínyo paglanatán sang ínyo mga matá ang mga
pagkáon sa látok. Don't stare with greedy eyes at the food on the
table. Indì mo pagilanát ang ímo mga matá sa mga bibínka. Don't cast
greedy looks on the bibinca-cakes.

_lánaw_, To observe well, watch, scrutinize, be on the look-out,
keep one's eye on, keep in sight or view. Ang salagiáwan nagalánaw
sang mga pisô. The hawk is on the look-out for chickens. Lanáwa ang
lampitáw. Keep a watch on the spy. Ang kaáway nagalánaw sang áton mga
mangangawáy. The enemy is closely observing our soldiers. (cf. lántaw,
panílag, bántay).

_lánay_, To shine, glisten, be lustrous. Nagalánay ang bohók
mo sa támà nga lána. Your hair is shining with an excess of
coconut-oil. (cf. sílì).

_lándas_, To crush, hammer, overcome, vanquish, conquer, outdo, worst,
beat. Indì ka makalándas sa ákon sa dalágan. You can't outdo me in
running. Landasá siá sa dúmug. Overcome him in wrestling. Landasá
siá sa pagdáro. Outstrip him in ploughing. Dílì malándas iní. This
cannot be beaten, is not to be overcome. (cf. daúg).

_landasán_, Anvil, stithy. (cf. hasóhasánan).

_lándì_, Vain, ostentatious, frivolous, carrying oneself proudly,
pretentious, showing affectation, worldly-minded. (cf. dayáw, bugalón,
matinaastaáson, palabilabíhon).

_lándok_, To plant cuttings (of kamóti, alugbáti, etc.). Ilándok iníng
mga láon sang kamóti. Plant these cuttings of sweet potatoes. Iníng
dútà saráng malandokán sing alugbáti. You can plant alugbáti on
this ground.

_landó-lándo_, To roam or walk about idly, loiter, loaf, lounge about;
loafer, vagabond, idle fellow. (cf. lagáwlágaw, haráyháray, ladóy,
tiyógtiyóg).

_lándong_, Shade, shadow; to give or provide shade, be
shady. Nalandongán kamí dídto sang madábung nga páhò. We were there
in the shade of the dense foliage of the mango-tree. Landongí ang
bátà sang páyong. Shade the baby with the umbrella. Ilándong sa bátà
ang páyong. Use the umbrella to shade the baby. Mapasílong kitá sa
lándong sang káhoy, kay támà kaínit sang ádlaw dirí. Let us take
shelter in the shade of the tree, for the heat of the sun here is
excessive. (cf. hándong, lámbung, háron).

_lándong_, Stateliness, impressiveness, dignity, imposing carriage or
demeanour; handsomeness, good looks. Walâ gid siá sing lándong. He
(She) is not prominent, not impressive, not handsome, not of an
imposing presence or the like.

_landóngan_, Shadowy, shady; imposing, commanding respect, dignified,
prominent.

_lanéte_, A kind of tree yielding a fine, white timber used chiefly
in furniture-making.

_lang_, Only, just, simply, but quite frequently used for mere
euphony's sake. Kádto ka lang dídto, kon malúyag ka. Just go there,
if you like. Amó lang iní? Is this all? (cf. lámang id.).

_lángà_, Oblivious, forgetful, half-witted, wandering in one's mind;
silly, idiot, wool-gathering; to be very oblivious, forgetful,
etc. (cf. hángà, buángbuáng, buangít, pungág, kolôkolô).

_langâ-langâ, langâlángà_, Dim. and Freq. of lángà. Also: to be
absent-minded, very forgetful, wandering in one's mind, making
contradictory statements, behaving like a fool. Nagalangâlangâ siá
sa íya panabát. He gives incoherent or contradictory answers. His
mind is wandering.

_langá-langá_, Foolish, silly, crazy, out of one's wits (said
especially of poultry). Iháwon ta lang ang mungâ, kay nagalangálangá
or kay langálangá. Let us kill the hen, for she is crazy, (i.e. laying
her eggs sometimes here and sometimes there, but never for any length
of time in the same place. (cf. buángbuáng, talángtaláng).

_langá-lánga_, A large earthen bowl; to use such a bowl. (cf. kám-aw).

_langán_, End, termination, ceasing, break; to stop, terminate,
come to an end or break. Sa waláy langán. Without end, interruption
or break. (cf. puót, sa waláy puót, sa waláy katapúsan).

_langán-langán_, Dim. and Freq. of langán.

_langás_, Joke, jest, fun, wit, drollery, pleasantry, humour, smart
saying, flash of merriment; to tell jokes, make fun, etc. Nagalangás
(nagalinangás) siá. He is joking. Linangasán níya akó. He told me
some funny things or ridiculous stories. Langasí kamí sang ímo mga
hurubáton. Let us hear some of your jokes (witty sayings). (cf. lahúg,
hámpang, linangás).

_láng-at_, Interruption, interval, interstice, break, respite, interim,
meantime; distance from; to put in an interval, be distant from,
etc. Lang-atán mo sing isá ka ádlaw kag ugáling magbálik ka. Knock off
for one day and then return. Come back the day after to-morrow. May
láng-at nga duhá ka táknà. There was (is) an interval or pause of
two hours. Nagláng-at siá sing diótay nga tión kag pumadáyon siá
sang íya paglakát. He stopped for a few moments and then continued
his march. (cf. langán, puót, bál-ot, tápnà).

_lang-átay_, Distance between two or more objects; to be distant from
one another. Ang íla sinâ nga lang-átay (paglang-átay) mga duhá lámang
ka métros. Their distance from each other is only about two metres.


_lángaw_, Fly, house-fly; to be or become full of flies. Ginalangáwan
lang dirí ang mamón. The cakes in this place are full of flies i.e. are
not eaten, do not sell well, or the like.

_lángbas_, Inundation, flood; to overflow, cover, inundate,
flood. Nalangbasán ang ámon umá sang subâ. Our field was flooded
by the river. Ang búlan sa Oktúbre amó ang inogpanglángbas
(inogpanlángbas). The month of October is the season of floods. Ang
túbig naglángbas sang idálum sang ákon baláy. The water covered the
ground-floor of my house. (cf. lámbas).

_lángdò_, Sediment, dregs, lees; juice, distillation. (cf. lágdò).

_lángdong_, Shadow, etc. See lándong.

_lánggab_, To covet, desire, etc. See hánggab, hingamó, himúlat.

_langgádà_, To talk, converse, tell stories, prate, prattle. Anó
na man ang ímo ginlanggádà dídto? What stories did you tell there
now? (cf. súgid, panúgid, búrà, wákal).

_lánggang_, Yellow, ruddy, reddish; to turn yellow or red (of ripening
fruit). Nagalánggang na ang búnga sang kamúnsil. The camunsel-fruit
is turning red, is getting ripe.

_lánggaw_, Vinegar; to turn vinegar, become sour, to sour. Naglánggaw
ang tubâ. The toddy turned into vinegar. (Palanggawá) Langgawá lang
iníng bíno. Let this wine turn into vinegar, have this wine made
into vinegar.

_lánggay_, A foolish, stupid woman, feather-head. (cf. langkálángka,
panggápángga).

_lánggod_, Poor, sterile, barren (of fields); to be or become
barren. Lánggod nga dútà. Poor soil. (cf. lámgod).

_lánggot_, To commence to eat or graze, start taking other food than
milk. Ang bátà nagalánggot na sing kán-on. The baby is now beginning to
eat rice. Ang tínday sang karabáw anád na maglánggot sing hilamón. The
buffalo-calf is now accustomed to graze. (cf. dámgot, dánggot).

_lánggoy_, A foolish, stupid man, silly fellow. (cf. langkólángko,
panggópánggo; lánggay-silly woman).

_lánghas_, To look for, go in quest of, search for, try to find
or get. Langhasá ang ákon igsulúlat nga nadúlà. Look for my lost
pen. Langhasí akó sing ságing. Get me some bananas. Ilánghas akó sang
ákon pányo nga nawígit (nagkawígit) sa dálan. Kindly go in search
of my handkerchief that has been dropped on the road. (cf. lághap,
sághap, pangítà).

_lánghò_, Chuckle, giggle; to chuckle, giggle, laugh. (cf. lámhò).

_lángiaw_, To be or make watery, thin, to thin out, dilute
(liquids). Iníng gátas naglángiaw. This milk has curdled, coagulated,
separated, become part clotted and part watery. Langiawá ang tíntà sing
túbig, kay támà kalapúyut. Water the ink, for it is too thick. Ilángiaw
sa sabáw iníng isá ka báso nga túbig. Thin out the sauce with this
glass of water. (cf. básiaw).

_láng-ig_, A bad smell as of rotten fish, etc.; to be of evil odour,
get or emit a bad smell, stench, stink, smell bad. Nagláng-ig ang
salmón, kay dúgay na nga nabukasán ang láta. The salmon smells bad,
for it is some time now since the tin was opened. Nalang-igán akó
siníng mga sardínas sa láta, kay nagsungáw. It seems to me that the
sardines in the tin are rotten, because there was a leak.

_langís_, Rotten, rancid, bad (of coconut-meat, etc.); to be or become
rotten, etc. (cf. lúo).

_langís_, To be harsh, shrill, grating, discordant, jarring (of
sounds). Ginalangisán akó sang pagbál-ag sang lagárì. The filing of
the saw is grating on my ears, is setting my teeth on edge.

_langís-lángis_, Dim. and Freq. of langís. Also: To fool,
humour, flatter. Indì ka maglangíslángis sa ákon--or--índì mo akó
paglangislangíson. Don't try to fool or flatter me.

_lángit_, Heaven, sky, welkin. Ang mga Sántos sa lángit----. The Saints
in heaven----. Ang mga kabitoónan nagaigpátígpat sa lángit. The stars
twinkle in the sky. (cf. palángit--to go to heaven, etc.).

_langít-lángit_, A little heaven, an imitation of heaven, decorations
on ceilings or the like. Also verb. Langítlangíti ang kisamí sang sála
sa tábad sang mga kalasálon. Put nice decorations on the ceiling of
the main room for the banquet of the marriage couple. Ilangít-lángit
iníng mga kortína. Use these curtains for decorating the ceiling.

_langítnon_, Heavenly, celestial, supernatural, supremely excellent.

_lángkà_, The tree, timber and fruit of the jack-tree.

_lángkag_, To worry, be anxious about, have apprehensions, wait
anxiously for, to expect, desire. Nagalángkag akó sinâ. I am worrying
about it. Indì ka maglángkag. Don't worry. Ginalángkag ko ang íya
pagbáyad sang íya nga útang, kay may kinahánglan akó sang kwárta kag
lumígad na ang terminó. I am anxious about his paying his debt, because
I need the money and the date fixed for payment is passed. Indì mo
paglangkagón ang íya pagabút, kay may búhat pa siá dídto. Don't worry
about his arrival (or his coming home), for he is still occupied over
there (and will come a little later). Nagakalángkag ang ákon painóíno
tungúd siníng balítà nga nabáton ko. My mind is troubled on account
of this news I have received. Indì mo igkalángkag ang ímo anák dídto,
kay maáyo man siá sing láwas. Have no fear for your boy there, for
he is in good health. Dílì igkalángkag sang ímo buút ang amó nga
hitabô. You should not worry about such an event. Ginalángkag níla
ang pagabút sang pangúlo-bánwa. They are anxiously waiting for the
arrival of the Municipal President. (cf. bakág, hídlaw).

_langká-lángka_, A silly woman, etc. See lánggay, panggápángga, etc.

_langkápan_, A bamboo-stretcher or hearse; bamboo-bench.

_langkápi_, See langkápan. A low bench in small boats.

_lángkat_, Interval, etc. See láng-at. langkatí--lang-atí.

_langkawás_, A kind of plant.

_lángkay_, An addition, mixture; to mingle, mix, add to. May lángkay
ang áton tinóla? Has our side-dish any admixture (of fish, meat,
etc.)? Langkayí ang útan sing hípon. Add some hípon-fish to the
vegetables. Indì mo pagilángkay iníng mga butáng sa ámon sugilánon. Do
not introduce these things into our conversation. (cf. lákay, lakót,
sakót, símbug, sámò, símpon, súbak, dúgang).

_lángking_, Nankeen, nankin, a kind of Chinese yarn and cloth;
catgut. (cf. nángking).

_lángking_, Very ripe and full (of rice, corn, etc.); old, mature;
to be very ripe, etc. Lángking na ang maís, humáy, etc. The corn,
rice, etc. is quite ripe. Nalangkingán akó siníng tuíg sang ákon
maís kag humáy. My corn and rice were this year very good, very
ripe and full. Kulihút na ang pagpánggas sing maís, kay malapít na
ang tingúlan kag dílì na maglángking. It is now too late to plant
corn, for the rainy season is near and it will not become ripe and
full. Metaphorically; Lángking nga táo. A clever, experienced, wise
man. (cf. gúlang, tigúlang, láyo, sampáton, tínggas, etc.).

_langkó-lángko_, A silly, stupid fellow. (cf. panggópánggo, lánggoy,
etc. langkálángka--a silly woman).

_lángkoy_, Straight on without a hitch or break, continuous, without
interruption, steady, unbroken; together, at the same time, in one go
or push; to do something at a stretch, without interruption; to "kill
two birds with one stone", combine, do at the same time. Ang mga halígi
siníng baláy pulús mga lángkoy. The posts of this house are all of a
piece from the ground to the roof i.e. without splices. Langkoyá ang
trabáho. Work on steadily. Langkoyí lang sing alámbre ang kodál. Make
the whole fence of wire. Ilángkoy mo lang ang kodál sa talámnan
nga walâ sing lakarán. Enclose the whole field with a fence without
a stile. Maghámbal, magsulát, etc. ka sing lángkoy. Speak, write,
etc. in an orderly way, right on, without pauses or stops. Nagpamanílà
siá sa pagdúaw sa íya nga bátà kag lángkoy man sa pagpamaláklon. He
went to Manila to visit his son and at the same time to make some
purchases. (cf. dáyon, dungán).

_lángkub_, One half of a bamboo split lengthwise as often used
tile-fashion for roofing, etc.; to make or use bamboo split
in half. Langkubá ang atóp sang baláy. Make the house-roof of
split bamboo. Ilángkub iníng kawáyan. Use this bamboo as roofing
material. Langkubí akó sing napúlò ka nahót nga kawáyan. Work up ten
bamboos for me, splitting them in half, for roofing purposes. Ang
atóp nga lángkub mapág-on. A roof of split bamboo is strong.

_lánglang_, The singing of la-la and the like instead of words;
to sing la-la. Nagsáut silá sa lánglang, kay walâ silá sing
orkésta. They danced to the singing of la-la, because they had no
orchestra. Langlangí silá, kay buút silá magsáut. Sing la-la for them,
for they wish to dance. (cf. lála, lánton, láylay).


_lángnan_, From langán--to stop, etc.

_langô_, A nod of assent or approval; to nod assent. Maglangô ka
lang. Just nod your consent. Langoí akó. Give me your consent by a
nod. Si tátay naglangô. Father has nodded his approval. (cf. tangô).

_lángod_, To growl, grumble, murmur. Ang idô nagalángod. The
dog is growling. Indì ka maglángod sa ákon--or--índì mo akó
paglangódan (-óran). Don't murmur or grumble against me--or--in my
presence. (cf. kúmud, ngúrab).

_láng-od_, Having a snag or a projecting upper tooth, snaggle-tooth,
one with a prominent upper tooth making it impossible for him to close
the lips tightly. Láng-od nga táo. A man with a projecting upper tooth.

_láng-og_, Stale, decomposed, rotten, bad, evil smelling; to be rotten
etc. (cf. báng-og, pán-os, bagéu, láng-ig).

_langô-lángò_, Dim. and Freq. of langô. Ginlangôlangóan níya akó or
naglangôlángò siá sa ákon. He gave me his consent by a slight nod of
his head. (cf. tangôtángò).

_langó-lángo_, To tease, irritate by--petty requests,--jests and
raillery. Indì mo akó paglangólangóhon. Don't tease me. (cf. tiáwtíaw).

_langót_, Tied or fastened to, connected with; to be joined or tied
to, etc. (cf. ángot, angót).

_langóy_, A swim, swimming; to swim, float. Nagtabók silá sa
langóy. They swam across. They crossed by swimming. Maálam ka balá
maglangóy? Do you know how to swim? Indì kamó maglangóy sa masulúg
nga túbig, kóndì sa malínaw. Don't swim in a current, but in quiet
water. Nalangoyán (Linangoyán) níla ang línaw. They swam in the
lake. Langoyá lang ang pagtabók sa subâ. Simply swim across the
river. (cf. lalangóyan).

_lángpas_, To reach, arrive at, make. See lámpas.

_lángsa_, A fishy, rotten smell; to emit a fishy smell. See láng-ig.

_lángsì_, (H) A grin; to smile, grin, laugh showing one's teeth. Indì
ka maglángsì. Don't grin. Indì mo akó paglangsián. Don't grin at
me. Linangsián níya ang makakaládlaw nga sinúgid. He grinned at the
ridiculous story. Ayáw pagsábta, kóndì langsií lang siá. Don't answer
him, but simply grin at him. (cf. rángsì id.; ngirít, balangisí,
bangirít).

_lángto_, A very insipid, nauseating taste or smell, as of raw green
peas and beans, the fruit of the dalógdog, sibúkaw, etc.; to be
insipid, cause nausea, etc. Indì mo pagusángon iníng mga balátong,
kay pagalangtohán ka gid. Don't chew these beans, for they will make
you sick. (cf. lás-ay).

_lángub_, Weal, bruise, abrasion, excoriation, (cf. yángub, hanóg,
lanóg, lábhag, labúd).

_lángub_, Cave, cavity, hole, depression, place surrounded by hills;
hunting box, hut, hovel, cabin. (cf. lungíb, gíab; payágpáyag;
datág, lóblob).

_lángub_, To cover, fold, etc. See lákub. (cf. ilalangúb).

_langúb-lángub_, Dim. and Freq. of lángub.

_lángud_, To growl, grumble, mutter. (cf. ngúrab, ngúrub).

_langús-langús_, Rotten, decayed; of no use, worthless; to be or
become rotten, etc. (cf. dúnut, dunút, gabúk, garók).

_lángyaw_, Watery, thin, etc. See lángiaw.

_lániaw_, See lángyaw.

_lániog_, High, high-pitched (of voice); to be high. Lániog nga
tíngug. A high-pitched voice. (cf. láyog--tall (of trees, etc.);
lántiog--high, tall of persons). N.B. In some places lániog, láyog and
lántiog are used promiscuously for "high, tall" in general. (cf. táas,
tág-as).

_lanípga_, A kind of tree and its wood.

_lanítlánit_, Sinew, tendon. Daw lanítlánit na siá. He seems to
have only sinews now i.e. he is very lean. Ang mga lanítlánit
mahúnit. Tendons are tough.

_lánkà, lánkag_, etc. See lángkà, lángkag, etc.

_lán-o_, (B) Stale, vapid, spoilt; rotten, smelling bad, nauseating (of
fruits, foodstuffs, water, etc.); to be or become stale, etc. Naglán-o
ang túbig sa palanggána, kay pilá na ka ádlaw kag walâ mo pagilísi. The
water in the wash-basin has become foul, for you have not changed
it for some days. Nalan-ohán akó siníng búyò, lubí, tabákò, pagkáon,
etc. These búyò-leaves, coconuts, this tobacco, food, etc. seem bad
to me. Ang túbig sa sulúd sang botílya nga ginabutangán sing búlak
magalán-o sa dílì madúgay. The water in the bottle in which you put
some flowers will before long smell bad.

_lanóg_, A weal, bruise, black eye, etc.; bruised. (cf. hanóg).

_lánog_, To bruise, etc. See hánog.

_lánog_, Report, news, rumour; sound. May lánog nga gíkan sa Manílà
nga----. There is a report in from Manila to the effect that----. Ang
lánog sang linggánay. The sound of the bell.

_lán-ok_, To be plentiful, galore, lie about in heaps; abundant, more
than enough. Nagalán-ok gid lang ang mga ságing, kapáyas, etc. sa íya
nga hulút. There are in his room plenty of bananas, papaws, etc. Káon
ka sing páhò, kay nagalán-ok lang dirí sa ámon. Eat mangoes, there
are plenty of them at home. (cf. dagáyà, abúnda, bugánà, etc.).

_lanóng_, (B) Overripe, rotten-ripe, very soft (of fruits and
vegetables, etc.); to be or become overripe, etc. Naglanóng iníng
kapáyas. This papaw is too soft, is overripe. Nalanongán akó
siníng pínya. This pineapple is too soft for me--or--I consider
it too soft--or--it has become rotten-ripe (because I did not
pluck it in time, etc.). Linanongán akó sing madámò nga páhò
sang túig nga naglígad. Last year many of my mangoes became
rotten-ripe. (cf. tanáng).

_lán-os_, Still-born, a lifeless foetus (of man or beast); to be born
dead. Nalán-os ang bátà. The child was still-born. Nagbátà siá sing
lán-os. She gave birth to a dead child. (cf. hár-as).

_lánot_, Hemp; hemp fibre; hempen, of hemp. (cf. abaká).

_lánoy_, To be soft, tender, pliable, young, impressionable; to be
loud, sonorous, far-sounding (of voices, music, etc.). (cf. lúnay,
tánoy).

_lanóy-lánoy_, Dim. and Freq. of lánoy.

_lánsa_, (Sp. lanza) Lance. (cf. bángkaw).

_lánsa_, (Sp. lancha) Launch, lighter, small steamboat. (cf. lántsa).

_lansadéra_, (Sp. lanzadera) Shuttle, fly-shuttle in a weaving loom.

_lánsang_, Nail; to nail. Ilánsang siá sa kruz. Nail him to
the cross. Ginlánsang níya ang pisára sa díngding. He nailed the
blackboard to the wall. Lansangá ang tápì nga nagukáb. Nail down the
plank that has become loose. Lansangí lang ang lamésa. Drive nails
in the table. Bákli akó sing isá ka kílo nga lánsang nga parís nga
tagótlo ka pulgáda. Buy me one kilo of three-inch wire-nails.

_lansángan_, Place where nails are driven in (for posting notices,
etc.); road, street; sign-post.

_lansáng-lánsang_, Dim. and Freq. of lánsang. Also: A kind of small
fish.

_lánse_, (Sp. lance) To play a trick upon, make somebody a sort of
April-fool. Ginlánse níya akó. He fooled me, played me a trick. Andam
ka, kay lansehón níya ikáw. Be on your guard, for he will play a
trick upon you or have a joke at your expense. (cf. íntò, lahóg).

_lansétas_, (Sp. lanceta) Lancet, fleam, a farrier's sharp knife used
in phlebotomy; a pocket-knife.

_lansónes_, A kind of fruit.

_lántà_, To become insipid, etc. See látà.

_lantáka_, (Sp. lantaca) A small culverin, light piece of ordnance
or artillery, much used by the Philippine army in their fight against
Spain and America.

_lántang_, To put off, procrastinate, postpone, prolong, protract,
delay, defer. Indì mo paglantangón ang ímo sugilánon. Don't spend
a long time in conversation. Ginlántang níya ang pagkonpesár. He
postponed going to confession. Naglántang siá dídto sang íya
pagpuyô sing tátlo ka túig. He prolonged his stay there for three
years. Lantangá ang ímo pagpuyô sa hospitál túbtub nga magaáyo
gid ikáw. Prolong your stay in the hospital till you get quite
well. Karatán siá nga dáan kag walâ níya paglantangá ang pagkádto
dídto. He had been anxious for some time to go there, and did not put
off his visit. (cf. palántang, palantánglántang which are more in use).

_lantáng-lántang_, Dim. and Freq. of lántang. Indì ka maglantánglántang
(magpalantánglántang) sa pagtúman sang ímo katungdánan. Do not put
off from day to day the fulfilment of your duties. (cf. pabuyánbúyan).

_lántaw_, To watch, observe, spy, be on the look-out, keep an eye on,
see or notice from afar. Lantawá siá. Watch, him. Observe him. Lantawá
ang íla mga gího kag patúga. Watch their movements and plans. Ilántaw
mo akó sa íya kag kon magpalapít siá sa áton baláy dapíton mo siá nga
magsákà. Please keep him in sight and if he comes near our house invite
him to enter. Naglántaw siá sa íya túbtub nga nadúlà sa únhan. He
gazed after him till he disappeared in the distance. (cf. lánaw,
lampitáw, gáwa, láaw, panílag).

_lántay_, A line of separation or demarcation; to establish a
line, make a division or boundary line; line-guard. Bantayán mo ang
lántay kag dákpon mo ang nagalákbay. Watch the line and capture any
one that crosses it. Ilántay mo iníng kalát. Mark a line with this
rope. Ginalantayán na níla ang bálsa sing káble, kay may katalágman
nga anódon (-óron) sang sulúg. They are now providing the ferry with
a cable-line, because otherwise there is danger that it may be carried
off by the current. Diín ang lántay sang kadulúnan sang ínyo umá? Where
is the boundary line of your fields? Ikáw amó ang lántay. You are
the line-guard--or--you have to guard the line. (cf. látid, bántay).

_lántia, lántiog_, See lántya, lántyog.

_lántip_, The double-edged point of a lance, spear, or the like.

_lántip_, Perfect, accomplished, excellent; to be or make
perfect. Naglántip na siá nga mamaláybay. He has now become a
perfect poet. Ginlántip níya ang íya pagtoón sa Manílà. He finished
his studies in Manila. Lantipá ang pagpínta. Paint well. Try to be
a good painter. Lantipí ang ságwà sing pínta. Paint the drawing
room well. Ilántip mo akó siníng sulát. Please make this letter
perfect (correcting all the mistakes, etc.). Lántip siá nga dalága,
pamatán-on, manunúon, etc. She is an accomplished young lady, youth,
professor or teacher, etc. Maáyo na man siá maginingglés, bisán
dílì pa gid lántip. He talks English quite well now, though not yet
perfectly. (cf. hímpit, sampáton, maáyo gid)

_lantipúlong_, (H) Grammar. (lántip nga púlong--correct speech).

_lánton_, To hum a tune, sing la-la, sing a lullaby. Lantoní silá kay
masáut silá. Hum them a tune, for they are going to dance. Maglánton
na lang kamó, kay ang mga musikó mapahúway. Just hum a tune, as the
musicians are going to rest. (cf. lála, lánglang, láylay, yáyay).

_lánton_, The flute; to play the flute; music in general. Mahibaló
ikáw maglánton? Do you know how to play the flute? Do you know
music? (cf. lántoy, tulálay).

_lántong_ Full or highest tide, spring-tide. (cf. ayá-ay--neap-tide).

_lántoy_, A rustic or pastoral pipe, reed, flute; to play the
flute. Ang mamíngaw nga lánton sang íya nga lántoy nakapanalúpsup
sa íla tagiposóon. The sad tune of his flute went to their hearts,
touched them deeply. (cf. lánton, lánglang, tulálay, etc.).

_lántsa_, See lánsa--launch, etc.

_lantúgì_, Expression, voice, sound; flute. (cf. tíngug, tunúg;
lánton, lántoy).

_lántup_, Striking deep, penetrating; to penetrate, strike
deep. (cf. turúk, tudúk, látum).

_lántya_, (Probably a corruption of the Sp. linterna). Lantern, light,
illumination, candle, etc; to illuminate, set up lights. Nagalántya
ang mga táo kon magági ang prosesyón. The people are setting up
lights when the procession passes. Lantyahí ang baláy. Illuminate the
house. Light the house up with festal lamps, candles, etc. Nalantyahán
níla ang prosesyón sing madámò nga mga sugâ. They lit many lights
for the procession.

_lántyog_, High, tall, large, etc. (of men, etc.); to be high, grow
tall. (cf. lányog, láyog, lániog, lántiog).

_lanúbò_, Young, tender. Ang mga lanúbò sing panuigón. Those of tender
years. (cf. lámpong, lámhad, lágbus).

_lanús_, (B) A bruise, weal, contusion; to bruise, cause a contusion
or weal. Nalanús ang akón kamót, kay nakasúnggò sa bató. My hand got
bruised because I knocked it against a stone. Indì mo paglanusón ang
íya bútkon. Don't bruise his arm. Nalanusán akó sing pilá ka sipî
nga ságing sa bakág. Several clusters of my bananas got bruised in
the basket. (cf. hánog, hanóg, lanóg).

_lanús_, (B) Spoilt, rotten, overripe, putrid, tainted, rancid,
said of coconuts, oil, peas and beans, etc. (cf. luó, lanóng, tanáng).

_lánya_, (Sp. laña) Brace, clamp, cramp-iron.

_lányog_, High-pitched, (of voice). See lániog id.

_la-ó_, (B) Mud, slush, mire; to be or become muddy, etc. Naglaó
ang idálum sang baláy, kay nasúdlan sang túbig sang pagulán. The
ground-floor of the house became muddy, because water came in
when it rained. Nalaohán ang ákon sapín. My boots have become
muddy. (cf. lala-ó, lúnang).

_laód, laóg, laón_, etc. See laúd, laúg, laún, etc.

_laóng_, (H) To request license, ask permission. Maglaóng ka sa
kay nánay. Ask mother's permission. (This term seems to have come
from Capiz).

_lápad_, To be, become or make wide, broad, ample, extended. Naglápad
na ang íya palangúmhan. His farm has become extensive. Lapáda
(-ára) ang lamésa. Make the table wide or wider. Ilápad iníng tápì sa
látok. Add this board to the width of the table. Púngkò ka sa nalapáran
sang tápì. Sit down on the broad part of the plank. Magalápad ang
katúl mo kon ímo kalóton sing támà. Your skin-disease called katúl
will spread, if you scratch it too much. Ginalapádan akó siníng
umá. This field seems large to me.

_lapád_, Stumpy, stubby, thickset. (cf. búdol, tipúngkò, karibúd,
pándak, pandákà),

_lapád_, To strike with the flat part of. Ilapád sa íya ang
binángon. Strike him with the flat of the bolo. Lapadá (-ará) siá sang
ímo talibóng. Beat him with the flat of your talibóng. (talibóng--a
large bolo).

_lapád-lápad_, Dim. and Freq. of lápad and lapád. Also: flat, square,
with at least one flat side or part (of stones, timber, etc.). Magkúhà
ka dídto sing isá ka bató nga lapádlápad. Fetch from there a rather
flat-sided stone. (cf. matápan).

_lápak_, To tread or step or walk on, trample upon; to treat with
pride, contempt or insult. Lápak (maglápak) ka sang mán-og--or--lapáki
ang mán-og. Trample on the snake. Crush the snake with your foot. Indì
ka maglápak dirâ, kay mabasâ pa ang siménto. Don't put down your foot
there, for the cement is still wet. (cf. tápak, túmban).

_lapakán_, A treadle, pedal, anything used to tread or step
upon. Lapákan mo ang lapakán. Step on the treadle. (cf. tapakán).

_lapák-lapák_, To walk about, pace to and fro. See tapáktapák id.

_lapâlapâ_, To level, even, make smooth, flatten (by beating,
slapping, etc.).

_lápas_, To disobey an order, contravene, neglect, leave undone,
ignore, take no notice of, blink, disregard, omit to do. Nakalápas
siá sa pagsímba. Tátlo ka Domíngo ang íya ginlápas. He neglected
to go to Church. Three Sundays he failed to go to Church. Indì mo
paglapáson ang mga sógò sang ímo ginikánan--or--índì mo paglapásan
ang ímo ginikánan sang íla mga sógò. Do not disobey the commands of
your parents. Indì ka gid maglápas siníng ákon mga túgon. Don't by
any means neglect (fail) to carry out this order of mine. (cf. lális).

_lapás_, Past, after, gone by; to pass, go by (of time). Sa lapás
ang piésta magadúaw akó sa ínyo. After the Feast-day I shall visit
you. Tátlo na ka túig ang naglapás kútub sádto. Since that time three
years have passed. (cf. lígad, talíwan, lubás, ági).

_lapát_, A mop, swab, rag, cloth to wash floors with, etc. (cf. trápo,
lampáso).

_lapáw_, Over, above, rising above, higher than; to be higher
than, rise above. Ang bahâ lapáw na sa táo. The flood is now more
than man-deep. Nalapawán akó sang tubig. The water rose above
me. (cf. labáw).

_lápaw_, To go, pass over or above. Ang mga balúd naglápaw sa
sakayán--or--linapáwan ang sakayán sang mga balúd. The waves washed
over the boat--or--the boat was awash. (cf. lábaw).

_lápdos_, A flick, stroke, lash, cut (of a rod, whip, etc.); to
strike, flick, lash, flip, whip, beat, flog, give a stroke (of a
rod, etc.). Lapdosí siá. Give him a flick. Linapdosán akó níya sang
látigo. He gave me a stroke of the whip. Ilápdos sa íya ang bilogón
sing makátlo. Give him three strokes of the rod. (cf. lábtik, búnal,
hámpak, látigo, hánot, etc.).

_lápgos_, A knot easily undone, a slip-knot, as often used by
sailors. (cf. balô).

_lápgos_, To climb a pole or the like using only hands and feet. Maálam
ka maglápgos (saráng ka makalápgos)? Can you climb a pole? Lapgosí
ang lubí nga walâ sing hánghang. Climb the coconut without notches.

_lapgósan_, Pole, bole, may-pole.

_lápgot_, To suck, be suckled, imbibe. Ang tínday nagalápgot sing
gátas, ang báka ginalapgotán sang íya nga tínday. The calf is
sucking. The cow is suckling her calf. (cf. lótgot, súpsup, súyup,
hígup, yúpyup).

_lápiad_, Shallow, not deep (of plates, baskets, etc.); to be or become
shallow, etc. Hatági akó sing pínggan nga lápiad. Give me a shallow
plate (a dinner plate). Naglápiad iníng kalálaw. This rice-sifter
has become shallow. Nalapiadán (-arán) akó siníng kaláhà, laháng,
etc. This pan, earthen plate, etc. is too shallow for me. (cf. lápad,
lapádlápad; nábaw).

_lapiád-lápiad_, Dim. and Freq. of lápiad.

_lápid_, A galley with three banks of oars; to arrange in a row or
tier, join well, put firmly together, connect; twin. (cf. kápid).

_lápida_, (Sp. lápida) Tablet, memorial stone, slab, monument,
inscription on a metal plate or stone slab. (cf. batungdáan,
handumánan).

_lapíd-lapíd_, Dim. and Freq. of lápid. Also adjective: firmly joined,
connected, together, united. (cf. lipíd).

_lapígot_, Miserable, hard to bear, difficult, trying, wretched;
to be or become miserable, etc. Lapígot ang pangabúhì sa karón nga
panahón. Life at present is trying or difficult. Naglapígot ang íya
kahimtángan sa karón nga túig. This year his condition has become
miserable.

_lapî-lapî, lapí-lapí_, Full to overflowing, crammed, stuffed,
choke-full. (cf. búngbung, bát-al, punô, butâ).

_lapíl-lápil_, Lean, thin, gaunt, lank, slender, spare, emaciated; to
be or become thin, etc. Lapíllápil siá nga táo. He is a thin man. He
is lean and lank. Naglapíllápil siá sa lakás nga pangabúdlay. He has
become thin through overwork. (cf. hágpis, níwang, nipís, hapíl-hápil).

_lapíng-it_, To wish to be petted, caressed, fondled or played
with. (cf. paánggà, lampayát).

_laping-itán_, One that wishes to be constantly caressed, a petted,
spoilt child. (cf. anggaán, lampayát).

_lapíng-láping_, Slender, gaunt, lean, thin, of small size; to be
slender, etc. (cf. lapíllápil, kutimúy, diótay, maníwang).

_lápiò_, To tire, exhaust, weaken. Nalápiò siá sa lakát. He got tired
from walking. Palapioá siá. Tire him out. Make him tired. (cf. lúyà,
kápoy, búdlay, lábtoy, pául).

_lápis_, (Sp. lapiz) Pencil. (cf. igkulúdlit).

_lapís_, A kind of small flat fish.

_lapít_, (H) Near, nigh; to be or become near, close, close by, hard
by, close--, near--, at hand; be in the proximity of. Lapít na ang
tigaláni. The rice-harvest is near. Ang ámon baláy naglapít na sa
simbáhan. Our house is now near or close by the Church. Nalapitán
akó sang Manílà. Manila seemed near to me. Pagpalapít-- to come--,
go--, draw--, near, approach. (cf. malapít, kalapít).

_láplap_, To cut in slices or pieces, carve (cutting slantingly or
horizontally). Laplapá iníng búgsò, tinápay, ísdà, etc. Cut this piece,
bread, fish, etc. in slices. Laplapí akó sing kárne. Carve some meat
for me. Gingolót níya ang kárne, walâ níya paglaplapá. He cut the
meat downwards, he did not carve it from right to left. Iláplap sa
kárne iníng kotsílyo. Cut the meat with this knife.

_lápnag_, To become extensive, spread; propagate, circulate,
publish. Naglápnag na sa waló ka bánwa ang pagpamalatián
sang mga háyup. The cattle-disease has now spread to eight
Municipalities. Lapnagá ang íya sinâ nga kamatuóran. Circulate
the truth of that. Publish that truth. Nalapnagán na kitá sang
ininglés. English is now extensively used amongst us, is widely spread
in our country. Palápnag--to cause to spread, etc. (cf. alapláag,
lápta).

_lapó_, To cook, boil (leaves, stalks of various edible plants, or
the like, such as dágmay, balúnggay, green peas and beans in the pod,
etc.). Lapohí ang dágmay. Boil the dágmay-leaves (and stalk). Lapohí
akó sing latóy. Cook some soft green peas (beans) in the pod for
me. (cf. lágà--to boil mature or ripe peas and beans, meat, make tea,
etc.; tanók--to boil tubers, bananas, corn, etc.; tóla, útan, tíg-ang,
laúya, ánok).

_láp-og_, Put in, or on, the fire. Iláp-og ang ísdà. Put the fish in
the fire. (cf. dáp-ung, súgba, bóog, íhaw).

_lápok_, Fine wet sand, slippery sediment in water, rivers, etc.;
slime, viscous mud.

_láp-ok_, Blister; to blister, form--, raise--, blisters,
cause blisters to rise. Nagláp-ok ang ákon kamót sang pagbayó,
kay walâ pa akó mabuyó. I got blisters in my hand from pounding
rice, for I am not yet accustomed to it. Naláp-ok ang ákon bábà sa
ápog. The lime blistered my mouth. I got blisters in my mouth from
the lime. Nalap-okán ang túdlò ko, ambót kon anó ang nagpaláp-ok. My
finger is blistered, I don't know what is the cause of it. (cf. líbtug,
libutúg).

_lápsag_, To bring forth, give birth to, be delivered of a
child. Nalápsag na ang bátà. The child is born. Walâ pa malápsag ang
bátà. The child is not born yet. (cf. táo; bún-ag, bátà).

_lápsì_, Pale, pallid, bloodless, ghastly, ashy, colourless, to be or
become pale, etc. Naglápsì siá. He turned pale. Ang ibán nagalápsì
sa kaníwang, ang ibán sa kahádluk. Some are pale from leanness,
others from fear. Nalapsián akó sa íya. He seemed to me to be rather
pale. (cf. láspì, lúspad).

_lápta_, (H) To extend, spread, propagate, circulate, become known or
more extensive, be on the increase. Nagalápta na dídto ang pangolerá
kag may katalágman nga magalápta man sa ibán nga bánwa. The cholera
is spreading there and there is danger that it may spread also to
other towns. Nalaptahán ang ámon minurô sang pamalaúd. Dysentery has
spread in our village. (cf. lápnag, aláplag, etc.).

_lápug_, A dam, dyke, burrock, weir, breakwater, levee; to build a
dam or fence (of stones, stakes, twigs, bamboo, sand, etc.). Lapúgi
ang subâ. Make a dam in the river--or--Dam the river. Ilápug iníng
mga bató kag kawáyan. Use these stones and bamboos to build a burrock
or weir. May lápug dirâ. There is a dam there. (cf. púnud).

_lapunáya_ (H) A kind of plant used as a remedy for wounds, bruises,
etc. (cf. rapunáya id.).

_lápus_, (B) _lapús_, (H) To pierce, transpierce, transfix, penetrate,
go through, perforate, come out on the other side. Nakalápus na ang
barína. The gimlet is through now. Ginlápsan (--lapusán) sang dága ang
íya tagiposóon. His heart was pierced by the dagger. Palápsi ang tápì
sing lánsang. Drive a nail through the plank. Nalápsan sang bángkaw ang
íya tamíng kag ang matalíwis nga salsálon nalubúng sa íya dúghan. The
lance went through his shield and the sharp iron-point buried itself in
his chest. Indì mo pagpalápson ang lánsang. Don't drive the nail quite
through. (cf. hándus,--to thrust, pierce; dulút--pierce the surface).

_lapús_, Quite through, pierced, perforated, coming out on the other
side. Lapús na ang lánsang. The nail is through now. Metaphorically:
Ang ginsugilánon námon kahápon lapús na dídto sa íla baláy. Our
conversation of yesterday is now known over there at their house.

_lapútak_, To splash, spatter, bespatter, to pour forth volleys of
words, prate, prattle, chatter. Nagalapútak siá sang hámbal. He pours
out volleys of words, is a great chatterbox. (cf. lapútyak, búrà,
dúkal, hágak, wákal, katâkátà, etc.).

_lapútlapút_, A young, immature betel-nut. (cf. alibákaw).

_lapútyak_, To spatter, bespatter; the noise or splash of mud, slush,
water, etc. Magalapútyak ang lúnang, kon ímo lapákan. The slush will
splash, if you tread (step) in it. Nabatián ko ang lapútyak sang lúnang
sang paglubás níya sa ámon baláy. I heard the splashing of the mud,
when he went past our house. (cf. lapútak).

_lapúyot_, Thick, condensed, clotted, coagulated, inspissated,
semi-liquid; to thicken, condense, inspissate. Naglapúyot na
ang sabáw. The sauce has thickened. Dugángi ang almidón túbtub
nga maglapúyot. Add more starch till it becomes thick. Gátas nga
malapúyot. Condensed milk. Nalapuyótan akó siníng tsokoláte. This
cocoa is too thick for me. Palapuyóti akó sing sópas, sabáw,
etc. Make some thick soup, sauce, etc. for me. Ginapalapúyot níla
ang lasáw sa káwà. They are inspissating the sugar-cane juice in
the cauldron. Nagalapúyot na ang íla pagilináway. Their fighting is
getting thick i.e. they are now fighting in real earnest, tooth and
nail. They are getting to grips. (cf. lángiaw--thin, watery).

_lápyad, lapyád-lápyad, lápyò_, See lápiad, lapiád-lápiad, lápiò.

_laráwan_, Picture, portrait, likeness, representation, statue,
effigy, image, icon; model, type, example; photograph, photo; to
make a picture, etc. of, portray, liken to, represent. Laráwan iní
ni Fuláno. This is a picture, portrait of N.N. Laráwan siá sang mga
pamatán-on. He is a model youth. He is an example to other young
people. Ginlaráwan níya si Fuláno. He made a picture or painting
of N.N. He portrayed, represented, personated, acted the part of,
played the role of, N.N. (on the stage or the like). (cf. panglaráwan;
palanganináwan, huluáran, solóndan).

_larawanán_, Place where pictures, photographs, etc. are made or sold;
photographic atelier, photographer's studio.

_lárdo_, (Sp. lardo) Fat, lard. (cf. támbok, mantékà).

_lárga_, (Sp. largar) To go away, leave, depart, set out, set
sail. Naglárga na siá. He has gone, is off. Buás magalárga ang dakô
nga sakayán-húlas. To-morrow the large steamer will depart. Sán-o
kamó malárga pa Manílà? When are you leaving for Manila? (cf. halín,
lúmbus, talíwan, lakát, pánaw).

_largabísta_, (Sp. larga vista) Telescope; farsightedness.

_lárip_, To gather, collect, obtain, secure. (cf. típon, sígput, águm).

_lárong_, (H) To frown, look cross, look angry, look darkly at,
scowl, lower. Indì ka maglárong. Don't look so cross. Naglárong siá
sa ákon--or--ginlaróngan níya akó. He scowled at me. (cf. ariwaróng,
kolisáw).

_lásà_, To cut up, slice, divide in slices or pieces, carve (meat,
etc.) Lasáa ang kárne. Cut up the meat. Lasái akó sing tátlo ka lasâ
nga kárne. Cut off three pieces of meat for me. (cf. híwà, láplap,
gulút, útud).

_lasâ_, A slice, piece, portion of meat or fish; rasher, cut,
cutlet. (cf. híwà).

_laságas_, The south-east wind.

_lasák_, Bungled, done awkwardly or clumsily, performed inefficiently
or badly. (cf. lásak, rasák).

_lásak_, To do or perform badly, bungle, make a mess of; to treat
with scorn, despise; at random, haphazard. Indì ka maglásak sang
ímo sulát--or--índì mo paglasákon ang ímo sulát. Don't write badly,
don't write a clumsy letter. Ginalásak gid lang níya ang íya mga
buluhatón. He is very careless or negligent in the performance of
his duties, in his work. (cf. rásak, patarásak).

_lásang_, To talk or behave in a silly, foolish way. (cf. lamásang,
lamádà).

_lasáng-lasáng_, One who is rather foolish; silly, forgetful or
absentminded. (cf. langâlangâ, langkólángko, langkálángka, buángbuáng,
talángtaláng, etc.).

_lasáw_, Thin molasses, syrup, treacle; to thicken to the consistency
of syrup or treacle. Naglasáw na ang inutús. The pressed out juice of
the sugar cane has thickened to syrup. Ginlasáw níla ang inutús. They
made syrup of the sugar cane juice. Malúyag ka maghígop sing lasáw? Do
you like to sip treacle or syrup? (cf. inutús, pulút, asúkar, kalámay).

_lás-ay_ Insipidity, mawkishness, tastelessness; to be, make or become
insipid, mawkish, unappetizing, tasteless, abominable, disgusting. Walâ
gid sing lás-ay iníng pagkáon. This food has nothing of insipidity
about it. This food tastes fine or nice. Naglás-ay iníng bíno, kay
nasimbugán sing hinébra. This wine has lost its flavour, for it
has been mixed with gin. Nalas-ayán akó sa íya. He is abominable
to me. I am disgusted with him. Las-ayá lang ang íla pagkáon, kay
támà kadalók sa íla. Make their food tasteless, because they are too
greedy. Linas-ayán (pinalas-ayán) akó níla dídto sing pagkáon. They
gave me there tasteless or insipid food. Urúton (Saídon) mo iní sang
káon karón, kay sa buás magalás-ay. Eat this up now, for to-morrow
it will be stale, vapid, mawkish, unappetizing, flat. (cf. báng-aw,
pán-os, lán-o, maláin, etc.).

_lásgà_, (B) A kind of small red ant whose bite is
painful. (cf. tigásaw).

_lásgas_, Strong, firm, sturdy, solid; fully ripe, mature, hard
(of wood); to be or become strong, etc. (cf. bákud, báskug, pág-on,
líg-on, ísug, tugásan).

_lásì_, (B) The gums (of the teeth). (cf. ngíslò).


_lásik_, To be propelled, fly or jump off, scatter with some force,
as flying chips or the like. Nalasíkan akó sing inágsap sang pagbíal
níya sing káhoy. I was hit by a flying splinter when he was splitting
wood. (cf. lágsik, ásik, ásang, ágsik).

_lasík-lásik_, Dim. and Freq. of lásik. (cf. lagsíklágsik id.).

_lasíng_, Giddy, dizzy, confused; fuddled, drunk,
inebriate. (cf. libúg, lingín, alingógngog, hubúg, balúng).

_lásio_, Groove, channel, canal; to groove, channel. Lasiohí ang
kawáyan, pagtúod, etc. Groove the bamboo, the upright, etc. Make a
groove in the bamboo, etc. (cf. kordíso).

_láslas_, To tear or pull off with some force (a vine, thatched roof,
etc.). Laslasá ang balágon, ang kógon sa atóp, etc. Tear off the
climbing plants, the cogon-grass from the roof, etc. Metaphorically:
Nalaslasán (linaslasán) akó níya sing maláut nga mga púlong. He abused
me and used bad language. (cf. lalás, káskas).

_láso_, (Sp. lazo) A slip-knot, tie, lasso, snare; ribbon, sash tied
in a loop. Also verb. Anó ang ginaláso mo sa ímo bohók? What ribbon
are you tying up your hair with? Lasóha iní. Make this into a tie or
ribbon. (cf. higót, tábid, tabíd, lápgos).

_lásog_, To hit, strike. Nalásog siá sang bóla, kay walâ níya
pagsál-a. He was hit by the ball, because he did not catch
it. (cf. ígò).

_lásog_, To roam, loaf, wander, walk about aimlessly and finally "hit",
"strike" or "land" somewhere. Túbtub karón walâ kamí sing binatîbátì
kag walâ námon mahibál-i, kon sa diín siá maglásog. Up till now we
have not heard of him and do not know where he has gone or where he
is. (cf. patúpling).

_láspì_, (H) To become pale, etc. See lápsì, lúspad.

_lásti_, To like, get, eat, take willingly, wish to have, be partial
to or fond of food, sweets, etc. Nagpaistíísti ka sang pagtányag ko
sa ímo sang páhò, ugái naglásti ka man. You would not take the mango
I offered you, but all the time you wanted it very much. (cf. úyon,
lúyag, ílà).

_lástiko_, (Sp. elastico) An elastic band or ribbon;
elastic. (cf. yayát, únyat).

_lástima_, (Sp. lástima) What a pity. (cf. kanógon).

_lástra_, To perish, succumb, die. (cf. músduk, húy-od, rástra, patáy).

_láswa_, Vegetables; dishes of vegetables; to use or prepare
vegetables. Laswahón ko iníng mga balátong. I will prepare these
vegetables as a side-dish. Laswahí si Fuláno sing dágmay. Provide
N.N. with dágmay-vegetables. Linaswahán níla ang panyága sing manámit
nga mga lalaswáhon. They got ready some very tasty vegetables for
dinner. (cf. útan, ulutanón).

_lásyo_, Groove, etc. See lásio.

_látà_, To be--, become--, insipid; to boil or cook too soft, leave
too long in the water, applied especially to vegetables. Indì mo
paglatáon ang dágmay, kay índì akó kaúyon sang latâ. Don't boil the
dágmay too soft, for I don't like overdone vegetables. Indì mo akó
paglatáan sang balúnggay. Do not cook the balúnggay-leaves too soft
for me. (cf. lántà, lás-ay).

_latâ_, Stale, insipid; too soft, overdone, cooked too long (of
vegetables especially).

_láta_, (Sp. lata) A tin, can; to tin, can, put up in tins, preserve in
airtight cans. Makaúyon ka sing mga lináta? Do you like to eat canned
provisions? Latáha ang mga páhò. Can the mangoes. (cf. lalatahón).

_láta_, A kind of fence with upright posts filled in between with
thorny branches of bamboo, sibúkaw, kamúnsel, etc.; to make such a
fence. Anó ang láta nínyo sa talámnan? What kind of thorny branches
do (did) you use in your fence around the rice-field? Latáhi ang
pamulákan. Put a fence of thorns around the garden. (cf. síklat,
dagándan, kodál).

_láta_, To give a hint or clue. (cf. paitínítin).

_latáb_, Film, cream, coating, scum; to gather cream, to cream,
mantle, form a film or coating. May latáb ang gátas. The milk
has creamed. Naglatáb ang túbig sa áwang, kay dúgay na nga walâ
pagsag-ahí. The water in the well has mantled--or--become covered with
scum, because it has not been cleaned for a long time. (cf. kútap).


_latág_, An open field; out in the open. (cf. datág, patág).

_látag_, To put out in the open air; to bleach. Latága ang binakál ko
nga hénero. Bleach the cloth I bought. Latági akó sang ákon delárgo,
agúd maglágtì. Bleach my trousers for me, that they may become very
white. Linatágan níla ang atubángan sang íla baláy sang kotonía. They
put the dimity to bleach in front of their house.

_latág-látag_, Dim. and Freq. of látag. Also: loafer, idler, vagabond.

_latagón_, Open country, rural district, tract of pasture-land,
field. (cf. umá, palangúmhan, dútà; buhián).

_látak_, To walk or wade in water, mud, slush, mire, etc. Ang mga
bátà nagalátak sa tulúgban sang karabáw. The boys are walking about
in the buffalo wallow. Linatákan níla ang talámnan nga tubígon. They
waded through the irrigated field. (cf. lútak, etc.).

_lát-ang_, Space, room; time, opportunity. (cf. lugár, tión,
kahigayónan).

_latás_, To walk straight over or through, pass through without road
or pathway, make a short-cut, blaze a trail, make a bee-line. Naglatás
lang kamí sa talámnan. We simply walked through the field. Latasá lang
ang bakólod. Just walk straight over the hill. Latasí lang ang talámnan
kay malayô ang dálan. Pass straight through the field, for the road
is too far. Indì ka makalatás dirâ, kay támà kasíot. You cannot take
a short-cut there, because the vegetation is too dense. (cf. láktud,
rúmbo, lagtás id.).

_látay_, To balance oneself, go over a pole or beam serving as a
bridge, walk over a narrow bridge or gangplank (without rails) or the
like. Latáya or latáyi ang kawáyan. Walk over the bamboo, cross by
balancing yourself on the bamboo. (cf. taláytay, panaláytay; táytay).

_latayán_, A small narrow bridge or gangplank, often consisting of
only one or two bamboos without handrail. (cf. táytay).

_latî_, The moon-sickle on the three days before and after new moon;
to be near new-moon. Nagalatî na ang búlan. It is now the end of
the last or the beginning of the first quarter of the moon. May latî
na. There is a new moon. (cf. búlan, paugsarón, úgsad, pahimatayón).

_látid_, A line, rule, mark, measure, limit, limitation, restriction,
boundary line; course, way, road, scope (assigned); to line, mark,
rule, prescribe, limit, delimit, restrict, circumscribe. Latíri
(latídi) ang bulugsókan sang baláy. Mark out with lines the ground on
which the house is to be built. Ilátid ánay iníng písì sa walâ pa ikáw
magkáli, agúd magtádlong ang kalóg. Mark a line with this string before
you start digging, in order that the ditch may be straight. Ginlatíran
(--ídan) sang Mahál nga Diós ang mga alágyan sang kabitoónan. God
has marked out the path of the stars. (cf. lántay).

_látigo, látigó_, (Sp. látigo) Whip, rod, lash, scourge; to flog,
scourge, whip, lash, beat with a rod. Latigohí siá. Give him a
whipping. Flog him. Kon magsinutíl ikáw liwán ipalátigo ko ikáw kay
tátay mo. If you are naughty again, I'll see to it that your father
gives you a whipping. Linatigohán níya ang karabáw sing símsim. He
beat the buffalo with branches of bamboo. (cf. hánot, búnal, hámpak,
lábtik, lápdos, láw-it, lipát, hán-us, lámpus, lámba).

_latík_, The dregs, lees or sediment formed in refining
coconut-oil. (cf. ugásip, gatâ, lána). Also verb. Madalî na lang
malútò ang lána kay naglatík na or kay may latík na. The coconut oil
will now soon be ready, for the dregs have formed.

_latík_, To strike, knock, beat. (cf. patík).

_latík-latík_, Dim. and Freq. of latík. Also: to pace to and fro,
walk about noisily, stamp the floor or the like. (cf. tapáktapák).

_latín_, Latin; to put into Latin. Latiná iníng hámbal nga
Binisayâ. Put this Visayan sentence into Latin. Maálam ka balá
maglinatín? Can you speak Latin?

_látman, etc._, From látum.

_látnan, etc._, From latón.

_latô_, (B) To guess, conjecture, divine, surmise, assume, suppose,
believe. Latoá or lát-a kon anó ang binakál ko. Guess what I have
bought. Makalatô ka kon anó ang áton tinóla sa panyága? Can you guess
what our side-dish will be for dinner? Ginlatô níya ang paratkónon
(paktákon) nga ginpalatô ko sa íya. He solved the riddle I had proposed
to him for solution. (cf. pakót, lágpat, mái-om, sát-um).


_latód_, To strike, whip, beat, lash, etc. Latodá, latodí,
(--orá,--orí). (cf. litós, látigo, hánot, etc.).

_lát-od_, To be or become prominent, exposed to view, show through
(especially of bones in thin people, etc.). Nagalát-od ang íya nga
túl-an. His bones are showing--or--sticking out quite prominently. Támà
kaníwang sa íya, kay nagalát-od ang túl-an sa íya dúghan. He is now
extremely emaciated, for his ribs can be counted. (cf. sulúng--to
shine through (of blood, etc.).

_latók, látok_, Table. (cf. tulungtúngan, lamésa).

_lató-láto_, Half-empty, showing many gaps, not full (of corn-cobs
with only a few grains on it, etc.). Latóláto gid lang ang maís nga
pinatubás ko karón. The corn I have harvested this time is mostly
half-empty cobs.

_latón_, To infect, taint with, contaminate, be contagious, infectious,
catching, spread from one to the other. Andam ka, agúd ang balatían
sang útud mo índì makalatón sa ímo. Be on your guard, lest your
brother's disease should infect you also. Nalátnan or linátnan akó
sang íya nga katúl. I have become infected with his skin-disease
called katúl. May katalágman nga ang ibán nga mga bánwa pagalátnan man
sang kolerá. There is danger that the cholera will spread to other
towns. Indì ka magsímpon sa íla, kay básì malátnan ikáw sang maláut
níla nga batásan. Do not associate yourself with them, for you might
be contaminated by their vicious habits. (cf. manlaláton, malaláton).

_latón_, (Sp. latón) Brass; a large tin or can. (cf. láta).

_lát-on_, From latô--to guess, etc.

_latós_, See litós--to strike, beat, etc.

_latóy_, Fresh, soft, green, slender, young beans or peas, usually
boiled and served in their pods; slender, thin.

_latoyánon_, Pertaining to latóy; slender, thin.

_látum_, To enter deep, penetrate, permeate, sink into, soak in, be
absorbed. Naglátum na ang íya balatían, kay walâ níya pagbúlnga sa
gilayón. His sickness has now taken firm hold, for he did not apply
remedies at once. Nagalátum sa ákon tagiposóon ang íya matám-is
nga láygay. His sweet counsels are penetrating or touching my
heart. Nalatúman (nalátman) akó siníng mga kalisúd. These troubles
have touched me to the quick, have entered deep into my soul. Ang
dálit sang mán-og naglátum na sa íya kaugatán. The snake poison has
now permeated his veins. (cf. tudúk, turúk, salúpsup, kágit, etc.).

_laúd, la-úd_, The sea, ocean, high sea. See lawód.

_laúd_, (B) To eat greedily or voraciously, gulp down, to wolf, swallow
large pieces of food without chewing them properly. Laudá (laurá,
lád-a) lang tanán. Just gulp it all down. Nalaudán (nalaurán, nalád-an)
níya iníng kólon nga kán-on. He ate voraciously from this rice-kettle.

_láug_, To roam, stroll, walk about. See lágaw.

_laúg_, A loafer, tramp, vagabond, idler. (cf. tiyógtiyóg, landólándo,
etc.).

_laugán_, See laúg--a loafer, etc.

_laúgláug_, Dim. and Freq. of láug--to stroll, roam, etc.

_laúg-laúg_, A tramp, loafer, idler.

_laúk, laúk_, (B) To drink greedily or in large draughts, swill,
toss off, gulp down. Lauká lang iníng isá ka báso nga bíno. Toss off
this glass of wine. Ginlaukán níla nga duhá ang baláding nga tubâ kag
nagkalahubúg (nagkabalúng) silá. Both of them took large draughts of
toddy from the pail and got drunk. (cf. láb-ok, táyhong).

_laúk-láuk_, Dim. and Freq. of laúk. Ginlaúkláuk níla ang isá ka
baláding nga tubâ kag nahubúg (nabalúng) silá. They finished (consumed)
a pailful of toddy and got drunk.

_láum, lá-um_, Hope, expectation, trust, confidence; to hope, expect,
trust, confide in, be confident. Magláum ka gid nga----. Have
confidence that----. Nagláum silá nga makalámbut dídto sa sulúd
sang isá ka táknà, ápang duhá gid ka táknà ang íla paglakát. They
thought they could arrive there within an hour, but they had to walk
two full hours. Ginalaúman (Ginalám-an) ko nga----. I hope, expect
that----. Ginlaúman níya ang íya pagdaúg sa dúmug, ápang nabúntul
siá. He hoped to win in wrestling, but he was thrown. Ang Pagtóo,
Pagláum kag Paghigúgma. Faith, Hope and Charity. Walâ na siá sing
lám-on (laúmon). He has nothing to expect any longer. He is without
hope, in a quandary, great perplexity, despair. (cf. sálig, hulát,
paabút).

_láun, lá-un_, Cuttings, twigs or shoots broken off the stem and
to be planted in the soil, applied especially to the cuttings of
the sweet-potato plant. Mangítà ka sing láun kag matanúm kitá sing
kamóti. Find some cuttings and we will plant sweet potatoes.

_laún, la-ún_, Old, of a year or more ago. Laún nga humáy. Last year's
rice or rice of more than a year ago. Laún nga kawáyan. Mature bamboo
that is at least one year old. Laún nga tabákò. Old, mature, mellow
tobacco. Laún nga dalága, laún nga babáeng búhat. An old spinster.

_láus, lá-us, laús, la-ús_, To be or become hoarse. Naglaús (Nagláus)
ang tutúnlan ko. My throat is hoarse, has become hoarse. Anó
ang nagpalaús (nagpaláus) sa ímo? What is the cause of your
hoarseness? What made you hoarse? (cf. páus).

_laús, la-ús_, Hoarse. Laús siá. He is hoarse. (cf. paús).

_laút, la-út_, (H) Nausea, aversion, loathing; to be nauseated,
loathe, sicken, be disgusted, feel like vomiting. Nagalaút ang
ákon ginháwa. I feel like vomiting. Nagalaút ang ákon ginháwa sinâ,
ginalaután sang ákon ginháwa inâ. That makes me feel sick,--smells
to me bad,--sickens me,--disgusts me. (cf. lóod).

_láut, lá-ut_, (H) Badness, wretchedness, viciousness, malice,
wickedness; to be, become or make wicked, bad, malicious, depraved,
miserable, wretched, to deteriorate, degenerate, worsen, change
for the worse. Nagláut ang íya batásan sa Manílà. He contracted bad
habits in Manila. Ginláut sang maláin nga kaupdánan ang kagawián ni
Fuláno. Bad company perverted N.N.'s character. (cf. láin, kalalát-an).

_la-út_, To remain or last long (said of diseases, debts, etc.).

_laúya_, Boiled meat; to boil meat. Lauyáha ang kárne. Boil the
meat. Makaúyon ikáw sing laúya or linaúya? Do you like boiled
meat? Lauyáhi akó sing unúd sang báka. Boil some beef for
me. (cf. lágà).

_laúy-láuy_, To call somebody in a loud voice, shout, raise one's voice
(in singing, etc.). Laúylaúyi si tátay, agúd magkarí, kay hándà na
ang panyága. Call father in a loud voice to come here, for dinner is
ready. (cf. palaúyláuy, sínggit, turayáw, pugaás, pagaás).

_láwà_, A spider's web; to cover with a spider's web. Nalawáan ang
kisamí. The ceiling is full of spiders' webs. Sing masamí ginalawáan
ang mga púsud sang mga hulút. The corners of rooms are often covered
with spiders' webs. Nagapakamanggaránon siá, ibágo nalawáan ang íya
nga ánglit. He acts as if he were rich, whilst his small cooking pot
is covered with spiders' webs i.e he has no rice any more, has to
suffer hunger.

_láwà_, To pay out rope, loosen a line or string. Lawái sing písì ang
ímo buladór. Give your kite more line. Magláwà ka sang kalát. Pay out
more rope. Nagtáas ang buladór, kay ginlawáan ko sing písì. The kite
soared high when I gave it more line. (cf. láwlaw).

_láwag_, A kind of fishing-method and fishing apparatus employed in
catching fish on the high sea.

_láwag_, To invite, request one's presence. (cf. ágda, dápit, dáhan,
kángay).

_láwag_, To announce, publish, make known or public. Lawága
ang mga ngálan sang mga nakadalaúg sa paindísíndis. Announce
the names of the victors in the competition. Ginlawágan níya
kamí sang mga umalamót sa bulúlngan. He made known to us the
contributors towards the hospital. Iláwag mo akó siníng pagbulút-an
sa nakawáan sang bánwa. Please publish this law or ordinance in the
town-square. (cf. abíso, pabalítà, paháyag, táwag).

_lawáon_, Cobwebby, full of cobwebs or spider webs. (cf. láwà).

_láwas_, Body, matter; the principal part or substance of; existence,
reality.

_lawás_, To approach personally, have the courage of speaking
personally to high authorities, etc., about any important
matter. Ginlawás níya ang paghámbal sa mga punoán, sa mga ginikánan
sang íya nga ginakaluyagán, etc. He had the courage of speaking
personally to the authorities, to the parents of his intended, etc.

_lawás_, Any piece between two joints, as the tibia, thighbone,
a bamboo-joint, a link of a chain, etc.


_lawásnon_, Bodily, corporeal, material, physical; carnal, fleshy,
sensual.

_láw-at_, A kind of tree.

_láway_, Spittle, saliva.

_láway, or láw-ay_, Ugliness, repulsiveness, nastiness, meanness,
hideousness, obscenity; to be or become ugly, repulsive, hideous,
forbidding, etc. Nagláw-ay ang íya nga pangguyáhon. The expression
on his face become ugly. Ginláw-ay níya ang pagpuní sang baláy. He
decorated his house in a tasteless manner. Law-ayá ang íya nga maskará,
agúd magkahádluk ang makakítà sa íya. Make his mask horrible in order
that those that see him may be scared.

_láwhan_, (B) Long, extended, wide, large. Iníng bátà láwhan sing
páa. This baby has long legs. Pangitái akó sing isá ka lawás nga
kawáyan nga may bokó nga láwhan. Get me a joint of bamboo with one
large knot. (cf. malábà; malápad, maláwhan).

_láwi_, The long, curved feathers of a cock's tail.

_láw-id_, To switch, whisk, strike with something flexible. Law-idí
(law-irí) sang kamágo ang ímo kasíng, agúd índì mapatáy. Switch your
top with the string or it will come to rest.

_láwig_, Length, long duration; to be, become or make long,
lengthy, protracted, long drawn out, prolonged, especially of
time; to protract, prolong, drag on, last long. Nagláwig ang ámon
paglakát. Our walk lasted a long time. Lawíga ang ímo pagtoón, agúd
mag-álam ka gid. Prolong your studies so that you may become very
learned. (cf. dúgay; lábà).

_lawíg_, A length of rope, usually about ten meters. Also
verb. Ibalígyà mo sa ákon iníng isá ka lawíg nga kalát. Sell me this
length of rope. Lawigí ang karabáw sing kalát, agúd makahálab sing
maáyo. Give the buffalo a whole length of rope, so that he may graze
in comfort.

_lawíg_, The umbilical cord, naval string. (cf. púsud).

_lawíhan_, Having large curved feathers (of cocks); strong, robust,
powerful, mighty, formidable. (cf. isganán, kusganán, maísug).

_lawí-láwi_, Dim. of láwi. Anything resembling the curved feathers
of a cock's tail.

_láwis_, To be, become, or make,--pointed,--sharp. (cf. taláwis).

_lawís_, A full-length bamboo; a bamboo, whose small end has not been
cut off; pointed, sharp.

_láw-it_, A net, netlike wickerwork; to make wicker-network;
figuratively: to whip, flog, thrash, beat. Iníng síya may salandígan
nga láw-it. This chair has a back of (rattan--) network. Law-ití
sing owáy ang pulungkóan sang síya. Work into the chair a seat
of rattan-network. Law-itá ang pagrára mo. Weave in the form of
a net. Law-ití ang karabáw. Whip the buffalo. Iláw-it sa íya ang
kalát. Beat him with the rope. Linaw-itán siá ni tátay. Father gave
him a beating.

_láwit_, A trail or trace of something spilt or dropped; to leave a
trail or trace on the ground, floor, etc. Nagaláwit sa dálan ang maís
nga nahúlug sa sáko. The corn that fell out of the sack has left a
trail on the road. (cf. ráwit).

_lawít-láwit_, Dim. of láwit. (cf. rawítráwit id.).

_lawítwit_, To swing, dangle or hang down loosely. Nagalawítwit ang
íya nga báyò, kay nagísì. His jacket is hanging loose, for it is
torn. (cf. kawáykawáy, kabítkábit).

_láwlaw_, To loosen or lengthen a tether, rope, string, etc., pay
out or give rope to. Lawlawí ang karabáw, kay támà kakúg-ung ang
higót níya. Loosen the buffalo, for he is tied too closely. Give the
buffalo a longer tether, because his rope is too short. Lawlawí akó
sing kalát. Pay me out more rope. Nagláwlaw ang písì. The string has
become loose. (cf. labóy; lábà, lábug).

_lawód_, See laúd, lawúd id.

_lawóg_, (H) Large, big, of a more than ordinary size (of animals,
etc.); to be or grow larger than the common size.

_lawrél_, (Sp. laurel) Laurel; laurel-wreath; honour, distinction.

_lawúd_, Sea, ocean; high seas i.e. that part of the sea that is far
away from land. (cf. dágat, iláwud, ilawúd, kalaláwran).

_láya_, Something thrown in, something given over and above the exact
measure. See áman. Walâ gid sing láya iníng páhò nga binakál ko? Is
there nothing added to the mangoes I have bought?

_láya_, A kind of fishing net; to catch fish with the láya-net. Diín
si Fuláno?--Nagaláya (nagapanláya, nagapangláya) sa subâ. Where is
N.N.?--He is fishing in the river with a láya-net. Magláya or mangláya
kitá. Let us go fishing with a láya-net.

_láyà_, To be or become dry, exsiccated, to fade, wither, dry up,
shrivel. Ang búlak nga naípò kahápon naláyà (nagkaláyà) na. The flower
that was plucked yesterday is dry and shrivelled already. Naláyà
na iníng gatóng. This firewood is dry now. Palayáa ang kawáyan
ánay kag ugáling guyúron mo. Let the bamboo get dry first and then
haul it. Nalayáan kamí sing madámò nga tanúm tungúd sang lakás nga
ínit. Many of our plants withered away on account of the excessive
heat. (cf. malá, ugá, layóng, layâ).

_layâ_, Dry, faded, withered, exsiccated, parched, wrinkled and
shrivelled, sear, sere; to be completely dry, become faded, etc. Layâ
nga búlak. A faded flower. Layâ nga dáhon. A withered leaf. Naglayâ
na ang búlak. The flower has faded already. Nalayaán akó sináng mga
dáhon. Those leaves seem to me to have withered. Those leaves are
too wrinkled or shrivelled for me. (cf. láyà, layóng).

_layáb_, To flutter, flap, be shaken to and fro by the wind,
as clothes on a line or the like. Ang íya panápton nagalayáb sa
hángin. His clothes are fluttering in the wind. Ginalayáb sang hángin
ang íya báyò. His jacket is being fluttered by the wind. (cf. úyog,
hulág-húlag).

_láy-ab_, To spread, cover, extend, envelop. Ang búg-os nga atóp
sang baláy naláy-ab na sang kaláyo. The whole roof of the house is
now enveloped in flames. (cf. lúkup, láy-ang, tábon).

_layáb-láyab_, Dim. and Freq. of layáb. To stir, shake, sway, flutter,
flap. Nagalayábláyab sa hángin ang mga linábhan sa sabláyan. The wash
on the line is flapping in the breeze. Báyò nga layábláyab. A dress
that is too wide, sits very loosely. (cf. karápà).

_láyag_, Sail, canvas, sheets; to set sail, hoist sails, provide with
sails. Layági ang paráw. Hoist the sails on the outrigger. Iláyag
iníng hénero. Use this cloth as a sail. Magláyag na kitá. Let us
set sails. Linayágan níya ang lórtsa. He fitted out the lorcha
with sails. Pinalayágan níya ang sakayán. He had sails provided for
the boat.

_láyag_, The back of a knife, sword, bolo, etc.; to use or apply
the back of a knife, etc. Layági (palayági) ang karabáw sang ímo
binángon. Beat the buffalo with the back of your bolo. (cf. lapád).

_layág_, To sail, set out or forge ahead under sail. Nagalayág ang
sakayán sa mahínay nga huyúp sang hángin. The boat is sailing before
the gentle breeze.

_láy-ang_, To unfold, open the folds of, spread, extend. (cf. bulád,
búklad, bílad, húmlad, ládlad).

_layáng_, (B) Wide, roomy, baggy, loose, not tight or close; to be
or get wide, etc. Naglayáng na ang sárwal níya, kay nagníwang. His
trousers are baggy, for he has become thin. (cf. sángkad, hugák,
halúg).

_layáng-láyang, layánglayáng_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of layáng.

_láyap_, A small cup or bowl, salt-cellar, pepper-box or the like.

_láyas_, To flee, run away, bolt, make off. Nagláyas ang makáwat. The
thief fled. (cf. lágio, lágyo).

_layát_, Loose, baggy, wrinkled (of skin); to get loose, etc. Naglayát
ang íya pánit, kay tigúlang na siá. His skin has become wrinkled,
for he is old. (cf. halúg, tugák, kurinót, etc.).

_layát-láyat_, Dim. and Freq. of layát.

_layáw_, To roam about freely, be out in the open air, rove, stroll
about; idler, loafer, rover. Ang mga báka nagalayáw gid dirí. The
cattle are roaming about here quite free. Ilayáw lang ang mga báka. Let
the cattle be out in the open air, let the cattle graze or roam free,
without tether. Layawí lang sang mga báka iníng halálban. Let the
cattle rove at large in this pasturage. Layáw gid lang siá nga táo. He
is a mere loafer. (cf. luyáw id.).

_láy-aw_, Single, not married, especially applied to men. Láy-aw pa
gihápon si Fuláno. N.N. still is single. Ang mga láy-aw. The bachelors.

_láygay_, Admonition, exhortation, sermon, counsel, advice; to
admonish, advise, exhort, enjoin, preach, counsel. Laygayí siá. Exhort
or admonish him. Iláygay sa íla ang mga sógò sang Diós. Explain to
them and exhort them to observe the commandments of God. Instruct them
in the divine precepts. Nakabatî ikáw sang láygay sang Párì? Did you
hear the priest's sermon? Indì siá magpaláygay. He will not listen to
advice. Ginláygay ko inâ sa íya sing masúnsun, ápang walá siá magsapák
sang ákon nga láygay. I often advised him to that effect, but he would
not listen to my advice. (cf. túdlò, panúgyan, badlong, sáysay, etc.).

_láyhab_, To tear, rend, rive, rip, slit, make a hole in clothes,
etc. Naláyhab ang ákon báyò, kay nasang-atán sang dúgi. My jacket
was torn, because it was caught in the thorns. Ginláyhab níya ang
ákon báyò, kay ginhawíran níya sang nagadalágan akó. He ripped up
my jacket, for he took hold of it whilst I was running. (cf. gísì,
rítrit, rábrab, rátrat, gíhay).

_láyì_, Adultery; to commit adultery. Indì ka magláyì (mangláyì). Do
not commit adultery.

_láylay_, To sol-fa, sing a lullaby, etc. See lála, lánglang, yáyay,
etc. Laylayi ang bátà. Sing a lullaby to the baby.

_láyo_, Ripeness, maturity; mature, quite or fully ripe; to ripen,
mature, be fully ripe, quite ripe (of fruit-stones, seeds, kernels,
fruits with thick husks or pods, as nuts, peas, beans, etc., but
not of mangoes, bananas, plums, etc.). Nagláyo na ang kamúnsil. The
kamúnsil-seed has now become quite ripe. Manuláon ka na lang siníng
mga balátong, índì mo pagpalayóhon. Gather these beans now, do not
let them ripen (on the plant). (cf. gúlang, lútò).

_layô_, (H) Remoteness, farness, great distance; to be remote, far
off, distant, far away, far from. Naglayô sa simbáhan ang bág-o námon
nga baláy, kay ginpatíndog námon sa umá. Our new home is far from
the church, for we have built it on the farm. Nalayoán akó siníng
minurô. This village appears to me to be far off. Layô ang Manílà,
ápang layô pa gid ang Amérika. Manila is far away, but America is
much farther still. (cf. malayô, kalayoón, pahilayô, etc.).

_láyob_, To scorch, parch, wither, heat, warm (said of things that
are very near, but not quite in contact with, a flame). Naláyob ang
búlak sang dábdab sang kandílà. The flower was scorched by the light
of the candle. (cf. pásò, láhob, hálob).

_láyog_, Tall, big, large, high (of trees, etc.). (cf. lániog, lántiog,
táas, tág-as, matatáas).

_layók_, (B) To fade, wither, die out, parch, burn. Nagalayók
ang tinanúm ko nga mga búlak. The flowers I planted have
withered. Nalayokán akó sa karón nga túig sing madámò nga maís. This
year a great deal of my corn was parched. Kon magdáyon ang ínit nga
walâ sing ulán madámò nga tanúm ang magalayók. If the heat continues
without rain, many plants will die. (cf. láyà, lúmpaw, layóng).

_layô-láyò_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of layô.

_láy-on_, Detritus, fine sand and earth, slime, deposit, sediment,
mud carried along by running water, especially during a flood,
and deposited somewhere else; chaff, empty ears of rice, etc. Also
verb. Nalay-onán ang ámon áwang, kay naágyan sang bahâ. Our well
was filled up with mud, because the flood passed over it. Linay-onán
sang subâ ang ámon dútà. The river covered our land with a deposit
of mud. (cf. búnbun, bagónbon, laó, lalaó, lúnang).

_layón_, A full grown bamboo, etc. See laún.

_layóng_, Dry, arid, parched; to dry up, etc. (cf. láyà, layâ, malá).

_láy-ud_, Lazy, indolent, idle; to be or become lazy, etc. (cf. ligóy,
támad, tamarán).

_layúyò_, (B) Young, tender, soft, pliable, flexible (of leaves,
shoots, sprouts, etc.). Layúyò nga dáhon. A tender leaf. (cf. lúm-ok,
hómok).

_layúyò_, Ripe, dry (of podded and husked fruit).

_lebadúra_, (Sp. levadura) Yeast, barm, ferment, leaven.

_lehislatúra_, (Sp. legislatura) Legislature, legislative (law-making)
assembly or body. (cf. palatukán-pagbulút-an).

_leksyón_, (Sp. lección) Lesson, lecture, reading, instruction.

_lemása_, A kind of fruit-tree.

_león_, (Sp. león) Lion.


_leopárdo_, (Sp. leopardo) Leopard, panther.

_leró-leró_, (Probably from the Sp. relój) Mentally deranged, not
quite normal; to "have a screw loose" somewhere. (cf. lingínlíngin,
libúg; buangít, kolôkolô, etc.).

_létra_, (Sp. letra) Letter; character (of the alphabet). (cf. sulát;
tigbató).

_létse_, (Sp. leche) Milk. Also used as a term of contempt: Mean, vile,
good-for-nothing, wretch. (cf. gátas; háslò, waláy átsoy, waláy pulús).

_letsón_, (Sp. lechon) Roast pig, barbecue; to roast a pig on a
spit. Letsonón ko iníng báboy. I am going to roast this pig on a
spit. Nakakáon akó dídto sing báboy nga linetsón. I ate roast pork
there.

_ley_, (Sp. ley) Law, order, etc. (cf. pagbulút-an, sógò, kasogoán).

_líab, lí-ab_, A shirt-collar, the hole or opening for the neck
in a garment; to make a shirt-collar. Nagalíab siá sang ákon báyò
or ginaliában níya ang ákon báyò. She is making a collar for my
jacket. Ilíab iníng gúnting. Use this pair of scissors to cut out
the collar. Liábi ang íya nga báyò sing halúg. Make a loose collar
for her dress. (cf. kolyár).

_liáb_, To collar, grasp or take by the collar. Liabá siá. Collar
him. Ginliáb níya akó. He grasped me by the collar. (cf. líab).

_liábe_, (Sp. llave) Key; to close or lock with a key. Liabehí ang
baúl. Lock the box. (cf. alábri; será).

_liabéro_, (Sp. llavero) A key-guard,--ring; keeper of the keys,
porter; door-keeper.

_líad, liád_, To arch backwards, walk about proudly erect, incline or
bend backwards, carry the head erect. Liadá, liará or iliád ang láwas,
úlo mo. Bend your body--, incline your head--, backwards. (cf. biád-ad,
biádbíad, báy-ad, báy-od).

_liádan_, One who carries his head proudly erect or walks about with
his body leaning a little backwards. (cf. liád, biád-ad).

_liád-líad_, Dim. and Freq. of liád. Nagaliádlíad siá kon
maglakát. When he walks he throws his head proudly back.

_líak, lí-ak_, To split, cleave (wood, etc.). See bíal, bís-ak id.,
liáka--biála.

_liák, li-ák_, Split, cloven, divided. (cf. biál, etc.).

_liá-lía_, An open bier or stretcher, mostly of bamboo, used for
carrying a corpse, etc. (cf. pápag).

_liás, lías_, To slip, skid, slide, slither. Nakaliás siá (ang íya
tiíl) sa madánlug nga dálan. He slipped on the smooth road. Andam ka,
agúd índì ka magliás sa bató nga nalumútan. Be on your guard, lest you
should slip on the mossy stone. Figuratively: Sang pagkasúnug sang
baláy ni Fuláno daw naliásan siá kag nalágyo lang nga walâ gid sing
dalá bísan anó lang. When N.N.'s house burned he seemed to have lost
his wits and he fled without taking anything with him, i.e. without
saving anything. (cf. dúpias, dalín-as).

_liás-lías_, Dim. and Freq. of liás. Madalî ang pagliáslías sang táo
dirí, kay támà kadánlug sang salúg. It is easy for people to slip here,
for the floor is very smooth.

_liát_, Pause, rest, interval, interruption; to cease, stop, leave off,
interrupt. (cf. luát).

_liáy_, To recline, lean back against, rest one's back against
or on. Nagaliáy siá sa ulúnan. He leans back against the
pillow. Liniayán (ginliayán) níya ang ulúnan. He leant back against
the pillow. (cf. saliáy, idág).

_liáy-líay_, Dim. and Freq. of liáy. Also: to move, shake, swing to
and fro.

_libâ_, To strike (a ball, as in baseball, etc.). (cf. hán-us, lámpus).

_libád-libád_, To look around curiously. The composite form
panglibádlibád is more in use.

_libág_, To throw a missile, as a stick, a piece of wood, etc. Libagá
ang báboy. Throw something at the pig. Ginlibág níya akó sang íya
bastón. He threw his stick at me. Libagí akó sang ákon bastón
nga nalipatán ko dídto. Throw the stick I forgot there over to
me. (cf. pakóg).

_libág_, Twisted, bent, turned, out of shape, misshapen,
distorted. (cf. labág, lubág).

_líbag_, To twist, turn. (cf. lábag, lúbag, pugâ).


_líbag_, To dissent, disagree, quarrel. (cf. híbag).

_líbag_, Flatness (of voice); to be or become flat, out of tune,
dissonant. Nagalíbag ang íya nga tíngug. Her voice is getting
flat. Sang kaína nga pagámba nalibágan siá sang íya nga tíngug. When
she sang, a short while ago, her voice was flat or out of tune.

_libág-libágon_, A little out of--tune,--order, disagreeable,
inharmonious, displeasing, unpleasant. Libáglibágon siá sing
batásan. He has disagreeable manners or habits.

_libágon_, Flat, dissonant, discordant, inharmonious, out of tune,
incongruous; twisted, crooked, turned, misshapen, distorted,
bent. (cf. líbag, libág).

_libáhon_, A kind of coconut with a reddish husk. (cf. limbáhon id.).

_libák_, Detraction, disparagement, depreciation, vilification,
obloquy, defamation, aspersion, traducement, backbiting, speaking ill
of, running down; to detract, derogate, disparage, decry, depreciate,
run down, vilify, vilipend, malign, belittle, asperse, pull to pieces,
cast aspersions on, blacken, backbite, traduce, defame, speak ill of,
talk about the faults of others with injury to their reputation. Indì
ka maglibák. Do not detract. Indì mo siá paglibakón. Do not talk
about his faults. Ginlibák níya akó. He injured my reputation. Indì
mo pagilibák sa íya ináng diótay níya nga mga kakulángan. Don't bring
up against him those little short-comings of his. Dî maísip nga mga
kalaínan ang saráng mahátag sa isá ka bánwa sang amó nga mga paglibák
kag pagbutángbútang. Untold are the evils that may be brought upon
a town by such defamations and calumnies. (cf. híkay, múlay).

_libákaw_, A well-ripened betelnut preferred for
chewing. (cf. alibákaw).

_libálib_, To wrap or roll up well in paper, etc. Libalíba ang pagputús
sang mga panápton, agúd malíg-on. Wrap the clothes up well that the
package may be strong, may be able to stand rough handling or the
like. (cf. balólon, baláhos, putús, búngkus, bágtong, hapín).

_libánaw_, To wash one's hands, etc. See hunáw, hináw,
ribánaw. (cf. húgas, hilám-os).

_libáng_, To distract, divert, entertain. Duhá ka makáwat ang nagsulúd
sa balaligyáan, ang isá sa íla amó ang nangáwat sámtang nga ang isá
naglibáng sa manugbalígyà sang íya mga pamangkotánon. Two thieves
entered the shop; one of them committed the theft whilst the other
distracted the shop-keeper with various questions. (cf. bangá, lingáw).

_libáng_, Occupation, work, task, business, job; to have something
to do, be busy about, take care of children, etc. Anó ang libáng
mo dirí? What are you doing here? What business have you got
here? Maglibáng ka sang bátà or libangá ang bátà. Look after the
baby. Take care of the baby. Ilibáng mo akó ánay sang bátà. Kindly
look after the baby for a while. (cf. awát, búhat).

_libaón_, A depression, etc. See libaóng.

_libaóng_, A depression in the soil, a shallow hole in the
ground. (cf. limpásong, nalupyakán, alimpásong, búhò, bubôbúhò).

_libás_, A kind of tree, whose slightly sour leaves are used for
seasoning meat, fish and vegetables. The libás-leaves somewhat resemble
in taste the alupídan-leaves.

_libát_, Squinting, cross-eyed, having a cast in the eye, swivel-eyed;
squint, become cross-eyed, to look askance. Naglibát siá gíkan sa
balatían. He became cross-eyed through sickness. (cf. lisíng).

_libáyon_, (B) The youngest brother or sister; a younger
brother or sister. Libáyon ko siá. He is my youngest or younger
brother. (cf. kalibáynan, mánghud, kamanghúran).

_libertád_, (Sp. libertad) Freedom, liberty,
independence. (cf. kaluásan, kahilwáyan).

_líbgus_, See lígbus--A kind of edible mushroom.

_libiáno_, (Sp. liviano) Easy, light; slight, trifling, trivial,
frivolous; lewd, libidinous, dissipated.

_libô_, To feel out of sorts, be near vomiting. (cf. díway, dígwà).

_libô_, Roller, rolling pin; cylinder; any piece of wood or the like
that can easily be moved, rolled or turned, as a wheel or cylinder.

_líbo_, Thousand. Sa túig nga isá ka líbo siám ka gatús katloán kag
ápat. In (the year) 1934.


_líb-o_, Back-water, a small pool or sheet of water in a
river. (cf. línaw, lináwlínaw; N.B. Pools and mudholes on roads are
called danáw, linggálhub, etc.).

_líb-ok_, To be drawn out, held sustained, said of the voice,
of sounds, etc. Nagalíb-ok ang íya nga tíngug. His voice is well
sustained. Ginpalíb-ok níya ang íya tíngug. He sustained his
voice. Maálam ka balá magpalíb-ok sang ímo tíngug? Can you sustain
your voice? Do you know how to hold (keep up, sustain, prolong)
notes without taking breath? (cf. lígbok).

_libó-líbo_, Thousands, by the thousand. (cf. líbo, liníbo).

_libó-líbo_, Palibó-líbo is usually employed in the meaning of:
to ponder--, think over--, consider--, well, to reflect upon,
muse. Pinalibólíbo níla inâ sing masúnsun, agúd dílì mapas-awán ang
íla ginahándum nga katuyoán. They frequently thought over (meditated,
ruminated, reflected, mused, dwelt on) it, so that their cherished
plan might not be frustrated. (cf. painóíno, pasinó, basóbáso,
panghunâhúnà, pamalándong).

_líbon_, Imperforate, closed, compact, full, without an opening. Ang
ítlog, bóla, kabúgaw, etc. líbon. Eggs, balls, pomeloes, etc. are
completely closed, have no hole or opening.

_libón, líbon_, A piece of arable land in the midst of a jungle;
imperforation, occlusion, as of the anus, or the like. Ang bátà
natáo nga líbon (libón). The child was born having its anus covered
with skin.

_líbra_, (Sp. libra) A pound, half a kilo. Líbra esterlína. An English
pound, pound sterling.

_líbre_, (Sp. libre) Free, untrammeled, unscathed, unhurt; to get
free, escape unscathed, etc. Nakalíbre siá. He got off scot-free. He
escaped punishment. Librehá ang binilánggò. Liberate the prisoner. Set
the prisoner free. Librehón mo siá sa íya mga kalisúd. Extricate him
from his difficulties. Nalíbre na siá. He was set at liberty or at
large. (cf. luás, bagít, talíbwas, búhì; hílway, makinaugalingón).

_librería_, (Sp. librería) Book-store, book-seller's shop; library.

_líbro_, (Sp. libro) Book, volume, tome, treatise, brochure,
pamphlet. (cf. tulún-an, balasahón).

_líbro_, The paunch, first stomach of ruminating animals.

_líbtug_, A pustule; a slight skin-disease, prickly heat. (cf. libutúg,
bungangínit, aláw).

_líbud_, To peddle, going from place to place and selling small
merchandise. Ilíbud dídto ang ginamús. Go there and try to sell the
salt fish. Libúdi (--úri) ang minurô sang binódo. Go to the village
and sell the salt fish from house to house.

_libúg_, Confused, bewildered, stupefied, dazed, troubled,
bothered, flustered, disconcerted, fuddled; to be or become
confused, etc. Naglibúg ang íya úlo. His mind is confused. He is in a
quandary. Palígba (palibugá) siá. Perplex him. Indì mo siá pagpaímnon
sing lakás nga bíno, agúd índì maglibúg ang íya úlo. Don't give him too
much wine to drink, lest he should become fuddled. Yanáng makahanúsbò
nga hitabô amó ang ginapalígban sang íya panumdúman. That sad event
troubles his mind. (cf. língin, lingín).

_líbug_, A honey-making, fly-like insect, smaller than the bee,
that makes its nest in stone-walls, trees, shrubs, etc.

_líbun, libún_, See líbon, libón.

_líbut_, To go round, walk about, circle around. Libúta (libúti) ang
nakawáan sang bánwa. Walk around the town-square. Ang mga makáwat
sing masamí nagalíbut kon gáb-i. Thieves generally walk abroad at
night. Maglíbut sa baláy may matahúm nga talútug nga salsálon. There
is a beautiful iron railing round the house. (cf. alíhid, lágaw).

_libútay_, (H) To be at ease, contented, feel quite comfortable, set
one's mind or heart at rest, be of good comfort. Indì akó malibútay
túbtub nga matigáyon ang ginahándum ko nga túyò. I shall not be
contented until my cherished plan is executed. Walâ siá malibútay
sámtang nga walâ pa matápus ang piniliáy. He had no peace of mind as
long as the elections were still going on. (cf. arabútay, dalamúnon,
ogkánan, girámon).

_libutúg_, Pustule, etc. See líbtug. Nagalibutúg or may mga libutúg
ang ákon bútkon, dúghan, etc. My arm, chest, etc. is full of small
pustules or prickly heat.

_líbwas_, To escape, get free, elude danger or difficulty. (cf. luás,
tibáwas, etc.).


_lídan_, Want or lack of punctuality, failure to do something at the
proper time; to pass, go by, be past or over, to fail. Magaabút
akó sa ínyo sa waláy lídan. I will came to you without fail,
punctually. Naglídan na ang ádlaw sang mga Minatáy. All-Souls' Day
is past. (cf. lígad).

_lídgid_, To shell corn or the like. Lidgirá (-idá) ang maís. Shell
the corn. Lidgirí akó sing napúlò ka bílog nga maís. Shell me ten
corn-cobs.

_lidgirán_, (H) A corn-sheller, tool for shelling corn.

_lidít_, To protrude, project, stick out, hang out, stand out a
little. Ang íya kamiséta nagalidít sa idálum sang íya báyò. His shirt
protrudes a little from under his jacket.

_lidít_, See dítil.

_lidiyár_, (Sp. lidiar) To oppose, resist, contend, fight against;
annoy, pester, be a nuisance. Indì mo akó paglidiyarón. Don't pester
me. (cf. bátok, gamú).

_lídò_, (B) Very fat, obese, extraordinarily corpulent; to
be excessively fat. Nagalídò gid iníng báboy. This pig is very
fat. Naglídò siá dídto nga maláw-ay na tulúkon. He grew so excessively
fat there, that he is disagreeable to look upon. (cf. támbok, baragóok,
búg-ong, bug-óngan, bugróngan, búgrong).

_lígà_, (B) To forget, be oblivious or forgetful of. Nagkalígà akó
sang bílin mo--or--naligáan ko ang bílin mo. I forgot your order
or injunction. Indì mo pagligáan ang tulún-an. Don't forget the
book. (cf. lipát, límot).

_líga_, (Sp. liga) League, union, coalition, confederation; garter,
band, ribbon. (cf. katilíngban, katipúnan; higót, wágkos, wáklos,
páha, lígas, góos).

_ligáb_, To bend, twist, turn sideways, deviate from a straight course
or line; to move, stir, shake. (cf. tikô, likô, íngkà, tión, língkang,
íngkit, húlag).

_lígad_. To pass, pass--, go--, by. Naglígad na ang tátlo ka túig kútub
sádto. Three years have passed since then. Ligádi (-ári) siá. Pass
him by. Go past him. Ginligádan (-áran) níya ang ámon baláy nga walá
magsákà. He passed our house without calling on us. Ginpalígad níla ang
íla pándut. They let their feast-day pass i.e. they postponed their
feast-day. Ang naglígad índì saráng mapabálik. The past will never
return,--cannot be brought back. (cf. lubás, labáy, lídan, talikód).

_lígang_, To heat, warm (of solids, not of liquids). Ligánga
ang tinápay. Warm the bread. Naglígang siá sang íya kamót sa
kaláyo--or--ginligángan níya ang kaláyo sang íya kamót. He warmed
his hands at the fire. Ilígang iníng kaláyo sa salsálon. Heat the
iron in this fire. (cf. gáang, gánggang).

_lígas_, Band, bandage, garter, ribbon; to bandage, garter,
bind up; put ribbons or strings on. Ligási ang nagbátà. Bandage
the mother. Linigásan níya ang ákon médyas. She put ribbons on my
stockings. Ilígas sa íya pilás iníng hénero kag písì. Bind up his
wound with this cloth and string. (cf. líga, wágkos, etc.).

_ligás_, To squeeze, compress or crush to pulp, soften, make pliable
by rubbing or rolling (of leaves, peas and beans, etc. previous
to using as a plaster or the like). Ligasá ang búyò. Soften the
búyò-leaf. Ligasí akó sing dáhon sang katúmbal, kay itámbal ko sa
púgsa. Crush some chili-leaves for me, because I am going to use them
as a plaster for the boil. (cf. hálmok).

_líg-as_, (H) To complete the pounding of rice (leaving very little
rice unhusked), pound rice thoroughly. Nakalíg-as na akó sing isá ka
lusóng. I have now pounded thoroughly one mortarful of rice. Lig-así
akó sing duhá ka gántang nga humáy. Pound two gantas of rice very
well for me. Ginlig-asán akó níya sing tátlo ka lusóng. He pounded
for me three mortarfuls of rice. Líg-as na--or--nalíg-as na. The
rice is now pounded. The pounding of the rice is finished. (cf. gómà,
dásdas, bayó).

_ligatón_, (Sp. regatón, regatear) See regatón--a huckster; to peddle,
etc. Nagaligatón siá sing mga (Manugligatón siá sang) ságing, páho,
talóng, etc. He is selling (He is a vendor of) bananas, mangoes,
eggplant, etc.

_lígaw_, To transfer or remove to another site, set up somewhere
else, especially applied to small native houses, first taking off
and transporting the roof and then the rest. Ligáwon nínyo ang ákon
baláy. Transfer my house to another site. Ligáwi nínyo ang ákon útud
sang íya baláy nga árà dirâ sa bánwa kag dálhon nínyo sa umá. Transfer
my brother's town house to the farm. (cf. óhong--to remove a house,
posts and roof, in one load, to another place).

_lígay_, To be kind to, speak gently or ingratiatingly, act in a kind,
tender, affectionate way. Ligáya siá. Be kind to him. Speak to him
in a friendly way. (cf. paayónáyon arígay, rígay).

_ligáy-lígay_, Dim. and Freq. of lígay. Ligáyligáyi siá sing
hámbal. Use kind words in talking to him. Linigáyligáyan akó níla
sing ámba. They sang very softly or sweetly to me. Ligáyligáya ang
pagbayó mo sang lánot. Pound the hemp gently. (cf. hínay, inanáy,
dalôdálò paayónáyon).

_lígban_, From libúg.

_lígbin_, To separate, set apart, put aside, move away from; to be
away from, be (a little) removed or distant from. (cf. lígwin).

_lígbok_, To sustain, hold, draw out (the voice, etc.). See líb-ok,
ligô id.

_lígbus_, A kind of mushroom that is highly esteemed by many
as a savoury side-dish; to be alarmed, get a shock. Naglígbus
(nagpanglígbus) ang íya láwas. His hair stood on end. He stood agast
(aghast).

_lígdas_, To slip, drop or fall off (the edge of a bank, road, stone,
bench, etc.). Naglígdas ang káro sa bató. The cart slipped off the
edge of the stone. Naligdasán ang tiíl ko sang alíling sang kángga. My
foot got under the wheel when the cart slipped over the edge. Indì
ka magpaági sang káro sa binít sang dálan, kay básì maglígdas kag
mahúlug. Don't drive the cart near the edge of the road, for it might
slip off and fall over. (cf. dáhog, káy-us, lísding).

_lígdong_, Modesty, bashfulness, unobtrusiveness; to be or become
modest, perform in a modest way, etc. Naglígdong siá sa koléhyo. She
became modest or bashful at college. Ginaligdongán akó sa íya. She
appears to me to be of a retired disposition, to be modest or
unobtrusive. Ginalígdong níya ang íya hámbal, batásan, pagginawî,
etc. He is modest in his speech, manners, bearing, etc. (cf. úgdang).

_líghot_, To bind, etc. See balíghot.

_líghot_, To seek, look for, try to find, search after something
(especially in a place dense with undergrowth, in a forest, jungle
or the like). Lighotá ang báka nga nadúlà sa kagulángan. Look for
the lost cow in the jungle. Lighotí akó sing uwáy, nítò, etc. sa
talúnan. Get me some rattan, nítò, etc. from the forest. Nagalíghot
silá sing mga búlak sa masíot. They are looking for flowers amongst
the dense undergrowth. (cf. lághap, sághap, ságap, pangítà).

_lígid_, To roll, whirl, revolve, turn over and over; to lie
down (lazily, to rest); rolling, revolving. Púnggi ang baríl nga
nagalígid. Stop the rolling barrel. Bantayí iníng káhoy, agúd
índì maglígid pa idálum. Watch this piece of wood or it may roll
down. Paligída (-íra) lang ang baríl nga siménto. Move the barrel
of cement by rolling it. Indì malígid iníng kamatuóran. This truth
cannot be gainsaid. (cf. búyung, túyub--to turn on an axle).

_ligídlígid_, Dim. and Freq. of lígid.

_ligídligíd_, To roll, turn over and over (on the ground, down a
steep incline, etc.).

_ligís_, A harrow; to harrow; to lacerate, grind, mill, crush, rub (as
between two stones moving one of them to and fro or the like). Ligisá
(lígsa) ang talámnan. Harrow the field. Ligisí (lígsi) akó sing duhá
ka gántang nga kakáw. Crush two gantas of cocoa-seeds for me (by
rubbing them between two stones). Kay walâ akó sing ibán nga ligís,
iligis ko lang iníng mga kawáyan. As I have no other harrow, I'll
just make this bamboo into a harrow. (cf. galíng--to mill, crush,
grind between revolving stones).

_lígna_, To shudder, get a shock, become nervous, have one's hair
stand on end. Nagalígna akó sa pagtán-aw siníng mahígkò nga úlud. I
shudder to look at this dirty worm. It makes me shudder to see this
dirty worm. Nalignahán siá sa pagtúluk sing líntà. She got a shock
when she saw a leech. Ginlignahán akó níya, kay madámò ang katúl
ko. I made his blood run cold, I gave him--the creeps,--the shivers,
because I have "katúl" bad. (cf. bígne, lígni, rígna).

_ligná-lígna_, Dim. and Freq. of lígna.

_lígni_, See lígna, sígne, bígne.

_ligní-lígni_, Dim. and Freq. of lígni.

_lígnok_, Movement; stir, bustle; to move, bustle, stir, show life
by movement. Walâ sing lígnok ang mga táo dídto sádto nga baláy. The
people in the house there show no signs of life. Sa waláy duhádúha
nagakatulúg na silá, kay walâ sing lígnok. Doubtless they are sleeping,
for there is no stir. (cf. líhok, lítok, húlag).

_lignók-lígnok_, Dim. and Freq. of lígnok. (cf. hulághúlag, litóklitók,
lihóklihók).

_lígò_, To bathe, lave, wash, etc. See lígos, dígos.

_ligô, lígò_, To sustain the voice. See líb-ok, lígbok.

_ligô-lígò_, Dim. and Freq. of ligô. Nagapaligôlígò siá sang íya nga
tíngug. She sustains her voice.

_lígon_, To let melt or dissolve in the mouth, suck without
chewing. Ligóna iníng bináto nga dólse. Let this candy dissolve in
your mouth. (cf. túnaw, ligónlígon, logónlógon).

_ligón_, To rub, stroke, beat slightly, massage. Ligoná ang íya likód,
kay nadúnlan siá. Thump him on the back, for he has something sticking
in his throat.

_líg-on_, (H) To be, become or make firm, steady, stable, strong,
fixed, steadfast, reliable or the like. Naglíg-on na ang íya túyò sa
pagkádto dídto. His determination to go there is fixed. Lig-onón mo
ang ímo buót sa pagpadáyon sa dálan sang katarúngan. Make up your
mind firmly to keep to the road of honesty. Lig-oní akó sing isá
siníng mga síya nga mahúyang. Make one of these weak chairs strong
for me. Ang grásya nga ikagpakalíg-on sang pagtó-o. The grace that
makes Faith firm, strong. Magalíg-on ang íya pagsálig kon----. His
hope or confidence will be steadfast, if----. (cf. pág-on, bákud).

_ligón-lígon_, Dim. and Freq. of lígon. Ligónligóna iníng yélo. Put
this piece of ice in your mouth and let it dissolve.

_lígos_, (H) To wash, lave, bath, give a bath to, bathe. Ligósa ang
bátà, báboy, etc. Give the baby, the pig, etc. a bath. Ilígos akó ánay
siníng idô. Kindly give this dog a bath. Ligósi akó sing manók. Wash
a chicken for me. Linigósan níla ang batíà sang idô. They gave the
dog a bath in the wash-tub. (cf. dígos, palígos, lígò).

_ligóy_, Laziness, indolence, remissness, negligence; to be lazy or
negligent, to play truant; lazy, negligent. Ligóy siá nga táo. He is
a lazy fellow. Indì ka magligóy. Don't be or become lazy. Don't play
truant. Ang ibán nga mga mamumugón, kon walâ ang kapatás, nagaligóy
lang. Some workmen, if there is no overseer, dawdle the time away
or work very lazily. Ginaligoyán siníng mga bátà ang pagbúthò sa
buluthúan. These children are playing truant from school. (cf. támad,
amád, agohós, pasalipótpot). N.B. The verb is paligóy oftener than
ligóy.

_ligoyán_ Lazy, indolent, sluggish, averse to labour. (cf. ligóy).

_lígpit_, To jam, squeeze, press, compress, squash, crush by
pressure as between two boards and the like. Nalígpit ang tagútò sang
bató. The lizard was crushed by the stone. Ligpitá ang tánga. Squash
the cockroach. Ginlígpit níya ang ilagâ sang tápì. He crushed the
rat with a piece of board. Ilígpit ang haló sa padér. Jam the iguana
against the wall. Iníng tápì naligpitán sing tátlo ka tokô,--or--iníng
tápì nakalígpit sing tátlo ka tokô. Three geckoes were crushed against
this board. (cf. ipít, lágpit, lígsà; lumâ, pusâ).

_ligpítan_, Press; printing-office; printing in general. (cf. lígpit;
ilipitán, ipitán).

_lígsà_, To crush, comminute, fracture, squeeze to pulp by pressure
or a superimposed weight. Nalígsà ang íya bútkon sang bató. His arm
was crushed by the stone. Ginligsaán siá sang íya batíis sang alíling
sang áwto. The wheel of the automobile fractured his leg. Nalígsà
ang kawáyan sang halígi nga ginagúyud. The bamboo was smashed by the
post being hauled over it. Andam ka, agúd dílì ka maágyan sang tren
kag malígsà. Beware, lest the train should run over you and crush
you. (cf. lígpit, ipít, lumâ, pusâ).

_lígson_, From ligís.

_lígtas_, To break, part, snap. Naglígtas (nalígtas) ang písì. The
string parted, broke, snapped. (cf. búgras, búgtò, rúgtas).

_lígum_, See lúgum--to dye, etc.

_ligumdulúm_, See lugumdulúm--very dark, black.

_lígwa_, (Sp. legua) A league, a distance of about five kilometers.

_lígwa_, (B) Wide, roomy, spacious, extensive; to be or become wide,
etc. (cf. lápad, hanáhay, aliwána, sángkad).


_lígwan_, A kind of small bee or honey-making fly. (cf. líbug,
putyókan).

_lígwat_, To squeeze in, insert, put in between (a word, or the like);
to overturn, overthrow, upset. (cf. salígbat, túgda; balískad, sulî,
balíkwat, kamíndag.

_ligwát-lígwat_, Dim. and Freq. of lígwat. Also: to turn over
leaves, or the like. Ginaligwátlígwat mo lang ang tulún-an nga walâ
mo pagabasáha. You are merely turning over the leaves of the book
without reading it. (cf. hítad, hitádhítad).

_lígwin_, To be a short distance away from, at the side of, apart,
separate from at some distance; to set apart, hide, conceal. Ang
íya baláy nalígwin sa dálan kag ginalibútan sang isá ka matahúm nga
pamulákan. His house stands back from the road and is surrounded by
a beautiful garden. Kwárta nga pinalígwin. Money put aside.

_lígwis_, (H) Sharp-pointed; to be or become
sharp-pointed. (cf. talíwis).

_líhap_, To chop, lop, cut off a piece of meat, etc. Lihápa ang
kárne. Cut the meat. Lihápi akó sing isá ka paláng nga kárne. Cut off
a piece of meat for me. Ginlíhap sang manugbúlung ang kalónggo sang
ákon kamót. The physician cut off the wart on my hand. (cf. útud,
gulút, láplap, kíhad, etc.).

_lihát_, To make use of the first opportunity, do at once. Lihatí ang
pagsulát sa íya. Write him at once, as soon as possible. (cf. likát,
dalikát, kalít).

_liháy_, To dodge, avoid by stepping or bending aside, side-step,
duck, evade, elude. Walâ siá maígò, kay nagliháy. He was not hit,
because he stepped aside. Iliháy ang úlo mo. Duck your head. Magliháy
kamó sa madalî, kay may nagaabút nga áwto. Quick, get out of the way,
for an automobile is coming. Ginlihayán níya ang bastón nga ginlámpus
sa íya ni Fuláno. He dodged the stick with which N.N. struck at
him. (cf. líkday).

_lihî_, To forbid, interdict, disapprove, object to, refuse sanction,
put under taboo (often used in connection with superstitious
observances). Lihií siá sa pagpalígos sa amó nga panahón. Prohibit him
from taking a bath at such a time. Ginalihî ang pagpanáug sa baláy
kon ang isá ka tagútò nagahuní sa hágdan. It is not advisable (by
a superstitious observance) to leave the house if a lizard croaks
on the staircase. Ilihî ang pagkáon sa bátà nga nagalíngkod sa
tapalán. (A superstition). Object to the child taking food sitting
on the cutting block. Ginalihî ang pagkáon sing kárne sa mga ádlaw
nga Biérnes sa Kwarésma. It is forbidden to eat meat on the Fridays
of Lent. (cf. dílì, dumílì).

_lihía_, (Sp. lejia) Lye, a solution of an alkali used for cleaning
purposes.

_lihiánon_, One who observes superstitious rules and precepts or
insists on such practices and vain ceremonies. Lihiánon siá nga
táo. He is superstitious, addicted to superstitious practices and
ceremonies. (cf. lihî).

_lihít_, Corner, side, surroundings, environs. (cf. binít, kílid,
báid, soók, doók, hilít).

_lihít-lihít_, Dim. of lihít. Táo (babáe) lang siá nga lihítlihít. He
is a man (she is a woman) of very humble origin, coming from some
unknown corner of the earth.

_líhò_, To search after, look for, try to find, seek, wish to
obtain. Anó ang ginalíhò mo? What are you looking for? Nagalíhò akó
sing kwárta, sing palanyagahón, etc. I am looking for some money,
for things to prepare dinner with, etc. Maglíhò ka sing páhò sa mga
dumulúaw. Try to find some mangoes for the visitors. (cf. lághap,
pangítà, etc.).

_líhog_, To ask a favour, request, pray, beg. Si Fuláno
naglíhog sa ákon nga kuháon ko ang íya nga maléta dídto sa baláy
níya. N.N. requested me to fetch his hand-bag there from his
house. Lihóga siá nga íya kamí lihóan sing manók. Ask him to get some
chickens for us. Liníhog ko siá nga magkúhà sang ákon koríyo--or--sang
ákon mga sulát sa koríyo. I asked him to fetch my mail--or--my letters
from the post-office. Ipalihóg mo akó sa----. Palihóga akó sa ímo
sa----. Please do me the favour of----.

_líhok_, Movement, stir, signs of life. (cf. lítok, húlag, etc.).

_lihók, líhok_, To move, budge, stir, bestir oneself. Ilihók na ang
láwas mo sa pagtapás sing káhoy. Bestir yourself now and cut down
some trees. Walâ gánì siá magalihók. He does not even move. He is
very quiet. Lihók ka na. Get a move on now. Bestir yourself. Andot
warâ kaw angód pagkalihók nga adláwon ron? (B) Why don't you get
a move on now, as it is broad daylight already? (cf. litók, húlag,
húblag, híwos, gíos, íos).


_lihóklihók_, Dim. and Freq. of lihók. (cf. litóklitók).

_lihô-lihô_, An idler, loafer, vagabond, one wandering about aimlessly,
rover. (cf. tiyógtiyóg, landólándo, etc.).

_líkag_, (B) To be distracted, wander, be inattentive or
absent-minded. Indì ka maglíkag. Don't be distracted. Indì mo siá
paglikágon. Do not disturb or distract him. Indì mo pagpalikágon ang
íya hunâhúnà. Do not distract his thoughts. (cf. lingáw, kílag).

_likág-líkag_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of líkag. Walâ siá sing likáglíkag
kon nagapangabúdlay. He does not allow himself to be distracted when
he is at work. His mind is concentrated on his job. (cf. lingáwlíngaw).

_likát_, To do at once, make use of the first occasion, take time by
the forelock. Likatí ang pagáni, kay básì maulán sa buás. Harvest the
rice at once, for tomorrow it may rain. Ginlikatán níla ang maáyo
nga panahón. They made good use of the fine weather. (cf. kalít,
lihát, dalikát).

_likát-líkat_, Dim. and Freq. of likát. Also: to let alone, leave
alone for a moment. Linikátlikátan níla kag walâ na siá makítà. He
was left alone (unobserved) for a moment and then he--was not seen
any more,--had disappeared.

_líkaw, likáw_, To avoid, shun, keep away from, eschew, steer--,
keep--, clear of, fight shy of, evade, elude, have nothing to do with,
let alone. Maglikáw ka sa mga maláut. Likawán mo ang mga maláut. Shun
the wicked. Keep away (aloof) from bad people. Likawí ang kaupdánan
nga maláin sing batásan. Avoid companions of bad habits. Ilikáw
(ilíkaw) sa íya iníng masakít nga táo, agúd índì níya makítà. Hide
this sick man from him, lest he should see him. Makalikáw (makalíkaw)
ka sang amó nga katalágman, kon----. You can escape that danger,
if----. Linikawán níya akó. He avoided (meeting, coming together with)
me. (cf. aklihís, kuyáw).

_líkbà, likbâ-líkbà_, To turn over, etc. See líkwà, likwâ-líkwà.

_líkday_, Dodge, evasion; to dodge, avoid, step aside, sidestep, evade,
elude, start suddenly aside. Naglíkday siá, búsà walâ siá maígò. He
stepped aside, therefore he was not hit. Likdayí ang bató. Dodge
the stone. Kon walâ níya paglikdayí sing madalî ang lubí, walâ sing
duhádúha nga nahulúgan siá. If he had not quickly dodged the coconut,
he would certainly have been hit. (cf. liháy, líksi, idóg, ísdog,
ísol, likáw, líktin).

_líkding_, To tip, tilt or heel over, to slant, incline, lean sideways,
careen (of a boat). Naglíkding ang kólon. The rice-kettle is not
standing straight, is nearly tipping over. Indì mo paglikdingón ang
kólon, kóndì tadlongón mo. Don't set up the rice-kettle aslant, but
make it stand straight. Likdingí akó sang kólon, kay sukáron ko ang
kán-on. Tilt the kettle a little for me, because I am going to take
out the rice. (cf. lísding).

_likî_, To move one's shoulders up and down gracefully or
ostentatiously. A kind of native folk dance in which the shoulders
are moved in such fashion. Nagalikî siá kon maglakát. She moves her
shoulders up and down in walking. (cf. kisáykísay, kiáykíay).

_líkid_, To finish arranging the warp, complete the work on the
warping board (sab-ongánan) before putting it on the loom; to
arrange, get ready. Nakalíkid na ikáw? Have you finished arranging
the warp? Ginlíkid mo na ang sináb-ong kahápon? Have you completed
the arrangement of the threads you prepared yesterday on the warping
board? Likída (--íra) ang sináb-ong mo. Complete the arrangement of
the threads on the warping board.

_likî-líkì_, Dim. and Freq. of likî. Ang mga dalága nga madayáw
nagalikîlíkì sa dálan. Vain girls move their shoulders ostentatiously
on the road, (when they walk abroad).

_likín_, A pot--or kettle--stand in the form of a mat of braided
straw or the like. (cf. kalangán id.).

_líkis_, To take the warp from the warping board and arrange it on the
loom; to coil, wind (the woven cloth on the cloth-roller). Likísa
ang sináb-ong. Transfer the warp from the warping board to the
loom. Likísa ang hinabúl. Wind the woven cloth on the roller (pulugian,
purogían). (cf. balólon, lolón, lókot--to roll up mats; álas--to coil,
wind up ropes).

_líkis_, To manage or arrange things well for oneself, know how to get
results, gain one's point or the like. Maáyo siá maglíkis--or--sing
líkis. He is an adept at arranging things well. He knows how to get
results. He is very resourceful in whatever he undertakes. (cf. hímos,
híwat, lísto, ábtik, etc.).

_likisán_, A cloth-roller, the revolving beam in a loom
on which the finished cloth is wound, anything used like a
cloth-roller. (cf. pulogían, purogían).

_líkit_, To roll, bale, make up in a roll or bale. Liníkit nga papél. A
roll of paper. (cf. balólon).

_líklik_, Secret, hidden, sly, cunning, underhand; to do on the sly,
give secretly, bribe, suborn, corrupt, tamper with. Sa líklik nga
paági. By secret means. By fraud. On the sly. Ang líklik níya nga
pahitôhítò----. His secret (cunning, hidden) dealings (machination,
plotting)----. Liniklikán siá níya sing napúlò ka mángmang. He was
bribed by him with ten pesos. Ilíklik lang sa íya iníng tátlo ka
mángmang. Just give him on the quiet these three pesos. Si Fuláno
matárung nga táo kag índì gid magpalíklik. N.N. is an honest man and
cannot be corrupted or bribed. Ang líklik amó ang isá ka mahígkò nga
padúgì. Bribery is a mean expedient. (cf. híphip).

_líkman, etc._ From likúm.

_likô_, Twisted, etc.; a kind of úbi.

_likô_, To deviate, turn, deflect, swerve, curve, bend, wind (of roads,
etc.). Dídto sa únhan ang dálan nagalikô sa walá. Further on there the
road turns to the left. Maglikô ka sa toó. Turn to the right. Likoán
mo ang dálan sa walá. Take the road to the left. Turn into the road
at the left. (cf. tikô).

_likóan_, Turning point, place where a road, etc., turns or branches
off.

_likód_, The back, rear, background, the part behind. Sa likód mo. On
or behind your back. Behind you. Sa likód sang baláy. Behind the
house. At the back of the house. Laín ang íya guyá sa atubángan mo kag
laín sa likód mo. He is double-faced. He speaks and acts differently
to your face and behind your back. (cf. talikód, abá, talódtod, pihák).

_likô-líkò_, Zig-zag, serpentine, winding, meandering, twisting,
crooked. Likôlíkò gid iníng dálan. This road winds very much. Maglakát
ka sing tádlong, índì sing likôlíkò. Walk straight ahead, not zig-zag.

_líkos_, Circumference, etc. See líkus.

_líksi_, A quick movement aside, a swift dodge; to turn or step aside
swiftly, make a quick dodge, side-step, elude, evade. Walâ ko siá
madakúp, kay nakalíksi siá. I could not catch him, for he succeeded
in running off swiftly. Ginliksihán níya akó. He was too quick for
me. Ilíksi ang láwas mo, agúd índì ka maígò sang bóla. Dodge quickly,
lest the ball should hit you. (cf. págsi).

_líktin_, To make a quick step away from, towards or upon something,
pounce upon, give a jump, side-step quickly. Naglíktin siá (sa
ákon)--or--ginliktinán níya (akó). He made a quick step away from
(me) or towards (me). (cf. líksi, lúmpat, lúkso).

_likúm_, Concealment, hiding, secrecy; to hide, conceal, keep quiet
about, screen, secrete, veil, disguise. Indì malikúm iníng búhat
mo. This deed of yours cannot be concealed. Liníkman (linikumán)
níya akó sinâ nga búhat. He hid or concealed that deed from me. Indì
ka maglikúm sa íya sang kamatuóran siníng nagkahanabô (nahanabô). Do
not conceal from him the truth of this event. Ilikúm lang sa íya
ang ákon pagabút dirí. Simply keep him in the dark about my arrival
here. Walâ sing likúm ang íya nga katuyoán. There is no secrecy about
his intention or plan. (cf. lílong, tágò).

_líkup_, To surround, enclose, encircle, hem in. Likúpi sing síklat ang
naidálum sang baláy. Surround with a bamboo partition the ground-floor
of the house. Ang pamulákan nalíkup (nalikúpan) sing kodál. The garden
is surrounded by a fence (has a fence round it, is enclosed within a
fence). Ginlikúpan sang mga kaáway ang bánwa. The enemy beleaguered
(surrounded) the town. Ilíkup iníng alámbre nga may dúgi sa áton
pamulákan. Fence in our garden with this barbed wire. (cf. líbut).

_líkus_, Periphery, circumference; a scaly ring round the legs of
some cocks. Ang íban nga mga sulúg may líkus, ang ibán walâ. Some
cocks have a líkus, some have none.

_líkwà_, To overturn, overthrow; to toss, pitch. (cf. lígwat, balíkwà).

_likwâ-líkwà_, Dim. and Freq. of líkwà. (cf. likbâlíkbà, sulî,
balískad).

_líkwat_, To upset, overturn. (cf. líkbà, líkwà, lígwat).

_likwát-líkwat_, Dim. and Freq. of líkwat. (cf. ligwátlígwat).


_líla_, (Sp. lila) The lilac shrub and its beautiful flowers; lilac
colour, lilac-coloured, a blending of blue and pink. Ginbáklan níya
ang íya nóbya sing isá ka térno nga líla líso (líla nga líso, líla
nga lúgus). He bought for the bride a dress-suit of unfigured lilac.

_lílang_, Pickled or soused fish, fish preserved in brine; to souse
or salt fish with the use of a little water. Lilánga ang tabyós. Salt
the tabios-fish (with the use of a little water). May linílang kamó
nga tabagák? Have you got any pickled tabagac-fish? (cf. binóro,
binódo--fish preserved in salt alone without water).

_lílas_, (H) To strip, cut into small strips buri-leaves or the like,
to shred. Lilása ang burí. Cut the buri-leaves into strips. Lilási akó
sing burí. Make for me some strips from buri-leaves. Liláson mo ang
burí sing magamáy. Divide the buri-leaves into small strips. Maglílas
ka sang burí sing magamáy, kay himóon ko nga kálò. Make small strips
of the buri-leaves, for I am going to make a hat of them. (cf. ríras).

_lilasán_, (H) An instrument for cutting buri-leaves, etc., into
strips for weaving purposes. (cf. lílas).

_lílaw_, Boundary, fence, inclosure; limit, scope, circle, confines,
range (of action, etc.). (cf. látid, dolónan, kadulúnan).

_lílì_, To look at, peep or squint through an aperture or hole, observe
slily or cautiously. Kuháa ang tabón kag lilíon mo kag hikápon kon anó
ang sa idálum. Take off the cover and look and feel what is beneath
it. (cf. língling, bántay, lántaw, tán-aw, túluk).

_lilibángan_, (H) Place were something is taken care of. Lilibángan
sang mga kabatáan. Kinder-garten. Centre of puericulture. (cf. libáng).

_liligawón_, (H) What is to----, can----, should----, be removed to
some other site or place; transferable, transplantable. (cf. lígaw).

_lilihíon_, (H) Things that are forbidden, taboo, banned, prohibited,
disallowed, not allowed, proscribed, inadvisable or to be avoided,
interdicted, not sanctioned. (cf. lihî).

_lilikáwan_, (H) What is to be----, should be----, can be----, avoided,
avoidable, escapable. (cf. likáw).

_lilimósan_, (H) A person or object worthy of an alms or on whose
behalf alms are collected or solicited. (cf. limós).

_lilímsan_, See lilimósan.

_lilín_, (B) To turn down a hem or border, fold, double, tuck up,
take a tuck in. Liliní akó sang ákon báyò. Fold up my jacket for
me. Liliná ang mantél. Fold the table-cloth. Ililín akó ánay siníng
papél. Please fold this paper for me. (cf. pilô).

_lilingkóran_, (H) Seat, chair, etc. See lingkóran,
lingkoránan. (língkod).

_lílis_, See lílas--to strip, pull--, tear--, off.

_lilitsónon_, (H) Fit--, suitable--, prepared--, for being roasted
on a spit. (cf. litsón).

_liliwánan_, (H) Place of change or repetition. Liliwánan sang
pamatásan. A reformatory, house of correction. (cf. liwán).

_lílong_, Concealment--, hiding--, of the truth; to hide, conceal,
suppress--, keep from--, withhold--, the truth. Indì ka maglílong sang
ímo mga salâ. Don't conceal your sins. Ginlilóngan níya ang íya amáy
sang pagtámbong níya sa sáut. He kept back from his father the fact
that he had assisted at the dance. Ilílong mo sa íya iníng hitabô. Hide
from him this event or accident. (cf. likúm, tágò, hinabón).

_líma_, (Sp. lima) Lime, lime-tree. (ríma id.).

_líma_, The hand. (cf. alíma, kamót).

_limá_, To handle, take in the hand, etc. (cf. alíma, alimá, pangalimá,
pangamót).

_limá_, Five; to divide by five, make or take five parts. Limahón mo
ka báhin iníng túmpok nga humáy kag ipanágtag sa íla. Divide this heap
of rice in five parts and distribute it to them. Anó, tátlo lang ang
ímo kuháon (báklon, dálhon, etc.)? Limahá lang. Why, are you taking
(buying, fetching, etc.) only three? Take (buy, fetch, etc.) five.

_limálíma_, A kind of plant.

_límas_, To worsen, make a disease worse, change for the worse
(often implying a superstitious belief that one visiting a sick
person after he has been to a house where someone has lately died
will exert an injurious influence upon the sickness). Ginlímas níya
ang katúl sang bátà, kay naghápit sa napátyan kag nagpaúlì nga walâ
ánay pagtuóba. He made the child's skin-disease worse by going to
a house where someone had died and returning home without being
first disinfected by smoke. Naglímas siá sang ákon típgas. He made
my measles worse. Linímas níya ang hánggà (butí) sang ákon útud. On
account of him my brother's smallpox got worse. (cf. láin, búg-at).

_limátok_, Mountain leech. See alimátok.

_lím-aw_, Gulf, large bay, sea, ocean, lake. (cf. dágat, línaw, lawúd).

_límbag_, To colour, stain; to print. (cf. duág, bálhag).

_limbáhon_, A kind of coconut with reddish husks. Its milk is very
tasty and sweet. (cf. libáhon).

_límbo_, (Sp. limbo) Limbo, the place where the souls of the just
were detained before the coming of Christ; limb, the border or outer
edge of the sun and moon.

_límbò, límbo_, Dark, gloomy, dusky; to be or become dark, dim,
dusky. Naglímbò (lumímbò) ang íwag sang sugâ. The light of the lamp
became dim. The lamp was put out. Límbò nga alágyan. A dark passage. A
dusky or gloomy road (especially at night). (cf. dulúm, itúm).

_límbok_, (B) Immature rice or corn heated in a gánga and pounded
while hot; the dish made from such rice or corn, usually fried in
lard. Límbok is contr. from linubúk. (cf. lubúk, pilípig).

_límbong_, Fraud, imposture, cheating, swindle; to cheat,
defraud, impose upon, bilk, diddle, do, take in, swindle,
commit a fraud, appropriate fraudulently. Indì ka maglímbong kag
índì ka magpalímbong. Don't cheat and don't allow yourself to be
cheated. Linimbongán akó níya sing tátlo ka písos. He defrauded me of
three pesos. Sa limá ka mángmang ilímbong mo sa íya ang tátlo. Of the
five pesos keep back three yourself (and give him only two--or--defraud
him of three pesos out of five). (cf. dáyà, agóng, lág-it, palítog,
káwtì, káwat, tíkas, tákaw; likúm, lílong, tágò).

_límbong_, (B) Quiet, calm, windless, wind-free, not exposed to the
wind. Pahigdaá ang masakít sa isá ka hulút nga límbong (malímbong). Let
the sick person lie down in a quiet room, in a room sheltered from
the wind.

_limitasyón_, (Sp. limitación). Limitation, restriction. (cf. látid,
dólon).

_límnan_, (B) Ugly of figure, harsh of sound, bad of
smell, disagreeable to touch, etc., bad, mean, nasty;
abominable. (cf. laímnan, maláin).

_límog_, (B) Voice; sound. Maáyo siá sing límog. She has a good
voice. (cf. tíngug).

_limóg_, (B) To speak, voice, give utterance to. Walâ na silá
paglimgánay, pagkalimgánay--or--pagkalimogáy. They are no longer on
speaking terms.

_límog_, (H) To injure, spoil, harm, cause damage to. Andamán mo ang
lanahón, agúd índì malimógan. Take good care of the coconut-meat
from which coconut-oil is to be extracted, so that it may not be
spoilt. Ang amó nga mga pagbaísbáis nagalímog sang pagtoloóhan. Such
disputes are injurious to faith. (cf. dáut, láut, hálit).

_limókon_, A wild pigeon. See alimókon.

_limólimó_, To treat harshly, unjustly or oppressively,
to oppress. Sing masamí ang mga ímol ginalimólimó sang mga
manggaránon. Often the poor are harshly treated by the rich. Indì
mo paglimólimohón ang ímo sologoón. Don't deal unjustly with your
servant. (cf. pígus).

_limón_, (Sp. limón) The lemon tree and its fruit.

_limós_, (Sp. limosna) Alms, offering, gift, bounty, dole,
gratuity; stipend for a Mass; funeral fee; to give an alms,
etc. Ilimós sa makalolóoy nga táo iníng pisítas. Give the poor
man this peseta. Límsi--or--limosí ang makilímos sing salapî. Give
the beggar fifty centavos. Linímsan níya ang simbáhan sing napúlò
ka mángmang. He made an offering of ten pesos to the church. Walâ
pa silá paglímsi sang lángit sing mga bátà. They have not yet been
blessed with children. Heaven has not yet granted them the gift of
children. (cf. hátag, regálo, etc.).

_límot_, (H) Forgetfulness, oblivion; to forget, cease to remember,
be forgetful or oblivious of. Nagkalímot--or--nalímot akó sinâ. I have
forgotten it. I don't recollect it. It has escaped my memory. Indì mo
pagkalímtan iní. Do not forget this. Indì níla malímtan ang ginagíhan
níla nga kalisúd. They will be unable to forget the troubles they have
passed through. Básì kon limóton mo akó. Perhaps you will forget me,
will not think of me any longer. Pinanglímot siá. He forgot himself. He
lost his self-possession. (cf. lipát, lígà).

_limotóg_, Pustule, rash, prickly heat. See líbtug, libutúg.

_límpa_, To move to and fro, pitch, rock, toss, roll like a boat,
a cradle or the like; to halt, limp. Ginalímpa sang hángin
ang sakayán. The wind is rocking the boat, making the boat
roll. (cf. lúmpa).

_limpá-límpa_, Dim. and Freq. of límpa. Ang kángga nagalimpálímpa. The
cart is jolting. (cf. lumpálúmpa).

_limpásong_, A depression in the ground, etc. See alimpásong, libaóng.

_límpio_, See límpyo.

_limpyabótas_, (Sp. limpia botas) Boot-black.

_límpyo_, (Sp. limpio) Clean, stainless, spotless, pure, free, clear;
to clean, cleanse, make stainless, etc. Límpyohí ang balatonán,
ang mga pínggan, etc. Clean the reception room, the plates,
etc. Ilímpyo iníng habón sa mga panápton. Wash the clothes with this
soap. Linimpyohán níya ang mga báso sing maáyo. He cleaned the glasses
well. Límpyo na ang lángit nga walâ sing gál-um. The sky is now clear
of clouds. (cf. tínlò).

_límsan, etc._ From limós.

_límtan, etc._ From límot.

_limúnaw_, (B) To disappear suddenly or unexpectedly, vanish, fade
away, dissolve. Naglimúnaw ang ákon igsulúlat sa látok. My pen
suddenly disappeared from the table. Bantayí iníng mga páhò, agúd
índì maglimúnaw. Watch these mangoes, lest they should vanish or
disappear i.e. lest they should be stolen. (cf. dúlà, túnaw, alimúnaw).

_limunsíto_, (Sp. limón, limoncillo) A kind of shrub with lemon-like
fruit containing a viscous juice that is often used as paste.

_línà_, Very tasty, sweet toddy.

_linabô_, Cut or smitten with a sharp-edged tool. (cf. labô).

_linábo_, Dyed, steeped in colour. Linábo nga báyò. A dyed
jacket. (cf. linúgum from lúgum).

_linagápok_, A confused noise, clatter, crash, as of falling boards,
or the like. See lagápok.

_linágo_, Striped, streaked, variegated (particularly applied to
rough hemp-cloth or cotton goods). (cf. lágo-worm; sinamáy).

_linágot_, A cracking, squeaking, creaking sound; to creak,
etc. (cf. lágot, ígot).

_linágpang_, Meat, fish, chicken, etc. roasted over live coals
and served with vinegar and chili, etc. Ang ámon súd-an sa panyága
linágpang. We had a side-dish of linágpang for dinner. (cf. lágpang).

_lináhe_, (Sp. linaje) Line, lineage, family, progeny, race, stock,
kin. (cf. panimaláy, kalíwat, kadúgò, himatâ).

_linahón_, Maize (with husks) roasted on the cob. As a rule the linahón
is roasted once more (íhaw, bóog) before it is eaten. (cf. binóog,
iníhaw, sinúgba).

_linangás_, Joke, jest, fun; to joke, make fun, jest,
ridicule. (cf. langás).

_linapákan_, Trace, track, foot-print. (cf. lápak, lapakán).

_linapíd, linapíd-lapíd_, Firmly joined or connected,
twin. (cf. lapíd).

_linár_, (Sp. llenar) To fill out blank spaces in a printed form,
etc. Linahá ang balótas. Fill in the ballot-form. Linahí akó siníng
papél kay akó índì kahibaló. Fill in this paper for me, for I do not
know how to do it. (cf. punô, lunúb, dúgang).

_línas_, To tread, trample upon, applied especially to the separating
of rice-grains from the ears by trampling on them. Linása ang
humáy. Tread the rice. Linásan akó nímo sing tátlo ka pásong
nga humáy. Tread three bushels of rice for me. Maálam ka balá
maglínas? Do you know how to tread rice? Ginlínas gid lang níya
ang ákon katarúngan. He trampled on my rights. He spurned my
arguments. (cf. lápak, tápak).


_linasán_, An elevated platform, usually a kind of bamboo-flooring,
for threshing rice by treading. (cf. línas; bayáwbáyaw, pápag).

_lináta_, Canned goods or provisions. (cf. láta, lalatahón).

_línaw_, Lake, pond, sheet of quiet water, loch, lough, mere,
tarn; to be or become quiet, peaceful, unruffled, still, smooth,
calm. Naglínaw na ang dágat, ang íya kaákig, etc. The sea is now
smooth, his anger has cooled or quieted down, etc. Nalináwan (--áwhan)
kamí sang dágat sang ámon pagpakádto sa Manílà. We had a calm sea when
we went to Manila. Indì ka magpalígos dirâ sa sulúg, kóndì dirí lang sa
línaw. Don't bathe there in the current, but here in this quiet pool.

_lináw-línaw_, Dim. and Freq. of línaw. A small pond, lin, linn,
pool or puddle. (cf. líb-o, danáw).

_lín-ay_, Young, youthful, tender, soft, gentle; a young lady, girl,
maiden of tender years. (cf. lanúbò, bataón, pamatán-on, malúm-ok,
malolô, malólot, etc.).

_líng-an_, For linógan from línog--to quake, etc.

_língas_, To be distracted, confused, upset, flurried, to look about
distractedly not knowing what to do or where to turn to. Indì mo
paglingásan ang bátà. Don't be so distracted as to forget the baby
(your charge). Indì mo igkalíngas inâ. Don't allow yourself to be
upset by such a thing. Dumúlug ang íya paghámbal kag lumíngas siá sa
may bintánà. He stopped talking and looked distractedly towards the
window. (cf. língin).

_lingás_, Unnerved, distracted, upset, flurried, confused, not knowing
what to do or say out of fear or bashfulness. (cf. lingín).

_lingás-língas_, Dim. and Freq. of língas. Anó ang ginalingáslíngas
mo? What are you turning your head for? Why are you looking from
right to left? Why are you so distracted?

_lingás-lingás_, Dim. of lingás.

_lingáw_, To be distracted, look about curiously or listlessly,
divert one's attention, entertain, amuse; distracted, astray, lost,
diverted. Indì ka maglingáw (magpalingáw) sa simbáhan. Do not be
distracted in church. Ilingáw akó ánay sináng mga bátà. Kindly amuse
those children for me. Ilingáw sa íya iníng hampangánan. Divert him
with this toy. Lingawá siá. Distract, entertain or amuse him. Lingáw
silá. They are distracted. (cf. lingô, lingî, lingíg, lísi, bangá).

_lingáw-língaw_, Dim. and Freq. of lingáw. Lingáwlingáwa ang bátà. Do
something to amuse the baby. Nagalingáwlíngaw silá sa baybáyon. They
are diverting themselves on the beach. Lingáwlingáwon ang íya mga
kalisúd, si nánay mo, etc. Get his mind off his troubles, entertain
your mother, etc. Indì ka maglingáwlíngaw. Don't be absent-minded
or unattentive.

_linggáhub_, Washed-out parts of--, a washout in--, a road, pool,
puddle, mudhole, plash, splash. (cf. danáw).

_linggálhub_, See linggáhub id.

_linggánay_, Bell; to ring the bells. Lingganáya ang
bágting--or--bagtingá ang linggánay. Ring the bell or bells. Lingganáyi
ang bulunyágan sing tátlo ka basál. Ring three peals for the
baptism. (cf. bágting; básal, basál, rimáte, ripíke).

_lingganáyan_, Belfry. (cf. kampanáryo).

_linggí-línggi_, To shake to and fro or up and down, rock, tip, sway
to and fro, (said of one's head, of the rolling and pitching of boats,
etc.; limpálímpa, lumpálúmpa, lingkánglíngkang; úndag, tumbôtúmbò).

_linggóhot_, To go or walk about in all directions, disperse (as a
crowd, etc. paninggóhot, sarumbálì).

_línggon_, Línggon mo siá. Look upon him. See lingíg.

_línghag_, To muse, think, ponder, be absorbed in, have one's mind
occupied with. Nagalínghag siá sang trak nga íya pagalulánan sang
humáy níya nga galalíngon. He is thinking about how to get a truck
to take his rice to the mill. (cf. libólíbo, hunâhúnà, dúmdum).

_línghod_, (H) Immature, green, unripe, tender, minor. Línghod pa ang
mga páhò. The mangoes are still green, are not yet ripe. Nalinghorán
akó sináng mga búnga. Those fruits seem to me to be green, to be
unripe. Línghod pa siá sing panuigón. He is still of tender years,
is young yet. (cf. mánghud).


_lingî_, To look upon or towards. Lingiá siá. Look on him or at
him. (cf. lingíg).

_lingíg_, To look towards, set one's eyes upon. Ilingíg mo sa ákon ang
ímong mga matá nga malolóy-on--or--língga akó sang ímong mga matá nga
malolóy-on. Turn your merciful eyes upon me. Língga akó. Look at me
or towards me. Walâ gid paglíngga siníng bugalón nga manggaránon ang
makaloló-oy nga nagapakilímos. This rich fellow did not even deign
to bestow a glance on the miserable beggar, did not so much as glance
at him. (cf. lingî, tamúd, balikíd).

_lingî-língì_, Dim. and Freq. of lingî. Indì ka gánì maglingîlíngì
sinâ nga táo, kay maláut sing batásan. Don't even look at that man,
because he is a bad character. Ginpalingîlíngì sang ilóy ang íya nga
bátà sang halúk. The mother showered kisses on her baby turning it
this way and that.

_lingín_, Confused, worried, perplexed, bemused, puzzled, upset,
dizzy, fuddled, in a quandary. (cf. língin, libúg, hubúg, lipóng).

_língin_, To worry, confuse, be upset, etc. Nagalíngin ang íya úlo. He
is upset. His head is all of a whirl. Nagalíngin ang íla úlo, kay walâ
magabút ang sakayán. Their mind is upset or they are worried, because
the boat has not arrived. Palíngna (palingína) ang íya úlo. Perplex
him. Cause him some worry. Worry him. (cf. lingín).

_lingín-lingín_, Dim. and Freq. of língin and lingín. Also: idiotic,
crazy, fool, simpleton.

_lingít_, Anything borrowed or raised on credit, a loan. (cf. língit).

_língit_, To borrow, get on credit, raise money, run into
debt. Maglíngit ka lang ánay sing tátlo ka gántang nga bugás sa kay
Fuláno. Just borrow for the present three gantas of hulled rice from
N.N. Língta (lingíta) ang íya kwárta. Borrow his money. Palingíta
(palíngta) akó sing isá ka sáko nga maís. Lend me a sack of corn. Walâ
akó makalíngit sang íya salákyan, kay ginhinakáyan ni Fuláno. I could
not borrow his car or vehicle, for it had been hired by N.N. Pinalíngit
man níya akó kuntánì sing kwárta, ápang sa karón balasúbas siá. He
would have granted me a loan of money, but at present he is out of
cash. (cf. hulám, útang).

_língkang_, To shake, move to and fro or up and down, jolt, jog, budge,
move. Indì siá malíngkang sa íya tinindúgan. He cannot be moved from
his position. Lingkangá gid siá. Move him at all costs. Ilíngkang ko
iníng bára sa dakô nga bató. I shall try to move the large stone with
this crow-bar. (cf. ínghit, ínkà).

_lingkáng-língkang_, Dim. and Freq. of língkang. Ang káro
nagalingkánglíngkang. The cart is shaking, jolting. (cf. limpálímpa,
etc.).

_língkod_, (H) To sit, sit down, be seated, seat oneself, take
a seat. Língkod ka. Be seated. Take a seat. Lingkodí (--orí)
ang síya, dílì ang bángkò. Sit down on the chair, not on the
bench. Ang mga nagalilíngkod nagtilíndog sa paghátag sing katahurán
sa pangúlo-bánwa. Those that were seated rose to their feet to pay
their respects to the Municipal President. Walâ siá magpalíngkod
sa ákon. He did not offer me a seat. He did not permit me to sit
down. (cf. púngkò).

_lingkódan_, (B) Seat, chair, stool, settle, dais, throne, anything
used to be sat upon. (cf. língkod).

_lingkóran, lingkoránan_, (H) See lingkódan, lilingkóran,
pulungkóan. Nagapúngkò siá sa íya hinariánon nga lingkóran. He sits
in his royal throne.

_língling_, To peep or squint through a hole, observe secretly
through any small aperture. Anó ang ginalíngling mo dirâ? What
are you peeping through that hole for? Indì ka maglíngling. Don't
peep through holes. Linglingá silá kon anó ang íla ginabúhat
dirâ. Watch them through a chink or hole to see what they are doing
there. Ginlíngling níya silá nga nagailísip sang pílak. He watched
them secretly as they counted the money. Ang kinitáan sang tápì amó
ang ginalinglingán níya sa ilá. He peered or peeped at them through
the board-seam. (cf. bántay, panílag).

_língnon, etc._ From língin.

_lingô_, Turn one's eyes upon, look sideways, glance aside, etc. See
lingî, lingíg.

_lingó_, A little meat or fish or the like as a side-dish to the rice,
etc. (cf. súd-an, dáplì, daráplì).

_líng-og_, Noise, nuisance, annoyance; to annoy, be
annoyed. Ginaling-ogán

akó sinâ. I am annoyed at that. That
annoys me. (cf. gamú, gáhud).

_lingô-lingô_, Dim. and Freq. of lingô--to glance aside,
etc. (cf. lingîlíngì).

_lingó-lingó_, To doubt, waver, vacillate, be in doubt or
suspense. (cf. duhá-dúha, lamálamá).

_liñgós-liñgós_, To lick, pass the tongue over. (cf. dílà, dílap).

_língton_, From língit--to borrow. Língton mo ang íya humáy. Borrow
his rice (all his rice). Língtan mo siá sing humáy. Borrow some rice
from him. Borrow some of his rice.

_lingwéta_, (Sp. lingueta) A small tongue; any tongue-like band or
strap, any small narrow appendage; the reed of a harmonium.

_linibág-líbag_, Quarrelling, discord, dissension, disagreement,
difference; to differ, quarrel, disagree, dissent, be at variance
with. (cf. líbag, híbag, suáy-súay, sumpákil, áway, sipák).

_liníbo_, Thousands, by the thousand. Mga liníbo ka táo ang
nagtalámbong. Thousands of people were present. (líbo--thousand).

_lininggóhot_, To move about in all directions, as crowds of people
in a market, on a feast-day, etc. Nagalininggóhot gid lang ang mga
táo sa atubángan sang simbáhan sa ádlaw sang piésta. The people are
moving about in crowds or jostling each other in front of the church
on the day of the Feast. (cf. linggóhot, sarumbálì, surumbálì).

_línis_, See hínis--to rub, polish, etc.

_linmábaw_, The middle finger. (cf. lumábaw).

_linô_, To shake, agitate (bottles, etc.). Linoá ang lubí kon láhin
na úkon línghod pa. Shake the coconut to see whether it is ripe or
not. Naglubúg ang sulúd siníng botílya, kay ginlinô níya. The contents
of this bottle have become turbid, because he has shaken it. Linoí
akó siníng mga ítlog kon maáyo úkon kanô. Shake these eggs for me to
see whether they are (good) fresh or not.

_linó_, (Sp. lino) Flax, linen, sail-cloth, canvas, mosquito-netting.

_línog_, An earthquake, earth-tremor, seismic disturbance; to quake;
tremble, shake. Abáw, nagalínog--or--may línog. Why, there is an
earthquake. Kagáb-i naglínog--or--may línog ang kalibútan. Last
night there was an earthquake. Nalinógan (Nalíng-an) kamí dídto sa
Manílà. We experienced an earthquake in Manila.

_linóko_, Foolish, stupid, absurd. Linóko nga hámbal, búhat,
etc. Stupid talk, a foolish deed, etc. (lóko, binúang, tinónto, etc.).

_linókwan_, Place where cattle lie down and rest. (cf. lokó, lukú).

_linóng_, Quietude, peace, tranquillity, calm, calmness; peaceful,
tranquil, quiet, calm; to be, become or make calm, etc. Naglinóng
na ang íla baláy. Their house is quiet now. Naglinóng na ang íla
panimaláy. Their family-life is peaceful now. Linongá ang ínyo
pagpuyô. Live quietly together i.e. don't quarrel or the like. Walâ
pa maglinóng ang pagpuyô dídto, kay ang bolkán nagatúga pa kag
nagapalínog. Life there has not yet become tranquil, because the
volcano is active still and causes earthquakes. Ginalinongán gid akó
siníng bánwa. This town appears to me to be very quiet, peaceful or
tranquil. (cf. táwhay, dáit, húsay).

_líntà_, The leech. Pakádtan (Butangán) mo siá sing líntà. Put a
leech on him. Apply a leech to him. (cf. alimátok--the mountain leech).

_línta_, To crack, split, burst, cleave. (cf. litík, balanâ).

_lintaán_, Full of leeches. Subâ, talámnan nga lintaán. A river or
field, etc., full of, or containing, many leeches. (cf. lintaón).

_líntab_, Leech. See líntà.

_líntak_, To click one's tongue, etc. See pangalíntak.

_líntang_, A step, stair (of a flight of stairs), rung (of a
ladder). See halíntang, halíngtang.

_lintaón_, Pertaining to leeches; full of leeches. (cf. líntà,
lintaán).

_línti_, (Sp. lente) Lens; monocle; magnifying glass. (cf. tagosílang).

_líntì_, Lightning, fork--, sheet--, summer--, lightning, bolt, flash
of lightning; to lighten, strike by lightning; also used as a curse:
Blast it! or the like. Nagalíntì, may líntì. It is lightening, there
is lightning. Nalintián ang lubí dídto. The coconut palm there was
struck by lightning. Sa búlan sa Máyo sing masamí may panglíntì kag
panagúub. It often lightens and thunders in the month of May. Ang
íya baláy nahápit sang líntì kag nasúnug. His house was struck by
lightning and burned to the ground. Ginhápit (Hinápit) siá sang líntì
kag napatáy. He was struck and killed by lightning. Lintián ikáw! May
lightning strike you dead! Curse you! A curse upon you! Líntì! Blast
it! Hang it! The dickens! The deuce (take it)! Ay, líntì ikáw! Why,
you are a damned nuisance! Oh, líntì, naglupúk ang góma! Oh, damn
it, the tyre has burst! Indì ka magpangyáwà kag magpanglíntì,
kay maláw-ay. Don't curse and swear. Don't use so frequently the
expressions "yáwà" and "líntì", because it is unbecoming. (cf. kilát,
pangilát, kilás; yáwà, yámat).

_líntok_, (H) The smaller, finer particles of rice chaff after
pounding, bran, usually fed to pigs, etc. The larger parts (lábhang)
are made use of for cleaning plates or the like. (cf. upá).

_líntong_, To be confused, worried, perplexed. Nagalíntong ang
íya úlo karón tungúd sang íya útang. He is worried now about
his debt. Nagapalíntong siá sang íya úlo. He is cudgelling his
brains. (cf. libúg).

_linúbid_, Made up in a string or cord, corded, by the cord or
string. Nakabakál akó sing tabákò nga linúbid. I bought some tobacco
by the cord. Bákli akó sing pilá ka tabákò nga linúbid. Buy me some
corded or stringed tobacco leaves (for chewing). (cf. lúbid).

_linúgaw_, Gruel, rice-porridge, rice boiled very soft and crushed
to pulp in a generous allowance of water, often given to sick
people. (cf. lúgaw).

_linúgus_, Forced; ravished by force. (cf. lúgus).

_linúmban_, Mended, patched, having gaps filled up, etc. See
lunúb. Indì mo paggamíton sa pándut ang linúmban. Don't wear patched
clothes at the town-feast.

_linúthang_, Shot, hit by a bullet. Ang mga linúthang. Those that
were shot or hit by bullets. (cf. lúthang).

_linuyáhan_, Weakened, exhausted. (cf. lúya).

_línya_, (Sp. linea) Line, stroke (of a pen, etc.); line, way, track
route; line, lineage, progeny. (cf. dalán, dinalán, kúris, bádlit;
alágyan, dálan, látid; kalíwat, kadúgò, panimaláy).

_lío_, To find a contrivance, means or remedy according to one's
needs, particularly applied to the borrowing of money. Naglío siá
sing kwárta. He borrowed some money. Somehow he managed to get hold
of some money. Ginlióhan níya akó sing kwárta. He borrowed some money
from me. Palalío (Palalíyo, paralíyo) siá nga táo. He is fond of--,
is always--, borrowing money. He is a troublesome or unpleasant man
to deal with. (cf. hulám, laláng, rimédyo and the following lío).

_lío_, (Sp. lio) Case, trouble, row, scrape, imbroglio, scene,
unpleasant incident or occurrence. (cf. gamú).

_líod, lí-od_, To put round, encircle, surround, trap, ensnare. Liodí
(--orí) sing kalát ang kabáyo. Put a rope round the horse. Liodón
(--orón) mo sing kalát ang karabáw nga simarón. Ensnare the wild
buffalo with a rope, throw a rope round the wild buffalo. Ilíod sa
líog sang kánding iní nga písì. Put this string around the goat's
neck. (cf. síod, líkup).

_liód-líod_, Dim. and Freq. of líod. Also: to molest, bother, pester.

_lióg, li-óg_, To collar, grasp by the neck. Ginlióg níya akó. He
grasped me by the back of the neck. Liogá siá. Collar him. Take
him by the throat. Indì ka maglióg sa íya. Don't take him by the
throat. Don't throttle him. (cf. kugâ).

_líog, lí-og_, The neck, scrag.

_liógan_, Thick--or bull-necked, one with a strong neck. (cf. líog).

_lió-lío_, Dim. and Freq. of lío. Also: To scull a boat, propel a
boat by working an oar at the stern.

_líong, lí-ong_, The armhole, the circular cut in a garment where
the sleeve is attached; to make the armhole. Sangkará ang líong sang
ákon báyò. Widen the armhole of my jacket. Ginpasángkad (Gintambihán)
níya ang ákon gutúk nga pakô náyon sa ílok kag pinadakô níya ang
líong. She widened (let out) my tight sleeve near the armpit and
enlarged the armhole.


_lipák_, A splinter, piece, fragment, a broken or split part of wood,
bamboo, etc. (cf. baníslak, baníklan).

_lípas_, To shun, avoid, turn away from, neglect, take no notice of,
deviate, digress; omit, be disobedient. Buút siá maglípas sa ákon,
kay mahádluk nga sókton ko siá sang ákon kwárta nga ginpahulám ko sa
íya. He wants to avoid me, because he fears that I might demand payment
of the amount he has borrowed from me. Sang pagkakítà níya sa ákon sa
dálan naglípas siá. When he saw me on the road, he turned away from
me. Ginlipásan níya siá gíkan sa kahuyâ. He avoided meeting him out of
shame. Naglípas siá sa párì, kay naglápas siá sa pagsímba. He avoided
meeting the priest, because he had neglected going to church,--had
missed Mass. (cf. likáw, lígad, lubás, aklihís; lápas).

_lipás-lípas_, Dim. and Freq. of lípas.

_lipásong_, Depression, hole, etc. See limpásong, libaóng, nalupyakán.

_lipát_, To forget, lose the memory or recollection of, be oblivious
or forgetful of. Nagkalipát (nalipát) na akó sinâ. Nalipatán ko na
inâ. I have forgotten that. I cannot recall that. It has escaped
my memory. Indì mo pagkalipatán ang pagpangamúyò sa agáága kag sa
gab-ígáb-i. Don't forget your morning and night prayers. Dílì níla
malipatán ang amó nga hitabô. They will not be able to forget that
incident or event. Nalipatán níla siá sa pagágda. Nalipatán níla
ang pagágda sa íya. They forgot to invite him. Indì ka malipát
(magkalipát). Don't forget. (cf. límot, lígà).

_lipát_, To slap, strike. Karón lipatón ko ikáw. I've a good mind to
slap you. (Perhaps this lipát is identical with the foregoing and
the phrase quoted can be explained by "I shall make you forget it"
(by causing you some physical pain that may restrain you from repeating
what you did).

_lípay_, A vine with hairy leaves that cause a severe itch when
touched. (cf. nípay).

_lípay_, Whitlow. (cf. típay).

_lípay_, To gladden, cheer, rejoice, delight, give joy or pleasure to,
console, solace, comfort, animate, raise the spirits. Nagalípay sa
ákon sing dakô iníng sulát ni nánay. Mother's letter gives me great
pleasure. Ginkalipáyan ko gid ang pagabút mo dirí sa ámon. I am glad
that you have come here to us. Dílì mo igkalípay ang mga kalisúd sang
ímo isigkatáo. Don't gloat over--or--take pleasure in, the troubles
of your fellow-men. Walâ nákon pagkalipáyi ang pagtámbong dídto sa
nahíwat nga sáut. I did not enjoy taking part in the dance that was
arranged there. Lipáya ang útud mo. Cheer up your brother. Nagakalípay
akó. I am glad. (cf. sádya, lúyag, wíli, bangá, lingáw, etc.).

_lípdan_, From lipód--to screen, etc.

_lipdánan_, A screen, shelter, protection. Dabóka ang kaláyo sa
lipdánan sang dápya sang hángin. Kindle the fire in a place that is
not exposed to the wind. (cf. lipód).

_lípdas_, To touch and glance off, graze, slip off. (cf. lígdas).

_lípià_, Mould-board, the iron plate or sheet attached to a plough
above the ploughshare (plowshare). It turns over the furrow-slice.

_lipíd_, A tooth with a supernumerary behind it. May lipíd siá. He
has two teeth one behind the other. Lipíd ang íya ngípon. He has a
double row of teeth. (cf. kápid--twin).

_líplip_, To bribe, suborn. See híphip, líklik.

_líplip_, Wickerwork made of the fibres of the leaves of the buri-palm;
ragged, torn, full of holes (of all kinds of wickerwork). Líplip ang
tabungós, amákan, kisamí, etc. The rice-basket, bamboo-mat, ceiling,
etc., is torn or full of holes.

_lípnan_, From lípon--to screen, etc. Pagalípnan ko ang sugâ. I am
going to screen the light, shade the lantern--or--the like.

_lipód_, To screen, stand between, bar, block, close the view of,
hide behind, conceal, cover, cloak, veil; a screen, etc. Ang kawáyan
nagalipód sang baláy--or--ang baláy ginalípdan sang kawáyan. The house
is hidden behind the bamboo. The bamboo screens the house. Ang tíktik
nalípdan sang madábung nga mga káhuy. The spy was concealed behind the
dense foliage of trees. Ang amó nga minurô ginalibútan kag ginalípdan
sing búg-os sang mga kawáyan. That village is completely surrounded
and closed to view by bamboos. Palípdi ang nabagátnan sang ímo baláy
sing mga akásya, kay ábong gid sa hángin. Hide the southside of your
house behind acacias, for it is too much exposed to the wind. Ang
íla nga binúhat índì na malípdan. Their deed cannot be concealed
any longer. Ginlípdan níya ang maláin nga katuyoán sing matám-is nga
hámbal. He covered his wicked design under a cloak of sugary or honeyed
talk. (cf. lipón, lípon, tábon, tabón, gabún, hingabón, tágò, panágò).

_lipód-lípod_, Dim. and Freq. of lipód. Sa waláy lipódlípod. Without
tergiversation or concealment, openly, honestly, frankly. Maghambálay
na kitá sa walâ sing lipódlípod. Let us talk it over now without any
circumlocution, without hiding or concealing anything.

_lípok_, To toss or move to and fro, flicker, swirl, whirl, eddy,
hover about (of smoke, candle-flames, etc.). Ang sáblab sang kandílà
nagalípok sa hángin. The flame of the candle is flickering in the
wind. Ginalipókan sang asó ang digamohán. The kitchen is full of
smoke driving hither and thither. Ang asó sang tabákò nagalípok
sa balatonán. The tobacco smoke eddies about the reception
room. (cf. hulághúlag).

_lípok_, To beat, thrash, give blows to. (cf. lipát, tampúyung,
súmbag, kadól, búngbung).

_lipók-lípok_, Dim. and Freq. of lípok--to flicker, etc.

_lipón_, A screen, cover, cloak, veil. (cf. lipód, biómbo).

_lípon, lipón_, To screen, cover, hide, conceal. Nalípnan (naliponán)
ang íya nga sululátan. His writing table is screened off. Lípni ang
sugâ. Screen, darken or shade, the lamp-light. (cf. lipód, etc.).

_lipóng_, Unconscious, dazed, being in a swoon or fainting fit,
dizzy, confused, perplexed, giddy; drunk, intoxicated. (cf. walâ na
sing kalibútan, paalumátay, lingín, hubúg, balúng).

_lípong_, To cause a fainting fit, swoon, syncope, unconsciousness;
to make dizzy, drunk, etc. Nalípong siá. He swooned (went off in
a swoon), had a fainting fit, lost consciousness. Ginlípong níya
akó sang bíno. He made me dizzy, giddy or drunk with wine. Ang mga
masakít nga oloperáhan ginalípong silá ánay sang manugbúlung. Sick
persons about to be operated upon are first given an anaesthetic by
the physician. (cf. língin, hubúg).

_lipót_, Interception, circumvention, stoppage; to pursue and
catch by a strategem, intercept, circumvent, take a short-cut or
the like. Lipotá ang makáwat. Intercept the thief. Linipót níya akó
sa dálan. He intercepted me on the road. Ilipót akó ánay sang ákon
kabáyo nga nagadalágan dirâ. Kindly run around and catch my horse
that is running away there. Kon sóndon nínyo iníng laktúran, básì
nga malipót pa nínyo ang buyóng. If you follow this short-cut, you
may be able to intercept and catch the brigand. (cf. bángan, bánggà,
dakúp, lagás, siód, litâ).

_líp-ot_, (H) Shortness, curtness, brevity, abbreviation,
abridgement; short, brief, curt, curtailed; to shorten, abridge,
abbreviate, curtail, cut short. Lip-otón mo ang kawáyan. Shorten the
bamboo. Lip-otí akó sang ákon delárgo. Shorten my pants. Make short
trousers for me. Ilíp-ot akó siníng káhoy. Kindly shorten this piece of
wood for me. Nalip-otán akó sinâ. That was too short for me. Nagági
kamí sa líp-ot (laktúran). We took the short-cut. Nagaamátamát
na sang líp-ot ang ádlaw. The days are slowly shortening (getting
shorter). Lakás kaláwig iníng sinulát mo nga láygay; lip-otá. The
written sermon of yours is too long; cut it short, make it
shorter. (cf. kabús--too short; bugô).

_liprán_, (Sp. refrán) Refrain, adage, proverb, saying,
saw. (cf. hurubáton).

_lípyà_, See lípià--mould-board, etc.

_líra_, (Sp. lira) The lyre. (cf. sísta--guitar; lántoy--flute).

_lírio_, (Sp. lirio) The lily, white lily. (cf. asuséna).

_liróliró_, See leróleró id.

_lisá_, Omission, default, mistake, deviation, irregularity, hitch,
fail, failure, deficiency, non-observance, neglect; to deviate, be
irregular, etc. Tumána iní sa walâ sing lisá. Execute this without
fail. Magtámbong ka sa waláy lisá. Assist punctually, do not fail to
put in an appearance. Nagalilisá na ang mga baláyan siníng dáan nga
baláy. The girders of this old house are getting out of order, are not
straight or well joined any longer. (cf. lídan, lápas, lípas, lális).

_lísag_, The way of cooking eggs without the use of lard or water,
by first opening and beating them, then placing the mass on, or
between, leaves and the latter into the pan or over live coals; to
prepare eggs in that way. Lisága ang ítlog. Prepare the eggs in the
lísag-manner. Lisági akó sing tátlo ka bílog nga ítlog. Cook three
eggs for me in the lísag way. Ilísag mo akó siníng mga ítlog. Kindly
prepare these eggs for me in the lísag style. Ginanamítan ang ibán
sang mga ítlog nga linísag (nahímos sa lísag). Some relish eggs
prepared according to the lísag recipe.

_lisáng_, Terrified, shocked, full of consternation, struck all
of a heap, very much afraid, aghast, horrified, awe-stricken,
panic-stricken. (cf. lísang).

_lísang_, To be terrified, shocked, frightened, affrighted,
impressed with sudden fear, alarmed, scared, dismayed, appalled,
filled with great fear or terror, inspired with awe, frightened
out of one's--wits,--senses,--seven senses. Nalísang siá sang
paglínog. Nagkalísang siá sang paglínog. He was filled with terror
(was full of consternation) at the earthquake. Ginkalísang níya
ang kaláyo. Nagpalísang sa íya ang kaláyo. The fire struck him with
awe. Indì mo siá pagpalisángon. Don't terrify him. (cf. hádluk, kibút,
kúlbà, kúgmat, panglígbus, panguyús, kibút, ngídlis).

_lisáng-lisáng_, Dim. and Freq. of lisáng and lísang. Nagalisánglisáng
silá tungúd sang bágyo. They are very much afraid of the hurricane.

_lísaw_, To be or become insipid, unsavoury, spoilt, go bad, applied
to old tubers or the like. Naglísaw iníng banáyan. This banáyan has
become insipid. Nalisáwan akó siníng úbi. This úbi tastes bad to
me. I think this úbi is spoilt. (cf. kalísaw, malísaw, ganás, maganás).

_lísbut_, (B) Worsted, defeated, overcome, lost, overpowered (by
drink); to lose, be worsted, etc. (at gambling). Sín-o ang lísbut? Who
lost? Who was defeated? Lísbut siá sang bíno. The wine has overcome
him. He is drunk. Nalísbut siá sa baráha. He got the worst of it at
card-playing or lost heavily gambling. (cf. daúg).

_lísdan, etc._ From lisúd.

_lísding_, To tilt, cant up, tip over, lean, slant,
topple. (cf. líkding, salidíng, saliáy, takílid). N.B. If the posts
of a house give way on one side and the house in consequence tips over
"lúsud" is to be used, e.g. Nalúsud ang baláy. The house tipped over.

_lisénsya_, (Sp. licencia) Leave, license, permission, permit; to
ask permission or leave. Malisénsya ikáw ánay kay nánay, kon buút ka
magupúd sa ámon. Ask first mother's leave, if you wish to go along
with us. (cf. túgut, pahanúgut, permíso, gahúm).

_lísgà_, To crush, squelch, compress, squash, smash, squeeze to pulp
or a broken mass. Nalísgà ang íya bútkon sang alíling sang kángga. His
arm was crushed by the cart-wheel. (cf. pusâ, lumâ, ipít, lígpit,
lágpit, lígsà).

_lísgis_, To scratch, graze, excoriate, mark a line by anything
pointed, engrave, tear open. Nalísgis ang kamót ko sang símsim. My
hand was scratched by the bamboo branches. Nagakalísgis ang íya mga
túhud. His knees are getting scratched, wounded, open, torn (by briars
or the like). (cf. báklis, bákris, pákris, balíkas, gámà, gábà).

_lísi_, To look about curiously or searchingly, let one's eyes wander
as when visiting a new place or the like. Anó ang ginalísi mo? What
are you looking at so curiously? Why are you so curiously looking
about? Indì ka maglísi. Do not let your eyes wander so curiously. Don't
gaze about you so inquisitively. Sang pagabút sádto nga bukídnon sa
Manílà naglísi siá nga daw lipóng sa katingála bangúd sang madámò
nga mga baláy nga dalágkò. When that mountaineer arrived in Manila
he stared about him as if beside himself with astonishment on account
of the many large buildings. Hinúgay sang lísi nga súbung sang isá ka
dalákpon. Don't look so excitedly about you as if you were (a criminal)
to be arrested.

_lisík_, To fly, jump off to a distance (like pieces of stone or chips
of wood, etc.). Naglisík ang inágsap sang káhoy sa malayô. The chips
of wood flew off to a distance. Nalisikán (nalískan) akó sang inágsap
sang bató. I was struck by a flying piece of stone. Malayô ang íya
nalískan. He quickly moved away, swiftly stepped aside, scampered
off to a safe distance. (cf. ásik, lásik, ágsik, ásang, ályas).

_lisílísi_, Dim. and Freq. of lísi. Indì ka maglisílísi súbung sang
isá ka haló. Don't look about like an iguana.

_lisíng_, Squinting, cross-eyed, swivel-eyed, affected with strabismus;
to squint, develop a squint. Naglisíng siá. He developed a squint,
contracted strabismus. Nalisingán akó sa íya. He appeared to me to
be cross-eyed, to squint, to be suffering from strabismus. (cf. libát).

_lískan_, From lisík--to fly off, etc.

_lísngad, lisngád_, Dull, backward, stupid, not quite normal; to be
or become stupid, etc. (cf. pákok, bulúk, kagúng, buangít, kolôkolô).

_líso_, (Sp. liso) Plain, even, unadorned, uniform, unfigured,
simple. Ang íya nga sáya may duág nga asúl nga líso. Her gown is of
an unfigured sky-blue. (cf. saláma, lúgus, lúnsay, túnay).

_líso_, Fruit-kernel, seed of pulpy fruits.

_lisó_, Bullet, shot, cannon-ball, rifle-shot. (cf. bála).

_lísò_, To turn round, veer, face about, right about, turn the other
side or way. Lísò or maglísò ka. Turn round. Lisóa ang kángga. Turn the
cart the other way. Lisói akó siníng salákyan. Turn this vehicle round
the other way for me. Ilísò, kon mga saráng, akó siníng síya. Please,
turn this chair round for me. Naglísò na siá. He has now come round,
has repented or been converted. Madámò nga mga protestánte kag masón
ang buút maglísò sa pagkakatóliko sa óras sang kamatáyon. Many
Protestants and Masons wish to become Catholics at the hour of
death. (cf. balískad, bálik, lumád, kulúb).

_lisóhan_, A kind of banana with many seeds, but still with less than
the pákol-banana.

_líson_, A kind of fish whose flesh is rather tough and therefore
líson, as a form of speech, also signifies health and strength. Si
Pédro matámbok, ápang tabonánà lámang, si Hosé magamáy, ápang
líson. Peter is stout, but merely fleshy, José is small, but strong
or muscular.

_lísta_, (Sp. lista) List, record, memorandum; to list, enlist,
enroll, enter a name, make a memorandum. Listahá silá. Enlist
their names. Ilísta akó ánay sang ákon ngálan. Please enlist my
name. Ipalísta silá. Have them enrolled. Get them to enlist. Mapalísta
na kamí. We are now going to have our names put down in the
register. Iníng tulún-an amó ang linistahán sang tanán nga mga
umalamót. This book contains the names of all contributors or
subscribers. Diín ang lísta sang mga katápò? Where is the record of
the members? (cf. pasulát, listáhan, pagkítan).

_lísta_, Bright, clever (of girls). See lísto).

_listáhan_, Roll or list of names, record, register, copy-book for
making memoranda or entering a list of names, etc. (cf. lísta).

_lísto_, (Sp. listo) Ready, prepared, equipped, fully provided
or arranged; clever, cunning, resourceful, tricksy. Lísto na ang
panyága. Dinner is ready. Lísto na akó sa paglakát. I am ready to
march--or--set out. Lísto na ang tanán nga inoglúlan. All the goods
to be loaded are prepared. Siá lísto gid sa tanán nga mga bágay. He
is a clever fellow in every way, an all round man. Andam ka sa íya,
kay lísto siá kaáyo. Beware of him, because he is very tricksy or
cunning. (cf. humán, tigána, hándà, hímos, antígo, anád, sagád,
sampáton, batíd, lántip).

_listón_, (Sp. liston) Ribbon, riband, band, sash; to use or apply a
ribbon, etc. Listoní ang ákon pányò. Put a ribbon or band round my
handkerchief. Ilistón akó ánay sang ákon pakô. Put a ribbon on my
sleeve. Ilistón lang iníng kondíman sa ímo háwak. Just use this red
cloth for a sash round your waist.

_lisúd_, Trouble, difficulty, distress, moral, spiritual or physical
hardship; to be or to get in trouble, distress, etc. Nagalisúd na ang
íya pagbátì. His disease is getting serious. Nalísdan kamí sang ámon
pangabúhì sa karón nga túig. This year we have found it difficult to
get a living. Dî mo igkalisúd yanáng mga butáng--or--dî mo pagkalísdan
yanáng mga butáng. Don't take those things too much to heart. Don't
allow yourself to be troubled by such things. Indì ka magpangalisúd
sing lakás tungúd sang kamatáyon sang ímo útud. Don't grieve overmuch
over the death of your brother. Nagakalisúd siá karón, kay----. He is
troubled--or--in distress at present, because----. (cf. kalisdánan,
kalilísdan, malisúd).

_líswa_, To pour hot water, etc., on or over something, put into
hot water. Liswahí ang báboy, kay kiskisán ko. Pour hot water over
the pig, for I am going to scrape off its bristles. Liswahán mo ánay
ang mga pínggan kag ugáling pahíran mo kag pamálhon (pamálon). Put
the plates first into hot water, then wipe and dry them. Ilíswa ang
túbig sa pínggan. Pour hot water over the plate, wash the plate with
hot water. Liniswahán ko ang dalók nga idô. I poured hot water on
the greedy dog.

_litâ_, Circumvention, subterfuge, trick, cheating; to catch by
crossing one's way, intercept, cut off, waylay, thwart, trick,
cheat. Litaá siá. Intercept him. Nadakúp ang makáwat sang paglitâ sa
íya sang polís. The thief was caught when the policeman crossed his
way. Ginlitâ níla ang buyóng sa búkid. They intercepted the robber
in the mountain. Kon magági ka dirâ sa laktúran saráng ka makalitâ
sa binilánggò nga nalágyo. If you take the short-cut there you may
be able to intercept the run-away prisoner. (cf. lipót, bángan,
bánggà, balábag).

_lítad_, To be absent-minded, attend to carelessly or negligently,
shirk, leave, relinquish, evade, abandon (work, etc.). Indì ka maglítad
sang ímo nga buluhatón. Don't shirk your duties. Don't be negligent
in the performance of your duties. (cf. líkag id.).

_litád-lítad_, Dim. and Freq. of lítad. Magtánum na kamú sa waláy
litádlítad. Plant rice now without interruption, without leaving off
every now and again. (cf. bíyà, báyà).

_lítag_, To detain, interrupt, disturb, encroach on one's time,
etc. Nalítag akó sang sugilánon. I was detained or interrupted (in
my work) by a conversation (with somebody). (cf. dúpag, lúpag).

_lít-ag_, To snare, ensnare, capture. (cf. síod, siód).

_litâ-lítà_, Dim. and Freq. of litâ--to intercept, etc.

_litá-litá, litá-líta_, To wander about, go from place to place,
rove, roam, ramble. (cf. lagáw-lágaw, landólándo, etc.).

_litaníya_, (Sp. litania) Litany.

_lítaw, litáw-lítaw_, To walk about, go from place to place, etc. See
lágaw, lagáw-lágaw.

_literatúra_, (Sp. literatura) Literature, classical reading, learning,
writings. (cf. kasulátan, balasahón, sinulatán, tulún-an).

_litík_, Cracked, split, flawed, rifted, fissured; to crack, split,
flaw, rift, become fissured; to be worried, perplexed, upset. Naglitík
ang bangâ. The water-cooler has cracked. Indì mo pagbutangán ang
báso sing túbig nga inínit, kay básì magalitík. Don't put hot water
in the glass, for it might crack. Litík nga gorgoríta. A cracked
water-jar. Palítkon (Palitikón) ko karón ang úlo mo. I'll split your
head. Palítki (Palitikí) siá sang íya ólo. Split his head. Nagalitík
ang ákon úlo tungúd siní. I am very much worried about it. Amó inâ
nga butáng ang nagapalitík karón sang íya úlo. That is the thing that
upsets him,--worries him, at present. (cf. balanâ, bukâ, balángkà,
píhak, bíal).

_litikón_, Cracked, split, full of cracks or fissures. (cf. litík).

_lítkon_, From litík.

_lítog_, To change one's abode, migrate, move, go to another place,
transfer one's residence. (cf. líton).

_lítog_, To misuse, defraud, steal or cheat craftily, embezzle, fail
to use (money, etc.) according to the intention of the contributor
or donor. Ginlítog (ginpalítog) níya ang ákon kwárta. He misused
my money, spent it wrongfully. Indì mo paglitógon (pagpalitógon)
ang pílak nga gintúgyan sa ímo sang ibán. Do not use for your own
purposes the money entrusted to you by others. (cf. palítog).

_litóg-lítog_, Dim. and Freq. of lítog. Also: migratory, nomadic;
loafer, vagabond.

_litók_, To move, etc. See lihók.

_lítok_, Stir, movement. See líhok.

_litók-litók_, Dim. of litók and Dim. and Freq. of lítok. Daw walâ sing
táo sa baláy, kay walâ gid sing litóklitók. There seems to be nobody
at home, for there is no stir whatever in the house. (cf. lihóklihók,
hulághúlag).

_líton_, To migrate, move, go to live in another place, transfer one's
abode, go to reside somewhere else (mostly with the intention of coming
back to one's former place of residence after some time). Naglíton na
silá sa umá. They have gone to live at the farm. Ginlíton níla ang íla
pagpuyô sa Manílà. They went to live in Manila. Sán-o kamó magalíton
sa umá? When will you transfer your residence to the farm? Ginlíton
níya ang íya panimaláy sa Mindanáw. He went with his family to live
in Mindanao. He emigrated with his family to Mindanao. Litóni ang
umá. Líton ka sa umá. Go to live at the farm. (cf. kádto, amoyóng,
puyô, lúntad, sáylo).


_litós_, To strike, whip, lash, beat, flog. Litosá siá--or--litosí
siá sing napúlò ka lápdus. Give him ten strokes of the whip. Ginlitós
ni tátay ang ákon útud, kay nagsinutíl siá. Father gave my brother a
beating, because he was naughty. (cf. búnal, látigo, hámpak, lámpus,
hánot, lápdus, láw-it, lábtik).

_litratísta_, (Sp. retratista) Photographer. (cf. manuglaráwan).

_litráto_, (Sp. retrato) Photograph, photo, picture. (cf. laráwan).

_lítro_, (Sp. litro) A litre.

_litsáda_, (Sp. lechada) White-wash; pulp; mixture of lime, sand and
stones for building purposes, bonded rubble work.

_litsón_, Roast pig. See letsón.

_lítug_, A kind of poisonous shell fish.

_lítug_, See lítog--to change one's abode, etc.

_líw-a_, To dislocate, sprain. (cf. líwas, bílwa, súlpò).

_líwag_, Disobedient, undutiful, refractory; to disobey, resist,
refuse, object, be refractory. (cf. lális, lápas, bátok).

_liwá-líwa_, Recreation, walk, stroll, constitutional, trip, holiday;
go for a walk, take a stroll, go out for recreation. Nagaliwálíwa silá
sa baybáyon. They are out for a walk on the beach. (cf. paliwálíwa,
pangliwálíwa).

_líwan_, Other, another, not the same, different. Líwan nga táo,
líwan nga tulún-an, etc. Another man, another book, etc. Sa líwan
nga dútà. In other lands, in different soil. (cf. laín, túhay, ibán).

_liwán_, Again, repeatedly, a second time; to do again, repeat,
to retract. Liwanón ko ang ákon sulát. I will rewrite what I have
written. Ginliwán níya ang íya batásan. He changed his habits. Indì
ka magliwán mangáwat (sa pagpangáwat). Do not steal again. Liwaní siá
sing isá ka kúpa nga bíno. Give him another glass of wine. Ginliwán
níya ang íya hámbal. He repeated his statement. He changed his
statement. He retracted his statement. (cf. liwát).

_liwanán_, (B) Door, door-step, entrance or outlet. (cf. gawáng,
ganháan, gangháan, puertáhan).

_liwán-líwan_, Dim. and Freq. of liwán. Also: Changeling, shifty,
undecided, wavering, fickle, a turncoat. (cf. luwánlúwan).

_líw-as_, To overlap, stick out at the side of, protrude,
dislocate completely. Papaá ang lánsang sing matádlung, agúd
índì maglíw-as. Drive the nail in straight, so that it may
not come out at the side. Naglíw-as ang íya túl-an. His bone
stuck out or protruded. Nagliw-as ang íya bútkon. His arm was
dislocated. (cf. súlpò; lúak).

_liwát_, (H) Again, repeatedly, a second time; to do again, repeat;
to change, retract. Liwatón ko ang ginhámbal ko kaína. I am going to
repeat what I have said some time ago. Ginliwát níya ang pagbúhat sang
amó nga butáng nga maláut. He repeated that wicked action. Nasilótan
siá, kay ginliwatán níya si tátay sa pagbátok. He was punished, because
he again contradicted Father. Ginliwát níya ang íya nga hámbal. He
retracted his statement. He repeated or changed his statement
(according to the context). Nagliwát siá sa íya ilóy. He took after his
mother i.e. he is like--or--resembles his mother. (cf. liwán, súlit).

_liwatán_, The wrist.

_liwát-líwat_, Dim. and Freq. of liwát. (cf. liwánlíwan, sulítsúlit,
luwánlúwan).

_liwít_, The scabbard fish, silver eel, cutlass fish.

_liyá-líya_, A stretcher, bier, etc. See liálía, pápag, langkápan,
langkápi.

_liyás_, To slip, make a false step. (cf. liás, dúpias, dáy-us,
dalín-as, kíbias).

_líyo, liyó-líyo_, See lío, lió-lío.

_lóblob_, A defile, gorge, ravine, canyon, a long, deep passage
between two heights, a narrow pass, narrow valley, narrow road,
hollow way; to be or become hollow, deep (of roads, water-courses,
or the like). (cf. lúblub id.).

_lóbo_, (Sp. lobo) The wolf.

_lobô_, (B) Hole, privy, lavatory, W.C. (i.e. water-closet); to make
a hole, hollow. Diín ang lobô? Where is the W.C.? Lób-i (loboí) ang
kawáyan nga hilimoón nga bayóng--or--lób-i ang balayongón. Hollow
out the bamboo-tube that is to be used as a receptable for
water. (cf. lubô, komún; búslot, luhút, tohók).


_lobó-lóbo_, A small river lobster, river shrimp. (cf. baskugáy).

_lobóy-lóboy_, See lobólóbo--a river shrimp. (cf. pasáyan).

_logát-od_, Prominent, outstanding, elevated, protruding, raised,
higher than the surroundings; to appear, protrude, project, become
conspicuous or visible (of tumours, boils, pimples, etc.). (cf. ólbo,
gitíb, gimáw, lát-od).

_logátok_, To crack, snap, etc. See lagátok, lágtok.

_lógho_, To drop, fall down, sink, descend, get loose and come down
unnoticed, as clothes that are only carelessly secured. Nalógho
(Nagkalógho) ang íya patádyong. Her skirt became loose (has become
loose) and dropped (has dropped). Andam ka, agúd índì malógho
(magkalógho) ang ímo puróy. Be on your guard, lest your short trousers
should get loose, drop or come down. Sing masamí ginaloghohán sang
íla delárgo ang mga bátà nga walâ pa maánad sa pagdalá sang amó
nga panápton. Quite frequently the pants get loose of boys not yet
accustomed to wear such articles of dress. (cf. dágdag, lóyloy).

_lóglog_, To poke or fish out with a stick, cane, pole, etc. Loglogá
ang búhò sang ilagâ. Poke the stick down the rat-hole. Drive the
rat out of its hole. Loglogá ang haroán. Poke the mud-eel out
with a stick. Ginlóglog sang mga bátà ang kwárta nga sa sulúd sang
alkansíya. The boys fished out the money from the slotted bamboo
box. (cf. gúlò, lúgit, lúkit).

_lógò, lôgô_, To shake, agitate (a bottle or the like). Logoá ang
botílya. Shake the bottle. Lògoí ang botílya sing túbig. Rinse the
bottle with water. Fill the bottle with water and shake it. (cf. linô).

_lóg-on_, From lóog--to push the finger, etc., into a hole.

_logón-lógon_, To mumble, eat with closed lips (as old, toothless
folks).

_lógro_, (Sp. logro) Gain, profit, success; usury; a higher bid,
an augmentation, raising or doubling of a stake; to bet or wager a
higher stake. Gintayaán níya silá sing lógro. Nagtayâ siá sa íla sing
lógro. He offered them a higher stake. He raised the stake (in order
to regain his losses or to make some profit, if luck should be on
his side). Hándà siá sa paglógro sing limá ka mángmang. He is ready
to bet five pesos more. He is willing to raise the stake by five pesos.

_lógtì_, To snap, break, etc. See lúgtì.

_lógway_, Line, rope, etc. See lúgway.

_lóhon_, To be or become healthy, hale, sound, strong, robust,
well. (cf. áyo, bákud, báskug, támbok).

_lóka_, (Sp. loca) A foolish woman, female idiot. (cf. lóko).

_loká-lóka, loká-loká_, Dim. of lóka.

_lóko_, (Sp. loco) A fool, idiot, ass, madman. (cf. lóka, búang,
kólò, etc.).

_lokó_, To lie down with bent legs like animals. (cf. lukó, dúm-ug,
lúp-ug; lukulukuán, lulúknan).

_lokó-lóko, lokó-lokó_, Dim. of lóko--fool.

_lokó-lokó_, A kind of grass, whose long and rather thick stalk,
reduced to ashes, is often used in the making of black gun-powder.

_lokó-lokoán_, The knee-joint, the bend of the knee, the part of the
leg just behind and above the knee, thigh. (cf. lukulukuán, lokó).

_lokón_, A large sea-lobster. (cf. lukón id.).

_lokón, lók-on_, A stay-at-home, one who, due to old age
or an infirmity, almost constantly squats in a corner of the
house. (cf. hukó, but a hukó may be up and working industriously
within the house).

_lókon_, To be or become a stay-at-home. (cf. húkò).

_lokoón_, See lokón--a stay-at-home.

_lókos_, The ink-fish, cuttle-fish, squid. (cf. lúkos id.).

_lókot_, To roll up, etc. See lúkot. (cf. lolón, balólon, lolós).

_lóla_, (Sp. lola) Grandmother. (cf. úyang, úlang, bayí, abuéla).

_lólo_, (Sp. lolo) Grandfather. (cf. úyong, lakí, úlang, abuélo).


_lolô_, (H) Kindness, tenderness, affection; to be kind, tender,
affectionate. Nagalolô siá sa bátà--or--ginaloloán níya ang bátà. She
is kind to the child or treats the child very tenderly. (cf. lólot).

_lólò_, A bamboo-rope, twisted bamboo-splints, strips of bamboo
called sókdap corded in the form of ropes; to cord, twine,
twist. Metaphorically: to touch dishonestly.

_lolókon_, The knee-bend,--joint. (cf. lukulukuán, lulúknan).

_lolón_, To roll up, make a roll of; roll, bale (of paper,
etc.). Loloná ang baníg, amákan, etc. Roll up the bed-mat, bamboo-mat,
etc. Ilolón mo akó ánay sináng mga sáko. Kindly make those sacks
up into a roll for me. Loloní akó siníng lág-i. Make this fish-trap
netting up into a roll for me. Ginlolón níla ang mga bayóong, etc. They
rolled up the bags, etc. (cf. balólon, balón, lúkot).

_lolós_, To roll up, wind up, tuck up. Lolosá ang pakô sang bátà,
kay síbtan siá sang manugbúlung. Tuck up (roll up) the child's sleeve,
for the doctor is going to vaccinate it. Ginlolós níya ang kortína sang
higdáan. He rolled up the bed-curtain. Indì mo paglolosón ang mantél
sang lamésa, kóndì lábhan mo ánay kag ibulád sa ínit. Don't roll up
the table-cover (table-cloth), but wash it first and spread it in the
sun to dry. Ilolós akó ánay sang amákan. Please roll up the bamboo
mat. Naghúmlad (nalógho) ang linolós níya nga delárgo. His tucked
up trousers have come loose. Andam ka agúd índì magúntay (malubád)
ang linolós mo nga pakô. Be on your guard or your turned-up sleeve
may become loose. Untayí akó sang álba nga nalolós sa ákon likód. Let
down the alb that is all rucked up on my back. (cf. lolón, balólon,
baláking, kolókos).

_lólot_, Gentleness, kindheartedness, mildness; to be or become gentle,
mild, tender. Naglólot siá sa ílo nga bátà--or--ginlolótan níya ang
ílo nga bátà. She treated the orphan child with great kindness. Ang
nalolótan níya nga anák. Her beloved son or daughter. (cf. lolô).

_lomílyo, lomíyo_, (Sp. lomillo) Small loin.

_lómo_, (Sp. lomo) Loin, sirloin (of beef).

_lomó_, Softness; to be soft, soften (through the action of a liquid or
the like). Naglomó na gid ang tinapáy nga ginbutáng mo sa túbig. The
bread you put into the water is quite soft now. Palomohá ang sókdap,
uwáy, nítò, etc. Soften (in water) the bamboo splints, rattan, níto,
etc. Palomohí akó sing balátong, kay lagáon ko. Soften the beans (in
water) for me, because I am going to boil them. (cf. hómok, lúm-ok).

_lómot_, Moss; to cover with moss, be or become mossy. Ang ámon áwang
nalomótan. Our well has become mossy, is covered with moss. Bató nga
nalomótan. A mossy stone.

_lón-an, etc._ From loón--to put a lid on, cover.

_longasóg_, Wet, moist soil, low-lying field or hollow where
the water remains a long time for lack of an outlet; fertile
soil. (cf. hínis--sandy, barren soil).

_lónggò_, To knock or push against, to come in sharp contact
with. Nakalónggò ang úlo ko sa díngding. I knocked my head against
the wall. Nalonggoán sang ákon ágtang ang halígi. My forehead came
in sharp contact with the post. Andam ka agúd índì ka makalónggò sa
pángpang sang lóblob. Look out, and don't knock against the sides of
the narrow defile. (cf. búnggò, súnggò).

_lónggong_, To shake a dice-box or the like. Longgongón mo ang káha
sang pósporo. Shake the match-box. Ginalónggong níya ang sulúdlan kag
nagalungkágay ang sulúd sinâ. He is shaking the receptacle and its
contents are rattling. Ginlónggong níya ang alkansía kag naglágting
ang pílak. He shook the money-box and the coins jingled.

_longgóngan_, A dice-box or any other box used for the purpose of
shaking; place or room where the game of dice is played.

_lónlon_, Pure, etc. See lúnlun.

_lonók_, A sort of mangrove, growing to a great size and giving off
a great number of branch-roots.

_lónok_, Gruel; the thick rice-water on top of boiling rice; to take
off or procure such rice-water. Kuhái sing lónok ang tiníg-ang. Take
the rice-water off the top of the boiling rice. Lonókan mo ang
masakít. Get some thick rice-water soup for the sick person. Maglónok
ka sing isá ka pínggan nga lónok sa masakít. Make a plateful of
rice-water soup for the sick person. Indì na siá makatulún sing
kán-on; ginalonókan lang námon. He cannot swallow rice any longer;
we are feeding him on gruel (rice-water soup). (lúnok id.).

_lóo, loó_, To rot, become decomposed, contract a bad smell, decay,
go bad, go mouldy, especially applied to coconuts, or the like,
that are not air-tight, and which soon spoil, unless they are opened
completely and dried in the sun. Naglóo iníng lubí. This coconut was
spoiled. Indì mo pagpaloóhon ang mga lubí. Do not let the coconuts
rot. (N. B. In Hiligáynon loó (luó) seems to be more in use than lóo).

_loó_, Spoiled, rotten, especially of coconuts. (cf. lóo).

_lóob_, To crouch down, to sit down in a crouching position, sit on
one's heels, squat; crouching posture. Ang mungâ kon nagahilúmhum
nagalóob sa pugarán. When the hen is hatching, she sits down low on
her nest.

_loób-lóob_, Dim. of lóob. Also: full of ruts or holes, applied to
roads. Loób-lóob ang dálan. The road is full of holes.

_loób-lóob_, A hole, ditch, rut, depression; gorge,
ravine. (cf. lóblob).

_lóod_, A nauseating stench; to have or feel a nauseating
smell. Nagalóod ang ginháwa ko. I feel like vomiting. Naloóran (--ódan)
akó siníng kabahô. I feel sick on account of this bad smell.

_lóog_, To push the finger, the hand, a stick, etc., into a hole or
narrow aperture. Lóg-a ang ímo tiláok sang túdlò mo. Push the finger
down your gullet. Lóg-a iníng pasók. Grope or feel inside this piece of
bamboo. Ginlóog (iginlóog) níla sa bábà sang Aton Ginóo ang pangalikóg
nga basâ sang ápdo kag lánggaw. They put to Our Lord's lips (mouth)
the sponge soaked with gall and vinegar. (cf. lóglog, kúut).

_loóg_, Hole, depression, cavity, hollow, low-lying land. (cf. libaóng,
limpásong, líb-o, búhò).

_lóok_, To surround, keep at bay, drive into a corner, encircle,
beset, hem in, compass. Loóka siá. Surround him (so that he cannot
escape). Ginlóok níla ang báboy túbtub nga dinakúp níla. They
surrounded the pig till they caught it. (cf. bánsok).

_lóok_, A thicket, a piece of dense undergrowth, corner, out-of-the-way
place. Indì ka magtádag sa lóok, kay básì may mán-og dirâ. Don't put
your foot into the thicket, for there may be a snake there.

_loók_, Corner, nook, out-of-the-way-place. (cf. lóok, soók, toók,
etc.).

_loóm_, In the shade, not receiving much light, dark, gloomy, dreary,
lonely; to be in the shade, lonely, gloomy, desolate, lonesome,
not in the light. Loóm iníng lugár. This is a dark, gloomy, lonely
place. Nagloóm inâ nga baláy, kay nagdalágkò na ang mga tanúm
nga nagalíbut sa íya. This house has become dark, gloomy, since
the trees (plants) surrounding it have grown. Naloomán akó siníng
lugár. This place seems to me to be quite dark, gloomy, lonely or
dreary. (cf. góom, gúnum).

_loón_, (B) Lid, cover; to put a lid on. Lón-i ang kólon. Put a lid
on the rice-pot. (cf. takúp, bísò, táklub).

_lóos_, To set aside or preserve fruit in a safe place to let it get
ripe or mellow. Loósa--or--paloósa ang páhò. Keep the mangoes till
they are mellow. Paloósi akó sing mga kabúgaw, kay iamóma ko sa mga
dumulúaw sa áton pándot. Set aside some pomeloes for me, for I intend
to give them to the visitors at our feast.

_loós_, Mellow, ripe, said of fruit that has been kept for some time
after plucking.

_ló-oy, lóoy_, Mercy, compassion, consideration, sympathy, lenity,
clemency, commiseration, lenience; to have mercy, be merciful, to
pity, have--, show--, take--, pity on, commiserate, compassionate--,
condole--, with, be sympathetic to. Nagkalóoy (nalóoy) siá sa ákon. He
had mercy on me, took pity on me. Maló-oy ka sa íya. Be merciful to--,
sympathize with--, him. Ginkalo-óyan níya siá. He condoled with him.

_ló-oy_, To crush or smash under a falling object. Naló-oy ang tanúm
kay natapákan sang táo, kay napukánan sang káhoy, etc. The plant
got crushed, for it was trodden down by men, for a tree fell on it,
etc. Nahulúgan akó sing káhoy kag naló-oy ang ákon tiíl. I was hit
by a falling tree and my foot was smashed.

_lórtsa_, (Sp. lorcha) A small sailing boat of about fifty tons
capacity.


_lóslos_, To get loose, drop, come down, fall down, sink lower,
said of things that are not fastened well, sag, droop, hang loose,
dangle. Naglóslos ang kawáyan sang kodál, kay gabúk ang higót, kay
nasakáan sang táo, etc. The bamboo got loose from the fence for the
ties are rotten, because people stepped on it, etc. Naloslosán ang
búgsok sang láta. The cross-pieces got loose from the stake. Húgta
ang paghigót sang halóghog, kay nagalóslos ang ímo puróy. Fasten the
slip-cord tightly, for your short pants are coming down. (cf. lógho).

_lóslos_, Rupture, hernia. (cf. ós-os, búslo sang tinái ukón sang
kasúdlan).

_lóte_, (Sp. lote) Lot, fortune, chance, hazard, luck, fate; a piece
of ground, parcel, patch, lot; to draw lots, play loto. Lotéhan
(ripáhan) nínyo kon sín-o ang mangintagíya siníng relóh. Draw lots
for the one who is to be the possessor of this watch. (cf. pálad,
kapaláran, swérte; punâ, pinunâ, báhin; rípa).

_lotehán_, Place or room where loto (lotto) is played; the stake
in loto.

_lótgot_, To suck, move the lips as if sucking. Linótgot (linotgotán)
sang bátà ang ákon túdlò. The baby sucked my finger, sucked at
my finger. Lotgotá (lotgotí) lang ang butóngbútong. Just suck the
butóngbútong-candy. (cf. súpsup, súyup).

_lótlot_, To squeeze in between, force one's way through, push through
a crowd and the like. Ilótlot ang líbro sa estánte. Squeeze the book
in between the other books on the bookstand. Lotlotí lang silá sa
bánkò. Simply squeeze yourself in between them on the bench. Maglótlot
ka lang sa mga táo sa simbáhan, kay daw may lugár pa. Simply squeeze
the people into the church, for there seems to be a little room
left yet.

_lóyloy_, To make fun, grimace, gesticulate, act and talk in a comical
way, as when playing with children. (cf. hámpang, dálò, aróáro).

_lóyloy_, To droop, hang down, dangle loosely, be limp, said of wet
clothes, etc. Nagalóyloy ang íya panápton--or--ginaloyloyán siá sang
íya panápton, kay naulanán. His clothes are limp, for he, has been in
the rain. Nagalóyloy ang íya pakô, kay ginbálhas siá (nabalhasán siá)
sing támà. His sleeve is hanging down limply, for he has perspired
very much. Naglóyloy ang íya bútkon, kay nabálì. His arm hung down
loosely, for it was broken.

_lúa_, A recitation, recital, declamation; to recite or quote from
memory some verses, or the like. Magbáyad ka sing lúa (maglúa ka),
kay nagsayúp ikáw. You shall recite some verses, because you have
made a mistake. Sa mga belasyón sing masamí ang mga pamatán-on nga
nagatalámbong nagalúa (nagahalámpang sa paglúa). On occasion of a wake
the young people that assist often play at reciting verses. Kantahá
lang ang ímo lúa. Sing your verses (instead of merely reciting
them). Ang magasayúp (magatálang) maglúa. The one that makes a mistake
shall recite some verses (as a forfeit or punishment for the mistake).

_lúab_, The collar (of garments); hole, rent, fissure; wide, open,
uncovered. Panápton nga lúab sa íluk. A dress that is open near the
armpit. (cf. líab, líong, gíhab, gúhab).

_luáb_, To collar, grasp by the collar. Luabá siá. Collar
him. (cf. liáb, lióg).

_lúab_, The smooth or outside surface of a bamboo-strip or the
like. Kon maglála ka sing bakág, amligán mo gid ang pagilisílis sang
lúab kag tinái. When you weave a carrier's basket, be careful to use
alternately surface-strips and under-surface strips.

_lúad_, To spit out, cast out of the mouth, eject (unpalatable
food, etc.). Ilúad lang ang mapaít nga búnga. Spit out the bitter
fruit. Maglúad ka lang sang mga pásì--or--Ilúad mo lang ang mga
pásì. Simply spit out the unhulled rice. Indì mo pagluádan sang ímo
minamâ ang salúg, kóndì ilúad mo sa bintánà. Don't spit your betelnut
quid on the floor, but spit it out of the window. Gintilawán ko
iníng kárne kag dáyon nákon ginlúad sa bintánà, kay támà katíg-a. I
tasted this meat and immediately spit it out of the window, for
it was extremely tough. Sín-o ang nagdúplà dirí kag naglúad sang
íya tilád? Who has been spitting and spirting his betelnut juice
here? (cf. dúplà, dulâ, durâ, súka, panúka, súgpà, kúghad, pangúghad).

_luág_, Ladle, soup-ladle, any large spoon or scoop for drawing or
serving liquids. (luwág id.).

_luág_, To look out of a window, or the like. (cf. láaw, lántaw, gáwa).

_luág-lúag_, Dim. of luág. Also: shoulder-blade, scapula,
back. (cf. talúdtud).


_lúak, lú-ak_, To dislocate, break or separate joints. Luáka ang pákpak
sang manók. Break off the chicken's wing. Nalúak ang íya bútkon. His
arm was dislocated. Ginlúak gid lang níya sang íya kamót ang páa sang
manók. He simply tore off the chicken's leg with his hand. Nahúlug
siá sa lubí kag nalúak ang íya abága. He fell from a coconut palm
and dislocated his shoulder. (cf. súlpò, líw-as).

_luáng, lu-áng_, (H) Room, apartment, quarters, place to live or to
stay in; an open space (as between lines, stripes, etc.). (cf. ruáng,
hulút, hilít, kwárto).

_luáng-lúang_, A kind of skin-disease; a sort of herpes or eczema.

_luás_, To free, deliver, redeem, liberate, set free, set at liberty,
let out, let loose, release, discharge. Luasá akó, Ginóo, sa maláut ko
nga kapaláran. Deliver me, oh Lord, from my misfortune. Iluás akó ánay
siníng binilánggò, kay ginakilála ko nga maáyo siá nga táo. Pray,
free this prisoner, for I know him to be a good man. Sín-o ang
nagluás sa ímo? Who let you out? Indì ka maluás sa ímo nga kaimolón,
kon matámad ka magpangabúdlay. You cannot rise out of your poverty,
if you are too lazy to work. Naluás na siá. He is now free. (cf. báwì,
tubús, búhì, pabúhì).

_luás_, Outside, foreign; except, apart from, outside of, beyond,
free of, away from. Indì ka magbakál sinâ sa luás. Don't buy such
things outside, from foreign countries. Gíkan sa luás----. From the
outside world----. From a foreign country----. Luás siní----. Apart
from this----. Luás akó siní. I am--free of it,--out of it. I have
no connection with, or responsibility for, it.

_lúas_, To go--, reach--, beyond or outside of. Indì mo pagluáson
ang ímo tíngug sa ímo nga baláy. Don't permit your voice to reach
outside your home, i.e. don't talk so loud as to be heard by outsiders.

_luásnon_, Foreign, from outside, strange; a stranger, outsider,
foreigner. (cf. luás, dumulóong).

_luát, lu-át_, To cease, stop, leave off, desist. Indì akó maluát sa
pagkádto dídto túbtub nga ákon siá makítà. I will not stop from going
there till I see him. Walâ níya pagluatí ang pagbalíkbálik dídto túbtub
nga nagkasugtánay silá kag nabakál níya ang báka. He did not (would
not) desist from returning there again and again till they came to
an agreement and he succeeded in buying the cow. (cf. liát, libútay).

_luát-luatán_, Joint, articulation; hinge. (cf. lutálutahán, biságra).

_luáy, lu-áy_, Awry, bent, inclined to one side; to be awry,
etc. Nagaluáy ang íya báyò, kamisón, etc. Her upper garment, her shirt,
etc. is all awry or hanging down on one side (exposing part of the
shoulder). Indì mo pagpaluayón ang kimóno mo. Don't wear your waist
awry or twisted to one side (thereby displaying too much of the skin
on one side of the neck).

_lubá_, Desire, wish, whim, caprice; to desire, wish, like. (cf. lúyag,
luyáglúyag, buút, wíli, hingamó, hánggab).

_lubád_, To open, solve, translate, untie, undo, unbind, disjoin,
disconnect, disentangle, loosen knots, etc.; to fade, said of
colours. Lubará ang higót. Untie the string. Lubarí akó siníng
balíghot--or--ilubád akó ánay siníng balíghot. Please, undo this knot
for me. Lubarón mo ináng paktákon, kon makalubád ka (sinâ). Solve
that riddle if you can. Ang katarúngan nga ginpaháyag ni Pédro
ginlubád gid ni Páblo. The arguments adduced by Peter were refuted
by Paul. Nalubarán siá sang iyá nga katarúngan. His reasons or proofs
were refuted or gainsaid. Naglubád ang duág sang báyò mo. The colour
of your jacket has faded. (cf. lúbdon, lúbdan-lubarón, lubarán).

_lubád-lúbad_, Dim. and Freq. of lubád--to untie, etc.

_lubád-lúbad_, The month of August. (cf. agósto).

_lúbag_, To twist, wring, turn. Lubága ang diróskas, ang kalát,
etc. Turn the screw, twist the rope, etc. Lubági akó siníng sókdap
kay ihigót ko sa kodál. Twist this split bamboo for me, for I am
going to tie the fence with it. Ilúbag akó siníng sâsâ. Twist these
buri-fibres for me. Hípus ka, kay kon dílì lubágon ko ang líog mo. Be
silent, otherwise I'll wring your neck. (lábag).

_lúbak_, (B) To crush, pound, beat. Nagalúbak siá sing ságing sa
lusóng. He is pounding bananas in the rice-mortar. Lubáka ang lánot nga
talagakón. Beat the hemp that is to be arranged for weaving--or--is
to be tied together. Lubáki akó sing dalógdog, balátong, etc. Crush
or pound for me some dalógdog-fruits, beans, etc. (cf. bayó for
pounding rice).

_lubakán_, (B) A mortar for the operation of lúbak. As a rule the
lubakán is smaller than the lusóng, but similar in shape and make-up.

_lúbang_, A kind of rice. (cf. arabón).

_lúb-as_, To spoil, rot, said of overripe cereals, etc. (cf. rúb-as).

_lúbas_, To shed, fall out, drop from the ears (of rice,
etc.). (cf. rúbas, rúgon, rúntay).

_lubás_, (B) To pass, go by, lapse, elapse, expire. Nakalubás na kútub
sádto ang pilá ka túig. Several years have passed since then. Sín-o
ang naglubás? Who was it that passed by? Nalúbsan níya akó. He passed
me by. Indì mo paglúbsan ang ámon baláy, kóndì maghápit ka gid kon
magkádto ka dídto sa ámon dapít. Do not pass by our house, but call
on us without fail, if you come to our place. Palúbsa siá. Let him
pass. (cf. ági, lígad).

_lubáy_, Young, tender, soft, impressionable, impressible, pliable,
flexible; to be or become soft, tender, etc. (cf. lúbud, lágbus,
lúm-ok, hómok, lanúbò, lamháron, lámpong).

_lúbdan_, From lubád--to open, spread.

_lúbgon_, From lubúg--to be turbid.

_lúbhà_, Cheating, cunning, treason, insidiousness, meanness; to be
mean, to cheat, betray, act insidiously, to worm--, fish--, pump--,
ferret--, out secrets or elicit an admission, etc. and betray the
confiding victim. Indì mo siá paglubhaón. Don't cheat--, trick--,
betray--, him. Ginlúbhà níya siá. She (He) jilted him (her). Ginbuhátan
níya siá sing madámò nga mga lúbhà. He often--played him false,--was
mean to him,--cheated him,--betrayed his confidence. (cf. dáyà,
límbong, búdhì, luíb, kátkat).

_lubí_, (H) The coconut palm and its fruit. (cf. nióg, kalubihán,
butóng).

_lúbid_, String, cord, line, rope, cordage; to twist, make into a
string or cord. Lubíra (-ída) ang tabákò. Make the tobacco leaves
up into strings. Lubíron mo na lang ang gomón sang lánot, kay índì
na mahúsay. Simply now make the tangled hemp-fibres into rope for
they cannot be unravelled any more. Lubíri akó sing limá ka dupá
nga kalát, písì, etc. Make me ten yards of rope, cord, etc. Ilúbid
akó ánay siníng lánot, bunáng, etc. Kindly twist these hemp-fibres,
this yarn, etc. into string for me.

_lubigán_, A kind of shrub.

_lúbiok_, To move up and down, swing up and down, sag, yield, be
resilient, bend, applied to a carrier's pole and the burden he carries,
etc. Nagalúbiok ang íya tuangtuangán, kay mabúg-at ang íya kárga. His
carrier's pole is bending, for his load is heavy. Palubioká ang ímo
tuangtuangán, kay daw mamág-an ang dalá mo kon maglúbiok. Make your
pole resilient, for the load seems lighter if it is yielding. Indì
kamó magpúngkò nga madámò dirâ kay nagalúbiok ang bánkò. Don't so
many of you sit down there, where the bench is yielding or sagging.

_lúbkan_, From lubúk--to dry rice and pound it.

_lubkánon_, Nearly ripe, fit to make límbok of, applied to rice
nearing maturity. (cf. lubúk).

_lúbngan_, From lubúng--to bury.

_lubngánan_, Grave, burial ground. See lulúbngan, kótkot.

_lubô_, (B) Hole; privy, lavatory, water-closet (W.C.). (cf. komún,
lobô, kasílyas).

_lubôluboán_, The soft, impressionable, yielding part of a child's
skull situated between the top of the head and the forehead; the
anterior or bregmatic fontanel (fontanelle). (cf. yubónyubonán).

_lúbsan_, From lubás--to pass by.

_lúbtan_, From lubút--to make a hole.

_lúbud_, Very young, tender, soft, pliable, said of plants, trees,
etc. Gintapás mo galî ang káhoy nga lúbud pa? Did you really cut
down the sapling? Malúbud iníng habón. This soap is soft, is soon
used up. (cf. hómok, lúm-ok).

_lubúg_, Turbid, cloudy, muddy; to become or make turbid. Nagalubúg
ang túbig, kay may bahâ. The water has become turbid, for there is a
freshet on. Lúbga--or--palúbga ang túbig sa áwang, agúd índì pagsalukán
sang ibán. Make the water in the well turbid, so that other people
may not draw from it. Indì mo paglinoón ang botílya, kay magalubúg
ang bíno. Don't shake the bottle for the wine will get turbid.

_lubúk_, (B) To dry artificially immature rice or corn and pound it,
in order to make "límbok". Lubuká--or--lúbka ang maís, humáy. Pound the
immature corn, rice. Lúbki akó sing humáy nga isá ka gántang. Pound
a ganta of immature rice for me. Ilubúk akó ánay siníng hinúlas nga
humáy. Please pound this heat-dried rice for me.

_lúb-uk_, Rotten, putrid, decayed, stale, bad smelling, said of
fish, meat, etc., corrupt, putrescent, bad, tainted, foul, fetid,
evil smelling, stinking, malodorous. Nagalúb-uk lang dirí ang ísdà
kay walâ sing nagabakál. The fish is just rotting here, for there are
no buyers. Ibalígyà ang kárne sing madalî, agúd índì maglúb-uk. Sell
the meat quickly or it will spoil. Nalub-ukán akó sing madámò nga
ísdà; dakô ang ákon kaperdihán. Quite a lot of my fish went rotten;
my loss is great. (cf. dúnut, dunút, hurô; bahál).

_lubúng_, Burial, funeral, exequies, obsequies, interment, inhumation,
entombment; to bury, inter, inhume, consign to the grave, hide in the
ground. Ilubúng na lang ang patáy nga karabáw, kay índì mapúslan ang
íya kárne. Just bury the dead buffalo, for his meat is of no use. Sán-o
kamú magalubúng sang minatáy? When will you bury the dead? When will
the funeral take place? Dirí may linubúng nga pílak nga nasulúd sa
tibúd, konó, ápang túbtub karón walâ maquítà. Here, they say, a pot
of money was buried, but till now it has not been found. Amó iní ang
linúbngan sa ákon ilóy. This is the grave, where my mother was buried
(laid to rest). (cf. kótkot, lulúbngan).

_lubús_, Pure, unadulterated, uncontaminated, unmixed, refined;
to be or become pure, etc. Nalubusán akó siníng buláwan. I consider
this gold pure, unalloyed. (cf. lúnsay, túnay, bús-og, lúgus, úlay).

_lubús_, Initiation, purification, ablution; to purify with
superstitious rites, especially on Holy Friday, in the belief that
such rites will make the participant healthy and strong and give him
great courage. Ang mga babáylan nagahímò sing lubús sa ádlaw nga
Biérnes Sánto. The medicine-men perform the rite of purification
on Holy Friday. Nagapanlubús siá. He is taking part in, or being
initiated into, the rite of the lubús. (cf. panínlò).

_lubút_, A hole, opening, aperture; to open, form a hole, etc.;
perforation, rent, break, rupture, tear. Naglubút ang ákon
bakág--or--nalubután (nalúbtan) akó sang bakág kag nakagwâ
ang humáy. My carrier-basket burst and the rice came pouring
out. (cf. luhót, tohók).

_lubút_, (B) The groove down the back of the neck, the nape,
neck. (cf. tangkúgò).

_lubút_, Hole; anus. (cf. tohók, búhò; kalipunát).

_lúbyok_, See lúbiok--to swing, move up and down.

_lúdag_, To step into something thoughtlessly or carelessly, walk
in mud, slush, mire, etc., to stumble. Nagalúdag siá sa kalóg. He
is walking in the ditch. Naludágan níya ang lúnang. He stepped into
(walked in) the mire. Indì nínyo pagludágan ang kalóg. Don't walk in
the (muddy) ditch. (cf. tásak, tádag, túdag, ládag; lútak).

_lúd-ak_, To be or become pale, to fade (of colours,
etc.). (cf. lús-aw).

_lúdgud_, To scour, rub with something hard, as with a stone in
bathing, or the like; to scrub. Ilúdgud sa íya iníng lulúdgud. Rub
him with this scourer. Ludgurí siá sing bató sa likód. Rub his back
with a stone. Ludgurí sing maáyo ang ákon luáglúag. Lúdgud ka sing
maáyo sang ákon luáglúag. Rub my shoulder blades well. (lúgod id.).

_lúdhan_, From luhúd--to kneel.

_ludíyo_, To run after, said of a horse running after the mare,
etc. Ang kabáyo nagaludíyo sang babáe. Ang kabáyo nga babáe ginaludíyo
sang laláki. The male horse is running after the female. Ang
mga kabatáan nga laláki nagpangludíyo kahápon sing mga púgad sang
píspis. The boys were after bird's nests yesterday. Anó ang ginaludíyo
mo? What are you after? (cf. lagás, pangítà).

_lugák_, Loose, not tight; to loosen, slacken, let out. Lugakí
ang kalát, ang wáklos mo, etc. Loosen the rope, your belt,
etc. (cf. hugák).

_lugár_, (Sp. lugar) Place, spot, station, site, location; time,
opportunity, leisure, convenience, occasion; room, space, village,
town, district. Sa lugár sang----. In place of, instead of----. Waáy
(Wáy) lugár. There is no room or no time for it. Kon may lugár
akó----. If I have an opportunity----. Sa amó nga lugár----. In that
city, country, district, place, etc.----. (cf. doók, hilít, sítyo;
tión, kahigayónan, kahigayonán, ikasaráng).

_lugás_, The warp, the threads or lines of the warp or woof; thread,
fibre.

_lugás_, To seek, look for, search after. (cf. lagás, dúngas, sághap).

_lúg-as_, To spoil, go to waste, run to seed, particularly
said of overripe cereals that are not harvested at the proper
time. (cf. lúb-as, rúb-as, rúg-as; lúgon, rúgon, rúntay).

_lugáto_, (Sp. alegato) Allegation; error, mistake. (cf. konó,
súgid, sayúp).

_lúgaw_, To make rice-porridge, to boil rice in more than an ordinary
quantity of water for the purpose of making "linúgaw". Lugáwa
ang bugás. Boil the rice very soft and in much water. Lugáwi ang
masakít sing bugás nga maputî. Make porridge of white rice for the
sick person. Metaphorically: Indì mo kamí paglugáwon. Don't fool
(flatter) us.

_lugawán_, Pot or kettle for making "linúgaw". (cf. lúgaw).

_lugáw-an_, To be bereft of, suffer the loss or want of, be without,
fail. The forms malugáw-an and nalugáw-an are commonly used in
the meaning of mawád-an, nawád-an. Indì silá malugáw-an dirâ sing
palamúgnan. They will not suffer there from unemployment. They will
not be stranded there without work. (cf. pás-aw, gamón).

_lugáy_, To stir, turn about, mingle, mix with a ladle or
beater. Lugayá sing maáyo ang linúgaw, agúd maghómok gid. Stir
the linúgaw well, in order that it may become very soft. Lugayán
mo lang siní ang palanggána. Just stir or mix this in the
wash-basin. (cf. labúgay).

_lúgay_, Taenia, tapeworm, intestinal worm. (cf. lulúgay, bítos,
bítok, solitárya,--o).

_lugáyaw_, To walk or roam about (abroad), go for a walk, take a
constitutional, take a stroll, travel about for recreation. Nagalagúyaw
silá sa baybáyon. They are out for an airing (a walk) on the
beach. (cf. lagúyaw, lágaw, liwálíwa, paseár).

_lugayáwan_, A walk, stroll, travel, journey, trip; to walk, etc. See
lugáyaw, laguyáwan).

_lúgdang_, Submersion, sinking, descent; to sink, disappear under (in)
water, founder, go down, descend; cause to sink, etc. Linúgdang sang
hángin ang sakayán nga nalulúnan sing táma kabúg-at nga siménto. The
wind sank the boat that was too heavily laden with cement. Nalúgdang
(nagkalúgdang) ang paráw sang pagbágyo. The outrigger sank during
the storm. (cf. túgdang).

_lúgdang_, Sediment, dregs, lees. (cf. lábud, lágdò).

_lúgdat_, To turn up the eyes, stare at, scowl, look fixedly at,
put on a frowning look, to look sour, look daggers (as one in anger
or passion); to squint, roll the eyes, goggle. (cf. búslo, balingasó).

_lúghud_, To rub, scour, scrub (with some force or pressure). Lughurí
ang salúg. Scrub the floor. Linughurán (-udán) níya ang lamésa sing
lapát túbtub nga maghíning. He rubbed the table with a cloth till it
shone brightly. (cf. lúgod, lúdgud).

_lúgit_, To bore, make a hole by a boring action with some pointed
instrument; to fish--, ferret--, out with a stick or the like, as money
from a box, etc. Lugíti ang tápì. Bore a hole in the board. Linugítan
níya ang baúl kag ginkáwat níya ang nasulúd nga pílak. He made a hole
in the trunk and stole the money that was in there. Ilúgit sa kawáyan
iníng dulát. Use this awl to bore a hole in the bamboo. Ginlúgit
(linúgit) níya ang kwárta sa alkansíya. He fished out (with a stick
smeared with birdlime, or the like) the coins from the slotted money
box. (cf. lóglog).

_lúgkat_, To eradicate, etc. See lúkat.

_lúgman, lúgmon, etc._ From lúgum to steep in, etc.

_lúgod_, (H) See lúdgud--to scour, rub.

_lugód-lúgod_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of lúgod.

_lúgon_, (H) To fall out, drop from the ears (of overripe
grain). (cf. rúgon, rúntay).

_lúgpay_, To mollify, placate, soothe, pacify, assuage, ease,
abate, appease, moderate, compose, tranquillize. Lugpayá ang íya
kaákig. Placate his anger. Nalúgpay na ang íya dumút. His hatred has
now become much less or has vanished. Támà kadakô sang íya kasubô nga
daw índì malúgpay. Her sorrow is so great that it seems impossible
to assuage it. Nalugpayán na siá. He is now appeased.

_lúgpit_, To squeeze, compress, jam, etc. See lígpit, lúpit.

_lugpítan_, Press, vice, clamp. (cf. ligpítan).

_lúgsad_, See lúsad--to dismount, disembark, etc.

_lúgsang_, To sit, squat down (on the floor). (cf. lupán-ak, lupándang,
lupágì, úgsang).

_lúgtas_, To break, snap, sever. (cf. lígtas, búgras, útud; búgtò).

_lúgtay_, To be or become soft, weak, limp; to faint, swoon, collapse
from weakness. (cf. lábtoy, labóy, lúya, lúnay, púnaw).

_lúgtì_, To break or snap through twisting or kinking, said of a
string, thread, rattan, etc. Nalúgtî (nagkalúgtì) ang lánot, owáy,
etc. The hemp, the rattan, etc. broke (snapped). Hulúman mo ánay ang
owáy, agúd índì malúgtì. Soak the rattan first (in water), lest it
should snap.

_lugúd_, (H) The material used for rubbing one's body when taking a
bath, mostly a stone. (cf. lúdgud, lúgod).

_lúgud_, To scour, rub, etc. See lúdgud.

_lúg-ok_, To soak, drench, steep in, dye. (cf. húgum, húlum, húpug,
lúgum).

_lugúm_, Colouring matter, tint, tinge, dye, stain; ink.

_lúgum_, To colour, dye, steep in colour, tinge, stain. Ilúgum sa
ákon báyò iníng lugúm nga mapulá. Colour my jacket with this red
dyestuff. Lúgma (lugúma) ang ákon báyò sa (sang) itúm. Steep my
jacket in black dye. Makahibaló ikáw maglúgum? Do you know how to
dye? (cf. húgum, húpug, lígum).

_lugúmdulúm_, Very dark, black, dyed or steeped in black.

_lugún-lúgun_, See logón-lógon--to put in the mouth, etc.

_lúgus_, Pure, unadulterated, undefiled, genuine,
unalloyed. (cf. lubús, púro, pulús, bús-og, lónlon, lúnsay, túnay).

_lúgus_, A thin membrane surrounding some seeds as those of the cacao,
sántol, jackfruit, átis. etc.

_lúgus_, To force, violate, ravish, stuprate, defile, debauch, abuse;
stupration, rape, violation, force. Ang mga babáye mahádluk sa mga
buyóng, kay básì lugúson níla. The women are afraid of the brigands,
for they might be ravished by them. Ginlúgus níya siá. He raped or
ravished her. Sa lúgus----. By force----. With violence----.

_lúgut_, To chafe, gall, fret, constrict, cut into the flesh (as a
tight cord, fetters, shackles, or the like). (cf. lugút-lúgut).

_lugút-lúgut_, Thinness through constriction away from the end of
a thing; thin, slender in the middle or away from the end; to be or
become thin through constriction, etc. Naglugútlúgut ang íya túdlò
sa kagutukón sang síngsing--or--nalugútlugútan ang íya túdlo sang
kagutukón sang síngsing. Due to the tight fit of the ring her finger
became thin in the middle. (cf. gútlò).

_lúgway_, A rope or line slung across a channel, river, over a narrow
bridge, etc. and serving as a handrail.

_lúhà_, Tear, tear-drop; to fill with tears, water, be wet with tears,
shed tears. Nagalúhà ang ákon matá, kay napúling. My eye is watering,
because a mote got into it. Naglúhà ang matâ níya. Her eyes filled
with tears. Ginluháan níya sing mapaít ang kamatáyon sang íya anák. She
shed bitter tears over the death of her child.

_luhâ_, To select, pick out, choose (from among a number, etc.). Luhaá
ang isá dídto. Pick out the one that is there. Pinílì kag linuhâ siá
nga magtotóon. He is (was) a carefully chosen and select teacher.

_luháan_, Full of tears, tearful, mournful, sad, dreary.

_lúhak_, To tear, break out a piece, make á hole in (a garment,
etc.). Linúhak (ginúhak) nga panápton, tulún-an, sinulát, etc. A
torn-off piece of a garment, an excerpt of a book, an extract of a
letter, etc. (cf. gúhak, gíkas, etc.).

_luhák_, Torn, broken off or away from; a fragment, a broken piece
or part of something that has been torn. (cf. guhák, gikás, etc.).

_luháng_, (B) To pass through the midst of, go--, slip--,
--through,--between. Nagluháng siá sa tungâ námon. He passed through
our midst. Indì ka magluháng sa prosesyón. Don't pass through the
midst of the procession. Don't cut across the procession. Luhangá
(luhangí) lang silá. Simply pass through them.

_luhót_, A hole, opening; to open. Ginluhót níya ang balá-on. He
made a hole in the basket. Naluhót ang bakág. The carrier's basket
has got a hole or holes in it. Iluhót iníng bagát sa díngding nga
amákan. Push a hole through the partition-mat with this slender
bamboo. (cf. lubút, tohók).

_luhúb-lúhub_, Hole, depression, mudhole, a worn out part of a road,
etc. (cf. loóblóob, linggálhub, búhò).

_luhúd_, To kneel down, kneel, genuflect, bend the knee; be a witness
to a marriage. Magluhúd (lumuhúd) kamó. Kneel down. Ginlúdhan níya
ang íya ilóy kag ginpangayóan sing patáwad. He knelt down before his
mother and asked her pardon. Palúdha siá. Make him kneel down. Make
him a witness to the marriage. Ang pílak amó gid lang ang íya nga
ginalúdhan. He only worships money. He bends his knees only before
wealth. (cf. túhud--the knee).

_luíb_, Treachery, treason, perfidy, betrayal, foul play; treacherous,
perfidious, cheating to commit a treacherous act, to cheat, betray,
mislead, deliver (to an enemy). Indì kamó magluíb sa íya. Indì nínyo
siá pagluibán. Don't play him false. Don't betray or cheat him. Amó
inâ ang ginluíb níya sa kay Fuláno. That was the dirty trick he played
on N.N. (cf. maluíb, búdhì, lúbhà, dáyà, límbong).

_lúka_, To overturn, lay low, uproot, unroot, as trees, etc. (by a
strong wind, or the like).

_luká_, Overturned, unrooted, uprooted; stem, stump, trunk (of a tree
laid low by a storm).

_lukâ_, (B) A small, short bamboo receptacle with lid; a small box,
chest, casket, safe.

_lúk-ab_, To open, lay open in folds, lay bare, expose. Nalúk-ab ang
íya úlo, kay naígò siá sang lisó. His brain was laid bare, for he
was hit by a bullet. Luk-abá ang dútà sang ímo tagád. Open the ground
with your dibble. Luk-abí akó sing isá ka púnò nga asuséna, kay itanúm
ko sa ákon pamulákan. Dig out (with roots and earth) one white lily
for me, for I wish to plant it in my garden. Naluk-abán siá sang íya
úlo kag napatáy. His head was split open and he died. (cf. lúkba,
húl-ab, ukáb).

_lukáb-lúkab_, A severe boil, ulcer, carbuncle, anthrax. (cf. hubág).

_lúk-ad_, To gauge, gouge out, scoop out, tear out, pull out. Ginlúk-ad
níla ang íya mga matá. They tore out or gauged his eyes. Luk-arón
(-adón) mo ang lubí sa payâ kag ibulád. Scoop out the coconut-meat from
the shell and spread it in the sun. Luk-arí akó siníng isá ka gatús
ka bílog nga lubí kay buháton ko nga kóprak. Scoop out the meat from
these hundred coconuts for me, as I am going to make copra of them.

_luká-it_, Empty, blank, said of pods, husks, brains; to be empty,
fruitless. Iníng kamúnsil luká-it--or--nagluká-it. This camunsel-fruit
has nothing in it, is empty. (cf. aluká-it).

_lukás_, End, termination, completion; anniversary; finished, complete,
ended, at an end; to finish, terminate. Lukás na ang íla laláw. Their
mourning is now at an end. (cf. tápus, humán).

_lúkat_, To dig out together with the roots, root up, eradicate. Lukáta
ang sibúkaw, ághò, etc. Dig out, roots and all, the sibúkaw,
ághò-plant, etc. Lukáti akó siníng mga kahóykahóy sa maglíbut sa ákon
baláy, kay tútdan ko. Dig out these shrubs around my house together
with their roots, for I am going to burn them.

_lukáy_, Palm-leaf, coconut-leaf, especially, if mature and dry, but
also applied to green ones. Ang pagsúnug sang lukáy nga nabenditáhan
sang Domíngo de Rámos. The burning of palm leaves blessed on Palm
Sunday.

_lúkba_, To open, lay bare, unfold, expose. See lúk-ab. Ang lisó
naglúkba sang íya bagól. The bullet laid his brain bare--or--exposed
his brain. Ginlúkba níya sa padér ang isá ka dakô nga bató. He broke
a great stone off the wall. (cf. úklab).

_lúkban, lúkbon, etc._ From lúkub, lukúb.

_lúkbo_, To jump, bound, leap, spring across, pounce upon, clear at
a bound. Lúkbo (lumúkbo, maglúkbo) ka pa idálum. Leap down. Lukbohá
ang kalóg, kodál, etc. Jump (spring) over the ditch, leap or clear
the fence, etc. Lukbohí siá dirâ. Pounce upon him there. (cf. túmbo,
lúkso, lúmpat, ámbak, úmbak).

_lúkdo_, To carry or balance on one's head. Lukdohá lang ang sáko. Just
carry the sack on your head. Lukdohí akó siníng isá ka baláon nga
humáy. Carry this basket of rice for me on your head. Ilúkdo akó
siní. Please, carry this on your head for me.

_lúkhò_, To pass over or skip. See láktaw.

_lúkhò_, Wavy, rippling, rippled; to ripple, show wavy lines (of hair,
etc.). (cf. hanúl, bálud, balúd).

_lukhô-lúkhò_, See laktáwláktaw. Indì ka maglukhôlúkhò sa
pagbása. Don't skip lines or words whilst reading. (cf. luthôlúthò).

_lukís_, To lift up or raise a curtain, clothes, and the like. Lukisá
ang báyò mo. Lift up or raise your jacket. Ginlukisán níya ang kátre
sang kortína. He raised the bed curtain. Kon magtabúk ka sa subâ,
índì ka maglukís sang ímo panápton sing támà kay maláw-ay. When you
go across a river, don't raise your garments too much, for it is
improper. (cf. bátak, baláking, lolós).

_lúkit_, To contrive to obtain through a small opening or aperture by
means of a stick and the like. Naglúkit siá sang kwárta sa alkansía. He
fished out the money from the slotted bamboo money-box. Ginlukítan níya
ang káha nga may búslot kag kináwat ang nasulúd nga pílak. He contrived
to get into the money box and stole the money inside. (cf. lúgit).

_lúkit_, Chiselled decorations, carvings, sculptured figures and
designs in woodwork and stone. (cf. puní).

_lúkmat_, To suffer a relapse, get sick again. Naglúkmat ang íya hubág,
pilás, balatían, etc. His ulcer, wound broke open again, he fell
sick again, etc. Nalukmatán siá sang íya síkmat. He had a relapse of
rheumatic pains in the back. Tagám ka, agúd índì maglúkmat ang bala-úd
mo. Take care lest you should get dysentery again. (cf. búghat, liwán).

_lúknit_, To tear asunder, separate the fibres, strip. Luknitá ang
burí. Tear the burí-stalks asunder. Luknití ang mga pánday sing limá
ka pakláng sang burí, kay nagakinahánglan silá siná sa tambárà. Tear
five burí-stalks into strips for the carpenters, because they need
them for the scaffolding.

_lukó_, To lie down with legs bent under (said of animals). Nagalukó
ang karabáw sa pamulákan--or--ginalukoán (-lukohán) sang karabáw
ang pamulákan. The buffalo is lying down in the garden. (cf. dúm-ug,
lúp-ug).

_lukón_, A large sea lobster. See lokón.

_lúkop_, See líkop--to surround, etc.

_lúkos_, The cuttle-fish, squid, sepia. (cf. lókos).

_lukót_, Rolled up, wound up, baled; wrinkled, creased. Lukót nga
baníg, amákan, etc. A rolled up--bed mat,--bamboo mat (for drying
rice upon), etc. (cf. yokô, yokót, yókot).

_lúkot_, To roll up, wind up; to wrinkle, crease, rumple, ruffle. Indì
mo paglukóton ang papél, kay mayókot. Don't roll up the paper, for
it might become creased. (cf. yókot, lolós).

_lúkot_, To sit on a hammock or the like. Ginpaándam níya kamí nga índì
námon paglukótan ang dúyan, kay támà na gid kagabúk. He warned us not
to sit on the hammock, for it is quite rotten. (Probably this "lúkot"
is identical with the foregoing, but is used here metaphorically).

_lukót-lukót_, A kind of parasitic plant growing on mango trees, etc.

_lukótlúkot_, Dim. and Freq. of lúkot.

_lúkpan, etc._ See lupók.

_lúkso_, To jump, leap, bound, spring, hop, clear at a bound. Maglúkso
ka. Jump. Luksohí siá. Leap or spring at him. Luksohá ang pángpang,
ang kodál. Leap down the bank, jump over the fence. Indì nínyo
pagluksohán ang kaláyo. Don't jump over the fire. (cf. lúkbo, lúmpat,
túmbò, ámbak, úmbak).

_lúkso_, A young locust, not yet able to fly, a hopper. When grown
to maturity it is called apán.

_lúkub_, To cover, extend, spread over; to crouch, squat, sit
upon. Nalúkban ang umá sang apán. The field was covered with
locusts. (cf. tábon, lúkup; lóob).

_lukúb_, Covered, shrouded, concealed.

_lukúb_, Fraud, trick, cheating; to turn upside down; to fleece,
cheat, trick, defraud, rob. (cf. dáyà, límbong, lág-it; kulúb).

_lukú-lukuán, lukôlukuán_, The kneejoint. See lokó-lokoán.

_lúkup_, To surround, cover, spread over. Nalukúpan ang lángit sing
madámol nga gál-um. The sky was covered with thick clouds. (cf. líkop,
lúkub, tábon).

_lúkwat_, To turn upside down, overthrow; to wriggle, writhe,
tumble. Nagalúmpat kag nagalúkwat siá súbung sang isá ka pakâ. He
jumps and tumbles like a frog. (cf. balískad, balínsay, lúkso).

_lúlan_, Burden, load; to burden with, load. Ginlulánan níya ang
kángga sing mabúg-at nga lúlan. He put a heavy load on the cart. May
inoglúlan ikáw? Have you any goods to be loaded? (cf. dalá, lúkdo).

_lúlay, luláy_, An exclamation and curse, mostly used as an
introduction to an emphatic statement together with "pastilán", as
"pastilán nga daw lúlay". Confound it! Blast it! A plague upon it! Woe
betide it!

_lúlid_, The queen of termites or white ants.

_lúlid_, A paralytic, cripple, one deprived of the use of his limbs.

_lúlò, lulô, lúlò, lulô_, See lólò, lolô.

_luluáson_, A person or thing to be reclaimed, redeemed or set
free. (cf. luás).

_lulúay, lulú-ay_, To be very kind to each other, attached to each
other. Nagalulúay gid iníng duhá ka magútud. These two sisters are
very much attached to each other. (cf. lolô).

_lulúbngan_, Grave, burial place, tomb. (cf. lubúng; kótkot).

_lulúdgud_, Anything used for rubbing one's skin in
bathing. (cf. lugúd).

_lulúgay_, An intestinal worm. (cf. lalúgay).

_lulugumán_, Dyehouse, place or building where dyeing is carried
on. (cf. lúgum).

_lúluk_, Driftwood, etc. (cf. rórok, dágsà, dinágsà).

_lulukdóhon_, Burden, strain, stress, cross; a heavy load. (cf. lúkdo).

_lululánan_, Any vehicle or beast used for the transport of goods,
any person or thing used for carrying loads. Káro nga lululánan sang
mga minatáy. A funeral cart. (cf. lúlan).

_lulús_, To unwind; to roll up. See lolós.

_lulusarán_, Station, wharf, quay, built landing place, platform,
where travellers--disembark,--alight,--dismount,--get off. (cf. lúsad,
lusarán).

_lulutgútan_, Nipple; nursing bottle, the mouth-piece (of a nursing
bottle or the like). (cf. lótgot).

_lulutoán_, Kitchen. (cf. lútò, kosína, digamohán, dapóg, dalúnghan).

_lulutohán_, One whose death is to be mourned over, a person
whose surviving friends have to wear mourning dress on his
demise. (cf. lúto).

_luluyasyásan_, A place open or exposed to the wind. (cf. luyásyas,
yásyas, yasyásan, ábong).

_lumâ_, (H) Old, worn out, useless. (cf. gubát, ulasón, gunâ).

_lumâ_, Crushed, smashed, broken; to crush, smash, break, splinter,
said particularly of bamboo, bólò, bagákay, tilíng, gutúng, and
similar plants with a hollow stem. Ginlumâ sang hángin ang madámò nga
kawáyan sang pagbágyo. Many bamboos were crushed by the wind during the
storm. Nálmà (nalumâ) ang kawáyan. The bamboo was crushed. (cf. pusâ,
litík).

_lumabáw_, Above, rising above; proud, haughty, overbearing,
overweening, insolent. (cf. labáw, linmabáw).

_lumábaw_, The middle finger.

_lumád_, Reformed, improved, reclaimed, changed for the better;
to reform, become an honest member of society, conform to--the
established order of things,--the ordinary rules of living, or the
like, said especially of robbers, bandits, pirates, etc. Lumád na siá
(Naglumád na siá) sa íya sádto nga pagkabuyóng. He has now reformed
and given up being a robber. (cf. lísò, sáylo).

_lumalántip_, One who perfects, improves or completes a
thing. (cf. lántip).

_lumalápas_, A transgressor, prevaricator, sinner,
law-breaker. (cf. lápas).

_lúmang_, To open (with another key) locks, etc.; to do on the sly,
do--stealthily,--secretly. Ginlumángan níya ang ákon ba-úl sang íya
lyábe. He opened my box with his key. Ilúmang akó ánay sang ímo lyábe
sa ákon kandádo, kay nadúlà ang ákon lyábe. Kindly try to open my
lock with your key, as my key is lost. Lumángi ang íya ba-úl sang
ákon lyábe. Open his box with my key.

_lumápaw_, More than man-deep, man-high, rising in height above a man
standing. Lumápaw ang túbig. The water is more than man-deep. Lumápaw
ang búhò sang halígi. The hole of the post, i.e. the hole in the ground
in which the post is standing, is more than man-deep. (cf. lapáw).

_lumát_, To relapse, fall sick again. Naglumát ang íya nga balatían. He
suffered a relapse of his disease. (cf. lúkmat).

_lumáw_, To grope in mud, etc. See lamáw.

_lumáw_, To fill, brim with (tears, etc.). (cf. kánaw).

_lumáwan, lumawán_, A collection of garbage, refuse or offal; pit,
pool, kitchen sink. (cf. lamáwan).

_lumáw-lumáw_, Dim. and Freq. of lumáw. (cf. palumáwlumáw, kanáwkanáw).

_lumáy_, A philtre, love-potion, captivation, enchantment, bewitchment,
charm, fascination.

_lúmay, lumáy_, To give (administer) a philtre or love-potion, to
charm, fascinate; enchant, bewitch, put (cast) a spell over. Lumáya
siá. Himói siá sing lumáy. Give him a philtre. Prepare a philtre for
him. Ginlúmay konó sang áti si Fulána. N.N., they say, was bewitched
(was given a love-potion) by a Negrito.

_lúmbà_, Race, competition; to race, run a race, cheeple-chase,
compete or vie with. Nagalúmbà ang mga kabáyo. The horses are
racing. Ang mga pamatán-on siníng bánwa maluyagón gid sang
palúmbà sang mga bisikléta. The young men of this town are very
fond of bicycle-racing. May palúmbà. There is (was, will be) a
race. (cf. paindísíndis, únhay).

_lúmban_, From lunúb--to mend, etc.

_lúmbang_, A kind of tree. (cf. rúmbang).

_lúmbay_, A new shoot, sprout, twig; to bud, sprout, shoot, put
forth, burgeon, bourgeon, said of a plant or tree. Nagalúmbay ang
mga páhò. The mango trees are putting forth new leaves. Nalumbayán
na ang akásya. The acacia is now sprouting.

_lúmbay_, Young, tender, soft, green (of new shoots, branches,
etc.). (cf. línghod, lamháron, lágbus, mahómok).

_lumbayág_, To run about, run to and fro, to frolic, sport,
frisk. Ang mga bátà nagalumbayág sa latagón. The boys are running
about (frolicking) in the open field. Ginalumbayagán níla ang nakawáan
sang bánwa. They are running about in the town-square. (cf. kuyámpad,
kuyápad, dalágan, hámpang, patabáyag).

_lúmbia_, A kind of sago-palm.

_lúmboy_, A kind of tree and its edible (cherry-like)
fruit. (cf. tulíng, turíng).

_lúmbus_, To leave, go away, depart, take--one's leave,--one's
departure, go--, pack--, take oneself--, off. Nalúmbus (Nagkalúmbus)
na siá. He has left, has gone away. Bág-o pa lang siá malúmbus kag
magabút ikáw. He had just left when you came. Palumbusá siá kag manyága
ikáw. Send him off (Dismiss him) and take your dinner. (cf. halín).

_lumílaw_, (H) To doze, be half asleep. See alumílaw.

_lumíng_, Weakness, feebleness, debility; to be or become weak, feeble,
frail; weak, feeble. Lumíng siá, kay tigúlang na siá. He is quite
weak, for he is old now. Naglumíng siá, kay nagmasakít siá. He is
very feeble (has become feeble), because he has been ill. Nalumingán
akó sa íya. I thought him very weak. I got the impression that he
was very feeble. (cf. lúya, pígaw).


_lúmlum_, A hen; brood (of chickens); to hatch, incubate, brood,
sit. Ang ákon mungâ nagalúmlum karón sa (sing) napúlò kag duhá ka
bílog nga ítlog sa íya pugarán. My hen is at present hatching twelve
eggs in her nest. Palumlumá na lang iníng kilawát. Get this young
hen to hatch (some chickens). (cf. hilúmhum).

_lúmnan, lúmnon_, From lúmon--to lodge with, etc.

_lúm-ok_, Soft, giving easily way to pressure; to soften, become soft,
be yielding, compressible, limp, impressionable. Nalum-okán akó siníng
tabákò. This tobacco seems to me to be soft. Nagalúm-ok na ang íya
tagiposó-on. His heart is now getting soft or tender. Plansahá na
ang báyò nga winískan mo, kay naglúm-ok na. Now, iron the jacket you
sprinkled with water, for it has become quite limp now. (cf. hómok,
yúm-ok, lúnay).

_lúmon_, To lodge with, stay with, room with, take lodgings at, put
up at, to billet, be billeted at, live in another's house. Nagalúmon
na siá sa kay Fuláno. He is now staying in N.N.'s house. Maglumonáy
kitá. Let us take lodgings together. Sín-o ang ímo ginalúmnan
(ginalumónan)? With whom are you lodging (staying as a lodger)? Palúmna
siá sa ímo baláy. Let him live in your house.

_lumóy_, To put into the mouth and swallow down (as a pill,
etc.). Lumoyá (lúmya) iníng pildorás. Swallow these pills. Ginlumóy
níya ang kinína. He swallowed the quinine. (cf. lámon, halúnhun,
tulún).

_lúmpa_, To walk with a halt, to limp, to be lame. Nagalúmpa siá. He
walks with a halt. (cf. límpa, limpálímpa).

_lúmpag_, (H) To destroy, demolish, break down, smash up, pull
down. Lumpagá ang síya, baláy, etc. Smash up the chair, pull down the
house, etc. Ginpalúmpag ko sa íla ang ákon bálay, kay gabúk na. I let
them pull down my house for it was rotten. Nalumpagán akó sang ákon
baláy sang mga buyóng. The robbers demolished my house. (cf. gubâ,
láglag).

_lumpá-lúmpa_, Dim. of lúmpa. Nagalumpálúmpa siá, kay nasúyak ang íya
tiíl. He limps a little, for his foot was pricked by a thorn. Also;
to rock, toss, shake, jolt. (cf. limpálímpa).

_lumpa-ód_, (B) To fall down on one's back with some
force. Nakalumpa-ód siá sa bató. His seat came down violently on the
stone. Sang buút siá magpúngkò kinuháan siá ni Fuláno sang síya kag
naglumpa-ód sa salúg. When he wanted to sit down, N.N. took away
his chair and he fell thump on his back on the floor. Buhî pa si
Fuláno? Hú-o, nagalumpa-ód pa gánì. Is N.N. alive still? Yes, and he
is still pretty strong. (cf. úgsang).

_lúmpat_, A leap, bound, an elastic spring, a jump; to jump, spring,
leap, bound. Lúmpat (maglúmpat, lumúmpat) ka pa idálum. Jump
down. Nagdalágan siá sing madásig gid kag lumúmpat sa kodál. He
ran very fast and jumped over the fence (cleared the fence at a
bound). (cf. lúkso, ámbak, túmbò).

_lúmpaw_, To wither, fade; faded, withered; state of being
withered. Naglúmpaw ang búlak, dáhon, káhoy, etc. The flower, leaf,
tree, etc. withered. Nalumpawán akó sing limá ka púnò nga kakáw nga
ákon tinanúm. Five cacao plants I put into the soil withered. Ayáw
pagbunyagí iníng mga tanúm, palumpawá lang. Don't take the trouble to
water these plants, simply let them wither. (cf. láyà, layâ, layóng).

_lúmpyà_, A kind of cake.

_lúmsan_, From lumús--to drown, etc.

_lúm-ug_, To sit--, squat--, lie down (as an animal); to
wallow. Naglúm-ug siá sa salâ kag sa maláut nga kaduyugán. He wallowed
in sin and vicious habits. (cf. dúm-ug, lukó, lúp-og).

_lumús_, Drowned, suffocated (in water or other liquid); to drown,
choke, immerse, suffocate; to overpower, overwhelm, overcome. Nasápwan
siá níla nga lumús na. They found him drowned. Nalumús (nagkalumús)
siá sa túbig. He drowned in the water. Nalumús siá sa kasubô. He is
immersed in grief. Sín-o ang naglumús sa íya? Who drowned him? Ginlumús
siá sang íya nga útang. He was overwhelmed (snowed under) by his
debts. (cf. lúgdang, lúnud, kalumsánan).

_lumús-lúmus_, Dim. of lumús. Nagakalumúslúmus siá sa lawód sang
kalisúd. He sinks in a sea of troubles.

_lún-ad_, Paleness, pallidness, wanness; to get pale, turn white, look
wan. Lún-ad siá. He is pale. Naglún-ad ang íya guyá. His face became
pale. Nalun-arán akó sa íya. To me he seemed to be pale. (cf. láspì,
lúspì, lápsì, lúspad id.).

_lunák_, (H) Common, ordinary, vulgar, in general use; to be or become
vulgar, common, within reach of everybody; to waste, wear out, run
to seed. (cf. komún, bástos, tóloy).

_lúnang_, (H) Mud, slush, mire; to form mud, become muddy. Naglúnang
ang dálan--or--nalunángan ang dálan. The road became muddy. Kon
magtúdag ka sa lala-ó, pagalunángan gid ang ímo sapín. If you step
into mud, your boots will certainly get muddy. (cf. la-ó, lala-ó).

_lunángon_, Muddy, full of mud. (cf. lúnang).

_lúnaw_, To grow weak, deteriorate, grow stale, become less strong,
weaken, subside, wane, fail. Naglúnaw ang íya paghigúgma, kaákig,
híngyò, etc. His love, anger, aspiration, etc. grew less intense. Kon
bayáan mo dirâ ang bíno magalúnaw. If you leave the wine there, it
will lose its strength. Nalunáwan akó siníng lánggaw. This vinegar
of mine has deteriorated--or--this vinegar is not strong enough for
me. (cf. báhaw, táhaw).

_lúnay_, To become soft, pliant, plastic, mouldable, viscous, pliable,
without melting completely, said of candles, lead and the like
exposed to heat. Ang tínggà naglúnay sa ínit. The lead became quite
soft in the heat. Indì mo pagbayáan ang mga kandílà sa kandelerohán,
kay magalúnay. Don't leave the candles in the candlesticks, for they
will get soft and bend. (cf. lúm-ok, húmok).

_lúndong_, Featherless, bare of feathers, unfledged, callow,
particularly of chickens growing to a considerable size before
developing their feathers. Pisô nga lúndong. A featherless chicken.

_lúnes_, (Sp. Lunes) Monday.

_lúnes_, (Sp. non, nones) Single, odd. Lúnes ukón páres? Odd or
even? One or two?

_lungá_, Sesame-seed; an herbaceous plant.

_lungâ_, (B) Parted, divided, cleft, separated (of hair, chin,
etc.). Lungâ ang íya bohók. His hair is parted. Lungâ nga ság-ang. A
cleft or dimpled chin. (cf. búkles).

_lungâ-lúngà_, A mixture of roast rice, sugar and coconut-meat.

_lungâ-lúngà_, To loosen by shaking to and fro, move to right
and left, as a nail, post, bolt, etc., in order to draw it with
ease. Lungâ-lungáa ang lánsang ánay kag ugáling gabúton mo. Shake the
nail first to and fro and then draw it out. Ginlungâlúngà níya ang
búgsok túbtub nga mahapús kuháon. He shook the stake till it became
easy to remove it. (cf. úyog, hungáhúngà).

_lungá-lungahán_, Joint; articulation; hinge. (cf. lutálutahán,
luátluatán).

_lungát_, To pull asunder or apart, force away from, separate,
tear--away,--off,--from. Lungatá siá sa lungón. Force her away
from the coffin. Ginlungát níya ang íya kamót. He pulled his
hand away. Ginlungát níya ang íla mga kamót. He forced their hands
asunder. Ilungát akó sa íla nga duhá nga nagadulúmug. Please separate
the two wrestlers. (cf. bákbak, ák-ak).

_lungát_, To open (the mouth, etc.). (cf. bungát).

_lungát-lúngat_, Dim. and Freq. of lungát. Dî malungátlúngat iníng
halígi. This post is very strong, cannot be shaken.

_lungá-ug, lungáug_, To grow stale, flat, insipid, vapid. Naglungáug
ang túbig. The water has become stale. Nalungaugán akó siníng
túbig. This water is too flat for me. This water appears to me to be
stale. (cf. lán-o, lungaúg).

_lunga-úg, lungaúg_, Stale, bad-smelling, having a bad taste, flat,
vapid, fetid, unpalatable. (cf. lungá-ug).

_lungáw_, A group or cluster dependent on a principal group; to appear
or grow in a group in the neighbourhood of the principal group. Iníng
púnsok nga óhong may lungáw dirâ--or--nagalungáw dirâ. This group of
óhong-mushrooms has another dependent cluster over there. (cf. lahóng).

_lungáy_, (B) To cast an admiring look upon, ogle, look sideways
admiringly at something. Anó ang ginalungáy mo sa íya? Wherefore are
you looking at him so admiringly?

_lungáyngay_, To lie down lazily, relaxed, comfortably (as a child
in the arms or lap of its mother); to lie on the floor, etc. (as a
person in a swoon).

_lungáyngay_, To bend, droop, hang down (as branches under the weight
of fruit).

_lunggáhub_, A mud-hole, etc. (cf. linggáhub, linggálhub, danáw, búhò).

_lúnggò_, To collide, knock against. See lónggò, búnggò, súnggò.

_lúnghaw_, To weaken, be or grow weak or feeble (of voice,
etc.). Nagalúnghaw ang íya tíngug, kay ginagútum siá kaáyo, kay
masakít siá, etc. His voice is weakening, because he is very hungry,
because he is sick, etc. Sa lúnghaw (nalúnghaw) nga tíngug nagpúlong
siá----. With a feeble voice he said----. (cf. lúsngaw).

_lúnghaw_, See lúnhaw--green, etc.

_lúngì_, (B) To twist or break off, pluck or harvest (corn-cobs,
etc.). Lungía ang maís. Twist off the corn-cobs. Lungíi akó sing isá
ka talángkan nga maís. Gather for me some corn sufficient for one
boiling. (cf. kotól, ípò, páksì).

_lungíb_, Cave, den, pit, lair, hole, borrow. (cf. gíab, búhò, etc.).

_lungî-lúngì_, Dim. of lúngì.

_lúngkab_, To force an entrance, break in, break down, tear
down. (cf. rúngkab, bíngkal).

_lungkagáy, lungkágay_, To clank, rattle, clatter, tinkle,
clink, chink, as matches, stones, nails, etc., if shaken in
a box and the like. Nagalungkagáy ang kadéna. The chain is
clanking. Indì mo paglungkagayón ang mga bató. Don't rattle the
stones. Ginapalungkagáy sang idô ang íya talikalâ. The dog is rattling
its chain. (cf. ringkádol, rungkádol--applied to the noise made by
pieces of wood or other objects tumbling down stairs, etc.).

_lúngò_ To shake the head as a sign of negation or disapproval.

_lungô-lúngò_, Dim. and Freq. of lúngò. (cf. olóngólong).

_lungón_, Coffin, casket, shell; to coffin. Lungonón mo lang iníng
mga tápì. Just make these boards into a coffin. Palungonán nínyo
siá. Provide him with a coffin. Buy--, get--, make--, a coffin for
him. Put him in a coffin.

_lungón-lúngon_, Dim. of lungón Also: pod, husk, shell, cod.

_lúngsod_, Town; anthill. (cf. búngsod).

_lungúg-lungúg_, Loafer, idler, gangster, tramp. (cf. landólándo,
huróng).

_lúnhaw_, Green, dark green, fresh (of leaves, etc.; to be or become
green, etc. (cf. lágtom, hiláw, bérde).

_lúnlun_, To swallow, put into the mouth and gulp down with little or
no chewing. Lunluná lang ang sotánghon. Put the sotánghon into your
mouth and gulp it down. (cf. halúnhun, lumóy, lámon, lamóy, tulón).

_lúnlun_, Pure, unadulterated, perfect, genuine. (cf. túnay, lubús,
lúgus, lúnsay, bús-og, púro).

_lúnok_, See lónok--gruel, etc.

_lunók_, See lonók--mangrove.

_lúnsay_, Pure, undefiled, unalloyed, unmixed, unsullied, mere,
uncontaminated, virgin, unadulterated; very, very much, truly,
really, thoroughly, excellently. Ang íla pagginawî lúnsay
kaáyo. Their manners (habits, behaviour) are (is)--very good
indeed,--excellent,--admirable. (cf. lúnlun, lubús, lúgus, túnay,
hímpit, pulús, pasáy; támà, lakás, túman, dúro).

_lúntad_, To live, reside, dwell, stay, remain, live in a place
for some time, fix (take up) one's quarters for a prolonged
stay; to live in peace and tranquillity; quiet, calm, tranquil,
peaceful. Ginaluntarán na níla ang Manílà. They are now living
quietly in Manila. Lúntad na ang íla pagpuyô. They are now living
in peace. Maghigugmaánay kag magbuligáy kamó, agúd maglúntad kag
magtáwhay ang ínyo pangabúhì. Love and help each other, that your
life may be tranquil and peaceful.

_lúntay_, To fall out, separate (as overripe grain from the ear,
etc.). (cf. rúntay id.).

_lunúb_, To patch, mend, fill up gaps. Lúmbi ang delárgo ko nga
nagísì. Patch my torn trousers. Ilunúb iníng tápì sa salúg. Fill up
the gap in the floor with this plank. Ginlúmban níla sa talámnan ang
kinán-an sang mga malámalá. They filled up the gaps in the rice-field
or replanted the places, where the malámalá-insects had devoured the
young rice-plants. (cf. hálup).

_lúnud_, To sink in water, go down, founder; to put in a
liquid. (cf. túgdang, lúgdang id.).

_lunúd_, (B) Inferior to, disappearing or inconspicuous in comparison
to; to be inferior to, be no match for, not to come up to, not to
be compared with. Indì akó magdúmug sa ímo, kay lunúd gid akó. I
will not wrestle with you, for I am no match for you. Kon sa kaálam,
nagalunúd siá sa kay Fuláno. With regard to learning he is far inferior
to N.N. (cf. kubús, sihág).

_lún-us_, To subject to, subdue, overpower, sway, rule over. Lun-usá
siá. Make him obey your orders. Ginlún-us siá sang íya nga asáwa. He
was ruled by his wife,--was hen-pecked,--was under the thumb of his
wife. (cf. daúg, otóm, okóm).

_lúo_, See lóo--to rot.

_luó_, See loó--rotten.

_lúog_, See lóog--to put, push, thrust into a hole, etc.

_lúok_, See lóok--to keep at bay, etc.

_luók_, Nook, corner, out-of-the-way place. (cf. loók, doók, soók,
toók, hilít-hilít).

_lúpà_, (B) Land, field, earth, ground. (cf. dútà).

_lupâ_, (B) To travel on foot, go or travel by land, tramp, walk,
go afoot, ride on shank's pony. Naglupâ kamó ukón nagsakáy kamó sa
bapór (sakayánhúlas)? Did you travel over land or did you sail on
a steamer? Ginlupâ lang námon ang Hámtik. We simply went on foot to
Antique. (cf. lakát).

_lupáan_, (B) One rich in grounds, possessing much land, rich
land-owner, landlord. (lúpà).

_lupád_, Winged, having wings, full-grown (especially said of
locusts). Ang apán, lúkso páti lupád, madámol na liwán dídto sa
talúnan. Locusts, hoppers as well as full-grown specimens, are now
plentiful again there in the forests.

_lupád_, To fly on wings, take wing, wing one's way or one's
flight, soar, aviate, hover, plane. Nakalupád na ang mga píspis
sa malayô. The birds have now flown far away. Ang talúnan didto
ginaluparán sing madámò nga píspis. Many birds are flying about that
forest there. Ginlupád níya ang lángit. He soared towards the sky or
skywards. Ang sakayán-hángin magalupád sa ibábaw sang Ilóngílong. The
air-ship will fly over Iloilo. Makahibaló ka maglupád? Can you fly?

_lúpag_, To detain, distract, divert, to cause to forget everything
else. Ginlúpag kitá dídto sang sugilánon. We were detained there by an
interesting conversation. Naglúpag siá sa ámon sang íya manámit nga
ambahánon. She diverted us with her sweet songs. Lupága silá túbtub
sa hápon sa mga sarîsárì nga hámpang. Divert them till evening with
a variety of games. (cf. dúpag).

_lupág_, Distracted, diverted, detained. (cf. dupág).

_lupágì_, (B) To sit down cross-legged, to sit
tailor-fashion. Ginalupagían níla ang dálan, bató, salúg. They
are sitting with crossed legs on the road, the stone or rock, the
floor. Indì ka maglupágì sa atubángan sang pangólo-bánwa. Do not
squat down in presence of the Municipal President.

_lupák_, Mop, rag. See lapát.

_lupák_, A worm or caterpillar similar to a centipede, but
hairy. (cf. irás).

_lupán-ak_, (H) To squat down. See lupágì id.

_lupándang_, To squat down. See lupágì, lupán-ak.

_lupáran_, Flying station, hangar, ground and buildings for
aeronautical purposes. (cf. lupád; hulugpáan--landing station; perch).

_lupát_, Mop, swab. See lapát id.

_lúpaw_, To wither, etc. See lúmpaw.

_lúpgas_, To rub, scour, clean, scrape, remove the slippery surface
of a thing by rubbing it with dry corn-husks, the larger particles of
rice-husks (lábhang), or any similar material. Lupgasí ang síli. Rub
the eel to remove its slipperiness. Ang bínhì sang kakáw ginalupgasán,
kay kon dílì madánlug kaáyo. Cacao-seeds are (usually) rubbed to take
away their smoothness, for otherwise they are very slippery. Ipalúpgas
sa íya ang túghud. Let him clean the túghud-fish. (cf. hínis which
is more used for cleaning table-ware and kitchen-utensils).


_lúpiak_, A small shallow depression or hollow basin; to form a small
depression in ground, etc. Nagalúpiak dirí ang dútà--or--nalupiakán
dirí ang dútà. The ground here forms a basin or hollow. Palupiaká
ang búsong mo. Draw in your stomach. Nakapanyága na ikáw?--Walâ pa,
lúpiak pa gánì ang búsong ko. Have you had your dinner?--No, not yet,
my stomach is quite empty.

_lúpid_, To oppress, etc. See lúpig. Indì ka magpalúpid sang súgid
sang ibán. Don't allow yourself to be carried away by hearsay.

_lúpig_, To oppress, treat unjustly, pay small wages and exact much
work, keep under the thumb; oppressed, subject to, unfree, in bondage
to, in the clutches of, domineered, bullied. Indì mo paglupígon ang mga
ímol. Do not oppress the poor. Ginalúpig níya ang íya mga mamumugón. He
is treating his workmen harshly or unjustly. Ang mga ímol sing masamí
lúpig sang mga manggaránon. The poor are often subject to oppression
by the rich.

_lúpig_, Inferior to, not up to, not to be compared with. (cf. lunúd).

_lupî-lúpì_, To shake, sway, bend or flap to and fro, said of thin,
broad objects. Ang manipís nga tápì nagalupîlúpì sa hángin. The
thin board is flapping in the wind. Ginalupîlúpì sang hángin ang
mga dáhon sang ságing, lubí, etc. The wind is swaying the banana--,
coconut-leaves, etc.

_lúpit_, Inferior to in size and strength, no match for. Lúpit iníng
manók sa isá. This cock is not so good as the other one. Iníng táo
lúpit sa kay Fuláno. This man is inferior in size and strength to
N.N. (cf. lútos--inferior in every way).

_lúpit_, To squeeze, pinch, compress. Sapátos nga malúpit. Boots
that pinch or are too narrow. Indì ka maglúpit dirâ. Don't squeeze
in there. (cf. ipít, lígpit; lótlot, dókdok).

_lúpit_, Well armed, equipped, accoutred, in fighting array.

_lúpnan, etc._ From lupón.

_lupô_, A kind of fish.

_lupô_, A kind of plant with edible leaves, but mostly only fed to
pigs. Metaphorically: to humble, treat ignominiously, put down, abase,
look down upon, depreciate, despise, snub; outdo, overcome. Indì
ka maglupô sa ákon, índì mo akó paglupoón. Don't treat me so
ignominiously. Ginlupô lang akó níya. He simply treated me as if I
were a lupô, as if I were of no consideration.

_lupóg_, Lame, crippled, halt, maimed; to become lame, etc. Naglupóg
si Fuláno. N.N. has gone lame (cf. piáng).

_lúp-og_, To sit or squat down with legs turned to one side, as
resting animals. (cf. lukó, dúm-ug id.).

_lupók_, Discharge, detonation, snap, pop, bang, crash; the report of
a gun, a shot; to explode, burst; the firing off of guns or mortars at
feasts, etc. May lupók. There is, was or will be, the firing off of
guns or mortars. Nakabatì ka sang lupók sang pusíl? Did you hear the
report of the rifle? Naglupók ang kaldéra, ang gúma sang áwto, etc. The
kettle, the auto-tyre, etc. burst, exploded, blew--up,--out. Nalúkpan
si Fuláno sing rekámara kag napatáy. N.N. was hit by an exploding
mortar and was killed. Nalúkpan akó sing kaldéra. One of my
cauldrons exploded. Ang ibán nga mga ítlog kon ibutáng sa abó nga
maínit magalupók. Some eggs burst when put in hot ashes. (Palupokí)
Palúkpi ang mga kalasálon. Fire off some guns for the marriage-couple.

_lupók-lúpok_, Dim. of lupók. Metaphorically: to explode, shout and
rail at. Indì ka maglupóklúpok sa ímo mga sologoón. Don't use such
explosive language to your servants.

_lupô-lúpò_, Dim. and Freq. of lupô--to humble, etc. Maíwat gid nga
íla siá lupôlupóon. It will be very difficult for them to keep him
down, to ignore or disregard him.

_lupô-lupô_, A grass that is often fed to pigs.

_lupón_, Screen, cover, shade, curtain, blind, veil; to screen,
eclipse, cover, veil, curtain off, hide behind, obstruct the
view. Lúpni akó sing amákan. Screen me with a bamboo-mat. Ginlúpnan
níla ang búslot sa díngding. They covered the hole in the
partition-wall. Ilupón iníng pányò sa sugâ. Shade the light with this
handkerchief. Lúpni ang ákon mga matá, kay támà kasílaw ang sugâ. Put
a shade before my eyes, for the light is too dazzling. (cf. lipód,
lipón).

_lúpos_, To pervade, impregnate, season, flavour, give a relish
to, applied especially to salt put as a seasoning into liquid
side-dishes. Ang ginamós walâ makalúpos sang tinóla. The salt-fish
did not give a flavour to the side-dish (too little of it having been
put in).

_lupót_, To discharge a little excrement at a time, as people suffering
from diarrhoea or dysentery. (cf. panlibáng).

_lupót-lupót_, Dim. and Freq. of lupót. To suffer from diarrhoea
or dysentery.

_lúpsì_, Paleness, wanness; to be or become pale, pallid, wan, to
blanch, turn pale. See lápsì, láspì, lúspad, lún-ad, lúspì).

_lúp-ug_, See lúp-og--to rest, lie down, as animals with legs turned
to one side.

_lúput_, To fill, cover (holes, etc.) Lupúti ang búhò sing dútà. Fill
up the hole with earth. (cf. támpok).

_lúpyak_, See lúpiak.

_lúsa_, (Sp. losa) Flagstone, paving tile.

_lusâ_, The eggs of lice, a nit. (cf. kayúmad--a young louse,
ngisíngísi--a nit, kúto--a full-grown louse, botól--mother-louse).

_lúsad_, To dismount, alight, step out of, or off, a vehicle, to
disembark, get out, get off, land, get off a boat, etc. Nakalúsad
na ang mga sumalákay. The passengers have now disembarked or
landed. Ginlusáran níla ang sakayán, áwto, etc. They left the boat, the
auto, etc. Palusára siá. Let him dismount, get out, land, disembark.

_lusáng_, To burst, break open, explode, pop (said of many kinds
of beans and peas, etc. that break open, when being boiled). Ang
ibán nga mga balátong nagalusáng kon lagáon. Some beans burst when
boiled. (cf. gusáng).

_lusarán_, Station, quay, etc. See lulusarán.

_lús-aw_, To fade, lose colour, bleach, tone down, become
wishy-washy. Ang kaayóáyo mahapús maglús-aw. Beauty fades
easily. Naglús-aw ang duág sang íya nga bísti. The colour of her
garments is faded. Nalus-awán akó siníng kálò. The colour of this
hat has faded, it seems to me--or--The colour of this hat of mine
has faded.

_lusáy_, Free, untrammelled, free to act or proceed as one sees
fit; unfettered, at liberty, one's own master. Lusáy ang íya
pangabúhì. His life is untrammelled. Lusáy siá sa íya kahimtángan. He
is of independent means. Naglusáy na siá. He has now become free,
unshackled. Lusáy nga bató. An unset (precious) stone. (cf. líbre,
hílway, luás).

_lúsdan, etc._ See lúsud.

_lúsgò_, To stop--, remain--, stay--,--a long time, to tarry,
linger. Indì ka maglúsgò dídto. Don't tarry there long. Naglúsgò
siá dídto sa íla baláy. He lingered there at their house for a long
while. Ginlusgoán níya ang ámon baláy. He stayed a long while with
us at our home.

_lúsgus_, To boil in water in such a way, that all the water
evaporates before the cooking is properly done. The quantity of
water required has to be accurately calculated beforehand. Hípon
nga linusgusán. Hípon-fish boiled in the lúsgus-way. Maglúsgus ka
siníng mga hípon sa ákon panyága. Cook this hípon-fish for my dinner
according to the lúsgus-method.

_lúsgus_, To shake, agitate, stir by shaking. (cf. lôgô, linô).

_lúsì_, To break, bend, blunt, said of pointed tools and other
things not made of metal. Nalúsì ang ákon báhì. My wooden dibble has
got blunted. Nalusían akó sing kokó. One of my fingernails has got
jagged. Ginlúsì ni Fuláno ang púnta siníng búgsok. N.N. broke the
point of this wooden stake.

_lúsiat_, Weakness, debility; feeble, weak; to become weak, frail,
feeble. Naglúsiat siá. He became weak. (cf. lúsyat).

_lusír_, (Sp. lucir) To show off, display, shine. Buút siá maglusír. He
wishes to display his accomplishments--wishes to shine. (cf. paámpag,
padayáw).

_lúskan, etc._ From lúsok.

_lúsngaw_, A weak voice; having a weak voice; to speak in a weak,
faint, feeble voice. (cf. lúnghaw, túsngaw).

_lúsò_, To fray, be torn to shreds, be torn to ribbons. Nagkalúsò
tungúd sang bágyo ang mga dáhon sang ságing. The banana-leaves were
torn to shreds by the hurricane. (cf. lúsì).

_lúsok_, To pierce, penetrate, destroy with a pointed instrument
(especially applied to the eyes). Indì mo paglúskon (paglusókon) ang
íya matá. Don't pierce his eye. Nalúsok ang íya matá sang dulát. His
eye was pierced by the awl. Ang panâ naglúsok sang íya matá. The
arrow penetrated his eye. Naglúsok ang ádlaw sang íya pagkamatáy sa
ádlaw sang íya pagkatáo. His death happened on the same day (of the
week or year) as his birth.

_lusók_, Pierced, destroyed with a pointed instrument (of eyes). Lusók
ang íya nga matá. His eye is destroyed (due to having been pierced
by a pointed instrument).

_lús-on_, To sustain, support, uphold, maintain, carry on, keep
up. May ikasángkol siá sa paglús-on sang amó nga palangakoán. He
is capable or qualified to maintain (fill, occupy) such a position
(office). (cf. tús-on).

_lusóng_, Rice-mortar used for pounding rice by hand with a wooden
pestle called "hál-o".

_lúsong_, To go or jump down, descend, dive into. Ginlusóngan níya
ang pisítas nga nahúlug sa túbig. He dived to get the twenty-centavo
piece that had fallen into the water. Ang íya pagpanlibáng nalusóngan
sang balaúd. His diarrhoea developed into dysentery.

_lúspad_, Pale, etc. See láspì, lún-ad, lúspì id.

_lúspì_, To be pale, wan, etc. See lápsì, láspì, etc.

_lúsud_, To topple over, heel over, tilt, tip, fall over due to
one or more supports giving way. Nalúsud (Nagkalúsud) ang baláy, kay
gináb-ab sang subâ. The house having been undermined by the river fell
over. Nabálì (nagkabálì) ang isá ka tiíl kag nalúsud ang lamésa. One
leg broke and the table toppled over. Nalusúran (nalusúdan, nalúsdan)
siá sang íya baláy. His house tumbled down (fell over, burying him
underneath). Gabúk iníng halígi; ilísi sing bág-o, kay kon dílì
malúsdan ka sang ímo baláy. This post is rotten; replace it by a new
one, for otherwise your house will--tumble down,--collapse,--come
to grief.

_lusút_, To pass or slip through a narrow opening, wriggle or squeeze
through a hole, fence, etc. Naglusút siá sa kodál--or--ginlútsan níya
ang kodál. He squeezed through the fence. Makalusút ikáw dirâ? Can
you wriggle through there? (cf. sóhot).

_lusút-lúsut_, Dim. of lusút. Ang bátà nagalusútlúsut sa mga táo. The
boy is threading his way through the people.

_lúsyat_, See lúsiat.

_lutá_, To luxate, dislocate, put out of joint. Nalutá ang íya
tiíl. His foot was dislocated. (cf. lúak).

_luták_, Slung shot. See kaboráta.

_luták_, To cleave, split, rend, break. (cf. litík, línta).

_lútak_, To step into anything wet or muddy. Naglútak siá sa
lala-ó--or--ginlutákan níya ang lala-ó. He stepped into the
mud. (cf. lúdag, tádag, túdag, tásak).

_luták_, Dirt, mud, rubbish, dust. (cf. hígkò, gapógapó, tapótapó).

_lutá-lutahán_, Joint, articulation. As a figure of speech:
Consideration, compassion, mercy. Walâ gid siá sing lutalutahán,
ba. He is unbending, inflexible, without consideration. (cf. lutá).

_lutás_, Weaned, weanling; to wean. Ang báta ginalutás karón kag walâ
na pagapasóswa. The child is being weaned at present and not being
given the breast. Lutasá ang bátà kay dakô na. Wean the child from
the breast, for it is quite big now. Lutás nga bátà. A child weaned
from the breast. (cf. butás, bútas).

_lutáw_, Rising to (showing on) the surface, floating, buoyant,
visible, conspicuous, prominent, eminent, distinguished; to float,
be buoyed up, come to light, rise to the surface, become conspicuous,
be distinguished or eminent, to be in (on, upon, above). Ang kawáyan
nagalutáw sa túbig. Bamboo floats in water. Ang dágat ginlutawán sing
madámò nga mga káhoy nga dinágsà sang pagbágyo. The sea was full
of floating driftwood at the time of the hurricane. Lutáw siá nga
táo kag binátà sang isá ka lutáw nga panimaláy. He is a prominent
man and scion of a conspicuous family. Naglutáw sa íya ang panálig
sang mga punoán. The authorities showed that they trusted him (had
confidence in him). Karón nagalutáw na siá sa dakô nga katalágman
nga----. At present he is in great danger of----. (cf. kubáw, kubág,
kutáw, utáw-útaw; bútwà--to rise to the surface from under water).

_lutáw-lútaw_, Dim. and Freq. of lutáw.


_lútay_, To straighten out, replace, reduce, put back or set (muscles,
etc.). Lutáya ang bútkon ko, ang kaugatán ko, etc. Straighten my
arm, my muscles, etc. by massaging. Lutáyi akó sang ákon tiíl nga
nalutá. Set or replace the bones of my dislocated foot.

_lúthang_, A bamboo gun, gun, rifle, musket, revolver; to fire a gun,
to shoot. Nasentensyahán siá sang hokóm nga pagaluthangón. He was
sentenced by the judge to be shot. Ginlúthang níla ang buyóng. They
shot the robber. (cf. pusíl).

_lúthò_, To pick out, select or take up some things and leave others
alone, to pass over, skip. (cf. láktaw, lúkhò).

_luthô-lúthò_, Dim. and Freq. of lúthò. Indì mo pagluthôluthoón ang
pagsaoló, kóndì saolohón mo ang tanán. Don't memorize only parts
here and there, but learn the whole by heart. (cf. laktáwláktaw,
lukhôlúkhò).

_lúto_, (Sp. luto) Mourning, mourning dress, etc. See laláw.

_lútò_, Ripe, mellow, mature; cooked; to ripen, mature, mellow;
to cook. Lútò na ang mga páhò. The mangoes are ripe. Lútò na ang
panyága. The food for dinner is cooked. Dinner is now ready. Lutóa
ang ísdà, kárne, manók nga kapón, etc. Cook the fish, the meat, the
capon, etc. Lutói akó sing manók, sing panihápon, etc. Cook a chicken,
supper, etc. for me. Nalútò (naglútò) na ang mga ságing. The bananas
have ripened now. Palutóon mo gid ang mga páhò sa káhoy, índì mo
ánay pagdugúson. Let the mangoes get ripe (mellow) on the tree, don't
pluck them prematurely. Palutóa si (ipalútò kay) Pédro siníng (iníng)
manók. See to it that Peter prepares (cooks) this chicken. (cf. gúlang,
gúrang; digámo, ráhà, hímos).

_lutó, lutô_, To tarry, linger, loiter, prolong one's stay or
conversation, etc. See lásgò, paútus.

_lútos_, Surpassed, outdone, inferior to another in any respect; to
surpass, outdo, overcome, be superior to, vanquish, defeat, beat,
conquer. Lútos siá ni Fuláno sa mánggad, sa kaálam, sa kataasón,
etc. He is inferior to N.N. in wealth, in learning, in height,
etc. He is not so wealthy, learned, tall, etc. as N.N. Linútos
siá ni Fuláno. He was defeated by N.N. Lutóson siá ni Fuláno sa
kaísug. N.N. will be superior to him in strength (bravery). He will
be outdone in strength or bravery by N.N. Indì mo malútos ang íya nga
katarúngan. You cannot beat (hold your ground or stand up against)
his argument. (cf. daúg).

_lútsan, etc._ From lusút--to slip through, etc.

_lúu, etc._ See lóo, etc.

_lúwa_, See lúa--recitation.

_luwág; luwág-lúwag_, See luág; luág-lúag--ladle; shoulder blade,
scapula.

_luwáng_, See luáng--room, etc.

_luwán-lúwan_, Changeling, shifty, etc. See liwánlíwan.

_luwás_, See luás--to free, redeem, etc.

_luyâ_, (H) Tired, exhausted, wearied, fatigued, done up. (cf. kapóy,
paúl, nabúdlay).

_lúya_, Weakness, debility, feebleness; to become weak, feeble,
debile. Nalúya (nagkalúya) siá. He became weak. Naluyáhan akó sa
íya. He appears to me to be weak. Ginlúya sang balatían ang íya
láwas. The disease (sickness) enfeebled him, made him weak. Linuyáhan
ang íya kabubút-on sang amó nga katarúngan. Those arguments weakened
his intention (will). (cf. pígaw).

_lúyà_, (H) To fatigue, fag, tire, weary, become tired, fagged
or weary. Nalúyà (nagkalúyà) siá sang paglakát. He got tired from
walking. (cf. kápoy, búdlay, pául).

_lúya, lúy-a_, Ginger; a plant whose roots are used for flavouring
fish, etc. and also for preparing a beverage called "tahô".

_lúyag_, Liking, desire, relish, enjoyment, wish; to like, relish,
desire, care for, delight in, derive pleasure from, take to, take a
fancy to, fancy, hanker after, covet. Anó ang lúyag mo? What do you
like (want, wish)? Ang ákon lúyag amó----. What I like is----. Malúyag
ikáw sinâ? Do you like it? Ang mga páhò amó gid ang ginaluyágan
níya sa pagkáon. Mangoes are just the thing he likes to eat very
much. (cf. buút, wíli, lípay, hándum).

_luyág_, To be fond of, attached to, have a passion for, take a
fancy to, look sweet upon, fall in love with. Nagakaluyág siá sa
kay Fulána. Ginakaluyagán níya si Fulána. He is passionately fond of
N.N. He has fallen in love with N.N. (cf. gúgma--love, affection).

_luyág-lúyag_, Dim. and Freq. of lúyag. Also: whim, caprice, fancy,
wish, desire, hankering.

_luyásyas_, To rush upon, strike or beat against something with full
force. (cf. yásyas, dásdas, dáldal).

_luyát_, Hanging down loosely or in folds and wrinkles as the skin
of old or very lean folks. See layát id. Luyát na ang íya pánit or
nagaluyát na ang íya pánit. His skin is hanging down in folds.

_luyátyat_, Dim. of luyát. Nagaluyátyat ang pánit sa íya
bútkon. The skin is forming wrinkles on his arm. Also: To lie
down or settle comfortably (as a child in the arms of its mother,
etc.). (cf. lungáyngay).

_luyáw_, To go about freely without restraint, range, wander
at will especially applied to cattle grazing in an open field
or pasture. Iluyáw lang ang báka. Just let the cow roam freely
about. (cf. layáw).

_lúyhad_, To improve, recover from, get well. Nalúyhad (nagkalúyhad)
na siá sa íya balatían. He has now recovered from his illness.

_luyó_, Side, flank, neighbourhood, proximity, alongside, nearby,
beside, border, edge; part, party, faction; to be (placed, situated)
at the side of,--in a nearby region,--in the neighbourhood of, etc. Sa
íya luyó----. At his side----. Sa naluyó sang íya baláy----. On the
ground at the side of his house----. (cf. kílid, binít, lapít, íngod,
kalúyo, kaluyó).

_lúyò_, To be slow, walk or trudge along slowly, be slow in
movement. Nalúyò (nagkalúyò) ang karabáw. The buffalo fell into a
slow step. Naluyóan akó sa íya. He seems to me to be very slow. He
is too slow for me. Amó ang nagpalúyò sa íya mga tikáng. That made
him slow down his pace. (cf. búndul, hínay, pákok, kúlì).

_lúyok_, To bend, incline, etc. See búyok.

_lúy-on_, To give way, give, sag, double up, as a sack, a corpse, etc.,
if lifted, or as a piece of cloth held open does, when a weight is
put in the middle of it. Naglúy-on ang sáko nga arína sang paghákwat
ko sinâ. The sack of flour gave (way) in the middle, when I lifted
it. (cf. táboy).

_luyúng_, Space, extent, room, length, distance; scope, range of
action or view. (cf. luáng, ruáng).

_lúyung_, To wander, roam, travel, walk about. (cf. lágaw, etc.).

_luyúng-lúyung_, To stroll, ramble, loiter; vagabond, tramp,
rover. (cf. lagáwlágaw, duyóngdúyong, etc.).

_lwás, lwásnon_, See luás, luásnon.

_lyábi_, Key. See liábe.

_lyabéro_, Key-ring, key-guard. See liabéro.




M


_m_, The letter "M" in Visayan is pronounced as in English. The
letter "M" is one of the labials b, p, m, and as it is the easiest
to pronounce, it often takes the place of the other two:
1) after the prefixes pan-, man-, magapan-, etc. But note that the
final "n" of these prefixes is dropt, e.g. pamulúng (pan-, bulúng);
pamúlong (pan-, púlong), etc. etc.
2) after the prefixes hi- and ha-, e.g. himungá (hi--, búnga);
himúlbul (hi--, búlbul); hamulák (ha--, búlak); hámtang (ha--, butáng),
etc. etc.

_ma-_, A shortened form of the verbal prefix maga- denoting the
active future, e.g. Si Fuláno maabút (magaabút) sa buás. N.N. will
arrive to-morrow. Karón sa hápon masulát (magasulát) akó sa íya. This
afternoon I will write him.

_ma-_, A shortened form of the verbal prefix magaka-; quite frequently
this ma- also stands for magka- and even for nagaka-. Madúla inâ, kon
dílì nímo pagtipígan sing maáyo. It will get lost, unless you guard
it well. (madúlà--magakadúlà). Andam ka, agúd índì ka mahúlug. Look
out or you may fall down. (mahúlug--magkahúlug). Mahádluk siá. He is
afraid, is getting afraid. (mahádluk--nagakahádluk).

_ma-_, The potential verbal prefix of the passive voice denoting
the possibility or feasibility, and if negatived, the impossibility
of what the root implies, e.g. Mahímò inâ. That can be done. That
is possible. Dílì (índì) mahímò inâ. That cannot be done. That
is impossible. Indì maíro inâ. That cannot be tolerated. That is
intolerable. This ma- is the counterpart of the active maka-.

_ma-_, A prefix forming adjectives in three ways, namely:
1) by simple attachment to the root, e.g. mahágpok--crisp;
malínaw--calm; matahúm--beautiful. (cf. hágpok, línaw, tahúm).
2) by adding also the suffix -on, e.g. malalíson--disobedient;
malimóton--forgetful; mapigusón--oppressing. (cf. lális, límot, pígus).
3) by superadding the particle "in" which is placed before the
first vowel of the root, e.g. malinapáson--omitting, neglecting
the performance of; mabinalák-on--careful, concerned, interested;
matinipígon--preserving, saving, guarding. (cf. lápas, baláka, típig).
N.B. Other formations of adjectives see under mag-, manog-, maki-.

_ma_, The bellow, lowing, moo, mooing (of cattle); to low, moo,
bellow. Ang báka nagamá. The cow lows, is lowing. (cf. humá, umá,
má-má).

_maabáng_, (B) Greedy, covetous, avaricious, avid, grasping. (abáng).

_maabí-abíhon_, Friendly, sociable, amicable, affable,
obliging. (abíábi).

_maáblang_, (B) Wide, broad, vast, extensive, ample, of great breadth
or extent. (áblang).

_maáblaw_, (B) Affable, sociable, friendly, companionable,
approachable, a good mixer, kind in social intercourse. (áblaw).

_maábtik_, Dexterous, expert, apt, adroit, deft; swift, nimble, quick:
clever, skilful, skilled. (ábtik).

_maabyánon_, Friendly, amiable, amicable, affable, sociable,
hospitable. (cf. ábyan, maabíabíhon).

_maádat_, Pungent, acrid, piquant, racy, bitter-sweet in a pronounced
degree. (ádat).

_maágaw_, Ravishing, charming, captivating, taking, bewitching. (ágaw).

_maágday_, Slow; tardy, deliberate, plodding, laggard, slow-coach,
dilatory, backward. (cf. ágday, mahínay, mabúndul, pákok).

_maágdom_, (B) Dark, obscure, gloomy, dusky. (cf. ágdom).

_maághò_, Smelling bad, of an evil smell, stinking,
evil-smelling, fetid, malodorous, rank, emitting an
unpleasant-odour,--effluvium,--exhalation, (ághò).

_maagíd-ágid_, Resembling, somewhat like, similar, almost the same,
not unlike. (cf. maapítápit, maanggídánggid).

_maáglot_, Harsh, grating, gritty, said of the sound produced e.g. by
biting grit hidden in bread and the like. (áglot).

_maágol_, Lazy, indolent, slack, idle, easy-going, slothful, sluggish,
sluggard. (ágol).

_maagóng_, Cheating, sneaky, sneak, sneaking, fraudulent, underhand,
swindling, shifty, tricksy. (agóng).

_maágrot_, See maáglot id.

_maagrót_, Boasting, bragging, bluffing, braggart, ostentatious,
swaggering, vaunting. (agrót).

_maágtà_, Black, blackish, dark, dun. (ágtà).

_maagwánta_, Strong, robust, inured, untiring, patient, long-suffering,
enduring, able to stand or bear much. (agwánta).

_maagwása_, Lively, cheery, cheerful, of good cheer, good-humoured,
jocund, jovial, joyous, gay, blithe, sprightly; wastrel, prodigal,
spendthrift, lavish. (cf. agwása).

_maaháng_, Bold, daring, audacious, intrepid, adventurous, venturesome,
rash, temerarious, foolhardy, forward, froward, impudent, insolent,
impertinent. (cf. aháng).

_maahás_, Bold, daring, etc. See maaháng. (cf. ahás, makáhas).

_maáka_, Much in demand or much resorted to (as a shop, merchandise,
etc.). (cf. áka, mabákal, maágaw, ágaw).

_maakígon_, Bad-tempered, testy, irascible, irritable, techy, touchy,
fiery, choleric, easily excited to anger, easily exasperated or
provoked. (cf. ákig, akíg, pikón, tarádyon).

_maákup_, Hospitable, entertaining visitors with
generosity. (cf. ákup).

_maalabáab_, Warm, tepid, not quite hot; warmish, lukewarm. (alabáab).

_maalág-ag_, Undecided, undetermined, vacillating, wavering,
hesitating, doubting, in doubt, doubtful, irresolute, not having made
up one's mind, boggling, burking, shilly-shallying. (cf. alág-ag,
madinuháduháon).

_maalag-agón_, See maalág-ag.

_maalaligotgotón_, Resentful, etc. See maaligotgotón.

_maálam_, Learned, clever, wise, intellectual, intelligent, sagacious,
sage, knowing, well-informed, scholarly, erudite, well-read,
well-instructed, educated, accomplished. (cf. álam, manginalámon,
aláman).

_maálan_, Rancid, rank of taste or smell. (cf. álan).

_maalangá-ang_, A little feverish, etc. See maaláng-ang, maalabáab.

_maaláng-álang_, Not quite
convenient,--fit,--timely,--opportune. (cf. alángálang).

_maaláng-ang_, A little feverish, having a slight cold; warmish,
tepid, lukewarm. (cf. maalangá-ang, maalabáab).

_maálay_, Tired, stiff, overworked (of limbs, etc.); heedless,
obstinate, stubborn. (cf. álay).

_maálhom_, Difficult to light, not burning well, slow burning,
smouldering. (cf. álhom, maalúm, maarúm).

_maalî-álì_, The best (of a kind); carefully chosen or selected,
prominent, outstanding. (cf. álì, pílì, luhâ, lutáw, pasahî, sampáton).

_maalibógbog_, (B) Having a slight headache, giddy,
dizzy. (cf. alibógbog).

_maaligótgot_, See maaligotgotón.

_maaligotgotón_, Resentful, spiteful, chagrined, full of rancour or
ill-will, malignant, malicious. (maalaligotgotón id.).

_maalikáya_, (H) Good-humoured, cheerful, joyous, joyful, jovial, gay,
blithe, cheery, jocund, sprightly. (cf. alikáya, masádya, manayánáya).

_maaliláon_, Fostering, taking care of, catering to, rearing or
bringing up, kind, considerate, generous (in looking after another's
wants or needs). (cf. alílà).

_maalingágngag_, A little deaf, not hearing well, hard of
hearing. (cf. alingágngag).

_maalingása_, Loud, noisy, boisterous, rowdy, obstreperous, clamorous,
clattering, disturbing. (cf. alingása).

_maalingáut_, See maalingása. (alingáut--alingása).

_maalingógngog_, A little dizzy or dull, not keen, slightly
fuddled. (cf. alingógngog).

_maalipúngot_, Exasperated, aggravated, annoyed, riled, put out,
angry, furious, passionate, chagrined. (cf. alipúngot).


_maalipúngton_, See maalipúngot.

_maaliwána_, Spacious; wide, roomy, broad, large, ample, vast,
extensive; clear, unobstructed, open, free. (cf. aliwána, mahanáhay,
mahanáyak, mahanáyap, malápad, masángkad).

_maaliwánay_, See maaliwána.

_maalúm_, Not burning well, not easily inflammable, smouldering,
slow-burning. (cf. alúm, arúm, maálhom).

_maálwag_, Wide, broad, large, vast, spacious, roomy, expanded,
extensive, ample; comfortable, well off, well provided for,
prosperous. Maálwag siá sing pangabúhì. He is well off, is quite
prosperous. (cf. álwag, maaliwána, matáwhay).

_maálwan_, Free, open, generous, liberal, charitable, open-handed,
beneficent, bounteous, bountiful, kind-hearted. Maálwan siá sing
kamót, sing tagiposóon, etc. He is open-handed, has a generous heart,
etc. (cf. álwan, mahinatágon, maamomáhon, malolóy-on).

_maálway_, See maálwag, mahanáhay, malápad.

_maámbas_, Expensive, requiring or needing much expenditure,
wasteful. (ámbas). (cf. mahákug).

_maámbong_, Nice, pleasing, lovely, pretty, good-looking, handsome,
attractive, goodly, comely, beautiful; modest, decent, proper,
self-respecting. (ámbong).

_maámion_, Sweet-smelling, fragrant, odoriferous, odorous, aromatic,
scented, perfumed. (ámion).

_maamomáhon_, Hospitable, keeping open house, liberal in entertaining
guests, treating visitors well. (amóma).

_maampínon_, Helping, helpful, giving support; partner,
party-man. (cf. ámpin, umalapín).

_maamuláwon_, Watchful, keeping--watch,--vigil,--late hours; one--who
stays (sits) up late,--who keeps watch and ward over. (cf. amoláw).

_máan_, (B) To know, be aware of, understand. Indì akó kamáan. I
do not know. Anó ang namán-an mo? What do you know? What have you
studied or learned? (cf. hibaló, sáyod, etc.).

_máan bay_, (B) I don't know. (cf. ambót, ambáy, ilám).

_maándak_, Boastful, bragging, showing off, proudly displaying,
braggart, bluffing, vaunting, ostentatious, swaggering, talking
big. (ándak).

_maánggid_, Similar, like, resembling, uniform with, the image of,
very much the same, much of a muchness, of a piece. (ánggid).

_maanggíd-ánggid_, Somewhat resembling, like, not unlike.

_maánggot_, Eating ordinary food, weaned from the breast. (ánggot)

_maánghit_, Goatish, smelling like a goat. (cf. ánghit).

_maánghol_, Smelling of sweat or perspiration. (cf. ánghol).

_maángso_, (B) Emitting a smell like urin. (cf. ángso; mapángsot).

_maángtod_, Emitting a smell as of burned food. (cf. ángtod).

_maantígo_, Clever, dexterous, expert, skilled, skilful, adroit,
apt, handy, well versed. (cf. antígo; batíd, anád, sagád, ansyáno,
alensyáno).

_maánting_, Hearing well, having good ears, keen or sharp of
hearing. (cf. ánting).

_maántod_, Smelling like burned or scorched food. (cf. ántod).

_maantóos_, See maántod.

_maantoróon_, Shy, bashful, timid, retired, afraid,
apprehensive. (cf. antorô, mahulúy-on, mahuyáon, mahádluk).

_maántung_, (B) Smelling like burning feathers, bones or
paper. (cf. ántung).

_maantúson_, Patient, enduring, tolerant, inured, suffering, bearing,
tolerating, sustaining. (cf. ántus).

_maányag_, Beautiful, nice, charming, pleasing, handsome,
comely, fair, pretty, good-looking, goodly, lovely, attractive,
prepossessing. (cf. ányag, maámbong, magayón, maayóáyo, matahúm,
mahîmahî).

_maanyóan_, Fitting, proper, agreeable to, suitable, congruous,
going well with, harmonizing with. (cf. ányò, anyóan).

_maápgas_, Difficult to swallow; rough, sore (of throat). Maápgas nga
búnga. A fruit that can be swallowed only with difficulty (on account
of being sour and coarse or the like). Maápgas ang ákon tutúnlan. My
throat is rough, sore. (ápgas).

_maápgot_, Difficult to swallow or to pass, due to dryness, mud, deep
loose sand, etc. Maápgot nga dálan. A muddy or sandy road. Maápgot
nga kángga. A wagon difficult to draw on account of a bad road,
etc. (ápgot, masápnot).

_maapínon_, Helpful, assisting, succouring, aiding, protective,
defensive, defending, protecting. (ápin, umalapín, mainapínon).

_maapít-ápit_, Resembling, nearly alike, similar. (cf. apítápit;
maanggídánggid).

_maáplod_, Astringent, acrid, acerb, piquant, pungent, bitter, tart,
sharp, hot or biting to the taste. (cf. áplod).

_maápsà_, Insufficient, desultory, of little or no use, too little,
of no avail, not adequate. (cf. kabús, kulábus, kúlang, higúshigús).

_maárat_, (H) See maádat.

_maaraligotgotón_, (B) Resentful, etc. See maaligotgotón.

_maarúm_, (B) See maalúm, maálhom--not burning well.

_maarús-arús_, Satisfactory, neither rich nor poor, rather well-to-do,
well off. (cf. dawâdawâ, dirâdirâ, hingánhingán).

_maásab_, Dirty, filthy, disgusting, omnivorous, not particular,
applied to persons who are ready to eat almost anything; also applied
to the manners and ways of prostitutes. (ásab).

_maásgad_, See maáskad. (ásgad--áskad).

_maasín_, Salt, salty, salted, saline, brackish, containing salt,
briny. (asín).

_maáskad_, (H) Sore, inflamed, (of throat; cf. áskad, maásgad).

_maáslum_, Sour, acidulous, sharp, acid, bitter, acerb, tart. (áslum).

_maáso_, (B) Smoky, smoking, full of smoke, giving off much smoke,
fumy, smouldering. Maáso nga digamohán. A smoky kitchen, a kitchen
full of smoke. Maáso nga káhoy. Wood that gives off much smoke when
burned. (asó).

_maasó_, (H) See maáso.

_maásoy_, Explicable, explainable, anything that can be elucidated
or stated clearly. Dílì maásoy inâ. That cannot be explained. (ásoy).

_maáthag_, Clear, distinct; manifest, evident, plain, apparent, lucid,
open, honest, without tergiversation or twisting of the facts. Maáthag
nga pagmítlang. A clear, distinct diction or pronunciation. Sa
maáthag nga hámbal----. Frankly, openly----. In a frank, open manner
of speech----. Maáthag inâ. That is clear, plain. (cf. áthag).

_maáthag-mítlang_, Vowel. (A modern term;
cf. pahágyon-mítlang--consonant).

_maátoy_, (B) Thick, condensed, viscous, viscid, treacly, stiff, not
flowing easily, like molasses, honey, porridge, or the like. (cf. átoy,
malapúyut).

_maawáon_, Compassionate, sympathetic, commiserating, condoling,
pitiful, clement, taking pity on, merciful. (áwà)

_maawayón_, Fighting, inclined to fight, quarrelsome, pugnacious,
belligerent. (cf. áway, mangangawáy).

_maáwot_, (B) Tough, hard, difficult to dislodge or to make an
impression upon. (cf. áwot, mahúnit, matíg-a).

_maayád_, (B) Good, well, healthy, fit, sound; fine, nice. (cf. mayád,
maáyo).

_maayád-áyad_, Dim. of maayád. Pretty well; nice, beautiful, comely,
pretty, handsome, good-looking, attractive. (cf. maayóáyo, maayóayó).

_maáyo_, Good, honest, righteous, virtuous, excellent, kind,
well-behaved, honourable, benevolent, wholesome, serviceable,
suitable, fit, proper, just, reasonable, fair; well, healthy, strong,
sound. Maáyo siá nga táo. He is a good (virtuous, etc.) man. Maáyo gid
(iní). This is very good. This is just the thing. Very well. Maáyo
man. All right. Walâ maáyo sa ímo (sa íya, íla, etc.) kóndì----. There
is nothing better for you (him, them, etc.) than----. You (he, they,
etc.) can do nothing better than----. Maáyo (gid) kuntánì kon----. It
would be (very) good (advisable, an excellent thing, a splendid idea,
etc.) if----. Maáyo siá sing láwas. He is physically fit, healthy,
strong. (cf. áyo).

_maayó-áyo_, Beautiful, handsome, good-looking, pretty, goodly,
comely, pleasing, prepossessing, winning, attractive, engaging,
charming, fine, nice.

_maayó-ayó_, Rather well, a little better, in pretty good health, so
so. Maayóayó na siá ápang dílì pa maáyo gid. He is a little better now
(improved in health), but far from being quite well.

_mabáhaw_, Stale, old, cold, said especially of cooked food. (báhaw).

_mabáhò_, Odoriferous, odorous, fragrant, sweet smelling, scented,
perfumed, aromatic, smelling either bad or good; stinking, fetid,
malodorous, rank. This term may be applied to any strong scent whether
pleasing or disagreeable. (báhò).

_mabahô_, Stinking, fetid, malodorous, rank, emitting
a--bad,--foul,--evil smell, giving off a--stench,--bad
odour,--effluvium--, exhalation. (bahô).

_mabahúl_, (B) Plump, large and stout, large in circumference, said of
persons and things in general. Mabahúl nga táo, kalát, káhoy, baláy,
etc. A stout man, a thick rope, a big tree or large piece of wood, a
large house, etc. (bahúl) Also: rough, coarse, ill-mannered. (cf. dakô,
madámol; bástos, manól.)

_mabahúl_, (H) Coarse, rough, uneducated.

_mabákal_, Much in demand, much resorted to, selling well; going off
well. (bákal; cf. maáka).

_mabákas_, Industrious, hard-working, energetic, diligent, active,
assiduous in work. (bákas).

_mabáknal_, Crammed, stuffed, full, chock-full, choke-full, bursting,
bulging (of pockets, etc.). (báknal; cf. mabát-al).

_mabáknit_, See babáknit--a contemptuous term applied to a woman.

_mabákud_, Firm, steadfast, strong, solid, steady, reliable, not
easily shaken or moved, stanch, staunch, unshaken. (bákud).

_mabalalháson_, Sweating, etc. See mabinalháson.

_mabalaligyáon_, Selling well, salable. (cf. balígyà).

_mabaláslon_, Grateful, appreciative, thankful; giving "tit for
tat". (cf. bálus).

_mabalatiánon_, Sickly, infirm, weak (of health); liable to catch a
disease. (cf. bátì, balatían).

_mabalibádon_, (B) Full of excuses, evasive, shuffling, expert in
finding excuses, being resourceful in pretexts, expert in inventing
explanations. (cf. balibad).

_mabalibáron_, (H) See mabalibádon.

_mabalóhon_, Much-married, one who has married several times, surviving
several husbands or wives. (cf. bálo).

_mabálud_, Wavy, bent in the form of a wave, undulating, sinuous,
rippled, ruffled, corrugated; rough, rolling, choppy, billowing,
billowy (of the sea). (cf. bálud, balúd).

_mabalúdon_, (B) Wavy, rolling; stormy (of the sea).

_mabalúron_, (H) See mabalúdon. (cf. balúd).

_mabalúson_, Grateful; making a fitting return. (cf. bálus,
mabinalúson, mabáslon).

_mabangís_, Violent, cruel, fierce, harsh, ferocious, brutal,
tyrannic. (cf. bangís, mabarís, mapíntas).

_mabángkag_, Bulky, cumbersome, cumbrous, taking up much space on
account of not being compact, awkward to carry on account of size or
form, even if not heavy in weight. Mabángkag ang mga ságing nga sinipî
sa bakág. Bananas in clusters take up much room in a basket (there
being many hollow spaces). Mabángkag iníng háwla sang píspis. This
bird-cage is awkward to carry. (cf. bángkag, magámbal).

_mabáng-og_, Spoilt, rotten, bad, unpalatable, corrupt, putrified
(of food, etc.). (cf. báng-og).

_mabantâ-bantáon_, Opining, guessing, surmising,
calculating. (cf. bántà).

_mabaribádon_, (B) See mabalibádon--full of excuses, etc.


_mabarís_, Fierce, violent, harsh, cruel, hot-tempered. (cf. barís,
mabangís).

_mabasâ_, Wet, moist, damp, dank, dewy, humid, clammy, watery, soggy,
sodden, water-logged, soaked with water or any other liquid or having
some liquid on the surface. (cf. basâ).

_mabáskug_, Stiff, hard, unbending, rigid, inflexible; strong, robust,
of great strength or vigour, healthy, vigorous. (cf. báskug).

_mabaslayánon_, Sharp, pointed, etc. See baslayánon.

_mabáslon_, See mabinalúson--grateful, etc.

_mabát-al_, Crammed, stuffed full, chock-full, choke-full, bulging
out. (cf. bát-al, mabáknal, punô, butâ).

_mabayóg_, (B) Long-faced, with a long face, horse-faced,
fiddle-faced. (cf. bayóg).

_mábdus_, To be pregnant, to bear, be (big) with child, be in the
family way, be in a delicate or interesting condition. Nagamábdus
siá. She is with child or pregnant. She is in a delicate or
interesting condition. Ginpamábdus siá ni Fuláno. She was with child
by N.N. (cf. dála, búsung, sámbol, búntis).

_mabílog_, Full, complete, entire, whole; large, tall,
well-developed. Mabílog siá sing pangláwas. He is a large (tall) man.

_mabinadlúngon_, Correcting, admonishing, adviser. (cf. bádlong).

_mabinaíson_, Combative, pugnacious, quarrelsome. (cf. báis).

_mabinalák-on_, Concerned about, careful, watchful, taking a
great interest in, bestowing great attention on, solicitous
for. (cf. baláka).

_mabinalaybáyon_, Poetical, poetic, pertaining to the muse, possessing
the beauty of poetry. (baláybay).

_mabinalháson_, Sweating, sweaty, perspiring, oily, one who perspires
much and often. (bálhas).

_mabinalíkdon_, Concerned about, mindful of. (cf. balikíd, maulikirón).

_mabinalúson_, Grateful, making a fitting return. (bálus).

_mabinantáyon_, Watchful, observing, observant, heedful, prying,
keeping on the look-out, dogging another's steps. (bántay).

_mabinasáhon_, One who reads or studies much, studious, well-read,
bookworm, book-learned, given to reading. (bása).

_mabinatókon_, (H) Resisting, rebellious, stubborn, refractory,
intractable, obdurate, wilful, obstinate, opposing, withstanding,
disobedient, rebelling against orders, answering back. (cf. bátok,
mabinatóon).

_mabinatóon_, See mabinatókon. (bátò--bátok).

_mabinatyágon_, Sentimental, sensible, sensitive, feeling, easily
affected, delicate, susceptible of a sensation or feeling. (cf. bátyag,
balatyágon).

_mabinaylóhon_, Changing, changeable, shifting, fickle, variable,
inconstant; a changeling. (cf. báylo).

_mabingít_, Now and then used as an adjective, but really a verbal
form of bingít. (cf. ámog, pawíkan, lampitás).

_mabinugnóhon_, Affable, friendly, conversing amicably. (búgno).

_mabinulánon_, Moon-blind, purblind, dim-sighted, not quite clear,
indistinct, misty, blurred, bleared. Mabinulánon ang íya panúluk. His
sight is dim, he does not see clearly. (cf. búlan, bulánon).

_mabinulígon_, Helpful, aiding, lending a hand, assisting. (búlig).

_mabinusisíon_, (H) Curious, inquisitive. (cf. busísì).

_mabinutáng-butángon_, Slanderous, backbiting, reviling, calumniating,
libellous. (butángbútang).

_mabinuúngon_, (H) Breaking; breakable, fragile. (cf. búung).

_mabinuylúgon_, (H) Accompanying; sympathetic. (cf. búylog).

_mabinuyóhon_, (H) Inclining towards; inclined, accustomed, inured,
habituated, disposed. (cf. buyó).

_mabóhot_, Sultry, hot, close, stuffy, sweltry, torrid, boiling,
roasting, baking. (cf. bóhot, magín-ot).

_mabólo_, A kind of tree and its fruit.

_mabubúyok_, Captivating, alluring, enticing, inviting, tempting,
seductive. (búyok).

_mabúdhì_, Treacherous, perfidious, disloyal, traitorous. (búdhì).

_mabúdlay_, Laborious, toilsome, arduous, tedious, wearisome, irksome,
tiresome, tiring, tired. (búdlay).

_mabudongón_, Shy, bashful, timid, reticent, quiet. (cf. budóng).

_mabúdul_, Short and thick, thickset, stumpy, stubby, podgy, squab,
squat, dumpy. (cf. pudól, tipúngkò).

_mabuganáon_, Fruitful, plentiful, prolific, teeming, crowded, thick,
studded, galore. (cf. bugánà).

_mabúg-at_, Heavy, hefty, ponderous, of great weight, weighty,
back-breaking, onerous, burdensome, grave, serious. (cf. búg-at).

_mabúgnaw_, Fresh, cool, cold, chilly; indifferent. (cf. búgnaw,
matúgnaw, mayamíg, maramíg).

_mabugô_, (B) Short, etc. See malípot. (bugô--líp-ot).

_mabúhat_, Active, energetic, enterprising, vigorous, reliable
at work, sedulous, not idle or lazy. Mabúhat nga táo. An active
man. (cf. mapísan, makarî, maúkud).

_mabúhay_, (B) Long (of time), lasting, protracted, prolonged,
enduring, lingering, tarrying. (cf. búhay; madúgay).

_mabúkag_, Swelling, rising, bulging, disarranged, dishevelled,
in a tangle, said of loose hemp-fibres, wool, hair, etc. (búkag).

_mabulákbulákon_, Flowery; embellished (of speech etc.; cf. mabulákon).

_mabulákon_, Flowery, full of flowers, like flowers, in blossom,
in bloom. Mabulákon nga umá. A field full of flowers. Mabulákon nga
hámbal. Flowery speech. (cf. búlak; himulák, hamulák--bearing flowers).

_mabulígon_, Helpful. etc. See mabinulígon.

_mabululáwon_, Amenable to spells. See bululáwon.

_mabulúngon, mabulungón_, Admiring, astonished, with wonder or
amazement, surprised, in surprise. (cf. búlung).

_mabulús_, Next in turn, succeeding, following, coming, ensuing. Sa
túig nga mabulús. Next year. The coming year. (cf. bulús).

_mabulús-búlus_, Alternate, turn and turn about, in turns, in
shifts. (cf. bulúsbúlus).

_mabúndul_, Slow, dilatory, sluggish, tardy, laggard, not quick or
swift. (cf. búndul, lágday, mahínay, pákok).

_mabungáhon, mabungahón_, Fruitful, productive, prolific, giving
(good) results. (cf. búnga).

_mabúsug_, Smarting, hurting, throbbing, painful, aching, sore (of
toothache, of the sting of a scorpion, of the prick of a needle, etc.).

_mabútlà_, Nauseating, loathsome, sickening, revolting, exciting a
feeling of nausea. (cf. bútlà; masúm-ud).

_mabuungón_, Fragile, breakable, brittle. (cf. búung).

_mabúut_, Prudent, intelligent, wise, clever; willing, obedient,
tame, domesticated, tractable, docile. (cf. buút).

_madábung_, Dense, thick, full of foliage, leafy, bushy. (dábung).

_madagáang_, Bright, vivid, gaudy, garish, showy, conspicuous, glaring,
standing out in clear, bright colours. (dagáang).

_madagaáng_, See madagáang.

_madagángdang_, See madagáang id. (dagángdang).

_madagásà_, Plentiful, abounding, abundant, galore. (cf. abúnda,
dagáyà, bugánà, dagásà).

_madágmit_, Glib, inconsiderate in speech, flippant of speech; swift,
quick, at once, without delay. (dágmit).

_madahás_, Daring, audacious, bold, venturesome. (cf. makáhas, dahás).

_madáhog_, Sliding, or gliding off; selling well. Madáhog gid lang
dirí ang mga ginabalígyà nga páhò. The mangoes sold here are going
like hot cakes. In this latter sense cf. maáka, mabákal id.

_madahól-dahól_, Pretty much, fair amount, tolerably well,
satisfactory. Madahóldahól nga kwárta ang ginhátag ko sa ímo; ngáa
man nga nagakósmod pa ikáw? I have given you quite a little money;
why then are you still complaining or fretting? (dahóldahól).

_madalás_, Precipitate, quick, hasty, rash, thoughtless, impetuous,
impulsive, without much reflection or consideration. (dalás).

_madalayónon_, Continual, constant, persevering. (cf. dáyon,
madinayónon).

_madalî_, Quick, immediate, without delay, swift, at once, prompt,
fast, speedy, rapid, fleet, in haste, with haste, with despatch. Sa
madalî ukón sa madúgay. Sooner or later. (cf. dalì, madásig).

_madálig_, (B) Nice, beautiful, pleasing, attractive, pretty, good,
comely, handsome. (cf. dálig, matahúm, magayón, maányag, maáyo).

_madálum_, Deep, profound, abysmal; intense, clever, subtle. Madálum
nga túbig. Deep water. Madálum nga hámbal. A subtle or clever
saying. Madálum nga pagpangusísà. An intense (thorough)
investigation. Madálum nga pagpanghunâhúnà. Deep, profound
thinking. (cf. dálum).

_madámò_, (H) Many, a great number, numerous, a lot of, a great
multitude or quantity, much. (cf. dámò).

_madámol_, Thick, not thin (of boards, sheets, or the like). Madámol
nga tápì. A thick plank. Madámol nga ulán. A heavy shower of
rain. Madámol nga pílak. Thick silver i.e. plenty of (much)
money. (cf. dámol).

_madámpig_, Partner, assistant, helper, associate, accomplice,
backer, confederate, ally, partisan, seconder, upholder, supporter,
abettor. (cf. dámpig, kadámpig).

_madampígon_, See madámpig.

_mád-an_, From malá--to dry, etc. (cf. málhan, mál-an).

_madánggà_, Conspicuous from afar, bright, bright of colour, gaudy,
glaring-vivid, showy. (cf. dánggà, madagángdang).

_madánlak_, Slippery, greasy, unctuous, soft, fatty, especially said
of lard, suet and the like. (dánlak).

_madánlog_, Slippery, greasy, very smooth, not providing a firm
foothold. (dánlog).

_madápig_, See madámpig.

_madapígon_, See madampígon, mabulígon, mabinulígon.

_madásig_, Quick, rapid, agile, fleet, swift, fast, speedy. (dásig).

_madasón_, Following, succeeding, successive, coming, ensuing,
next. (dasón). Sa madasón nga ádlaw. On the next or following
day. (cf. masunúd).

_madátà_, Enduring, lasting, long, continual; much, plentiful,
abounding, abundant. (dátà). (cf. masamí, masayón, masúnsun; bugánà,
dagáyà, etc.).

_madaúg-daúgon_, (H) Self-willed, overbearing, insolent, proud,
arrogant, imperious, domineering, dictatorial. (cf. daúg).

_madawâ-dawâ_, Satisfactory, pretty good, sufficient, decent, not bad,
not very much, but not too little either. (dawâdawâ). (cf. dirâdirâ,
ayádayád, maáyo gáwa, madahóldahól).

_madawóg_, Growing well, spreading, expanding. (cf. dawóg).

_madáyà_, Cheating, tricksy, wily, defrauding,
fraudulent. (dáyà). (cf. madinayáon, malimbóngon).

_madáyad_, (B) Good, well, nice, beautiful. (cf. maayád, maáyo).

_madayáw_, Vain, ostentatious, conceited, showing off, dandyish,
snobbish, foppish, dandified. Ang mga dalága nga madayáw kag lándì
sing pamatásan----. Girls that are ostentatious and frivolous in
their behaviour----. (dayáw).

_madinagáton_, Sea-sick; liable to become sea-sick. (cf. dagát).

_madinalagánon_, Running, racing, hurrying, coursing, careering,
flying, hastening, rushing along. (cf. dalágan).

_madinalóon_, Affectionate, caressing, petting, fondling, fond, kind,
tender. (cf. dálò, mapinalanggáon).

_madinamgóhon_, Dreamer, visionary; dreaming, dreamy,
vague. (cf. dámgo).

_madinangáton_, Obtaining, conducive to, leading to, tending to,
helpful in getting possession of. (cf. dángat).

_madinaúg-daúgon_, Self-willed, etc. See madaúgdaúgon.

_madinaúton_, Pernicious, nefarious, injurious, obnoxious,
bad. (cf. dáut).

_madinayáon_, Cheating, tricksy, etc. See madáyà id.

_madinayónon_, See madalayónon.

_madinuhá-duháon_, Dubious, doubting, doubtful, hesitating,
fluctuating, in doubt, perplexed, in a quandary,--pickle,--predicament,
undecided, unable to make up one's mind; a doubter. (cf. duhádúha).

_madinuhúl-duhúlon_, See madinuhúl-dúlon.

_madinuhúl-dúlon_, Passing--, transferring--, sending--, handing--,
a thing on, or to, someone else; a tell-tale, chatterbox. (cf. dóhol).

_madinumdúmon_, Thoughtful, recollecting, regardful, remembering,
mindful. (cf. dúmdum).

_madinumtánon_, Hating, spiteful, malignant, malevolent, vindictive,
vengeful, rancorous, full of ill will, bearing a grudge. (cf. dumút).

_madinuyúgon, madinuyugón_, Inclined, leaning towards, prone, warped,
biased, prejudiced, predisposed, disposed, bent upon. (cf. dúyug).

_mádlus_, A gale, squall, stiff breeze, blast, a cap of wind; violent,
strong, blustering (of wind). Nagmádlus ang hangin. The wind blew
strongly. Ginmadlusán kamí sang hángin sa sakayán. We encountered
violent winds while we were on the boat.

_mádmad_, To become fully awake, wide-awake, to get one's thoughts
clear, to wake up. Walâ pa siá makamádmad kag namáhaw na. He is
not yet quite awake and has taken breakfast already. Nakamádmad na
ikáw--or--namadmarán na ikáw? Are you now wide-awake, are you quite
clear in your head? (cf. marásmas).

_madolókton_, Liable to be adhered to, susceptible of, amenable to, not
unlikely to catch, apt to incur. Iníng táo madolókton sang ínit. This
man is very liable to change colour (to become very red in the face,
or the like) through exposure to the heat of the sun. (cf. dokót).

_madorogsánon_, (B) Quarrelsome, irascible, bad-tempered, irritable,
choleric, peevish, touchy, petulant, soon exasperated. (cf. dógsan,
maakígon).

_mádre_, (Sp. madre) Mother; sister of a religious order or community;
nun. (cf. ilóy, nánay).

_madrína_, (Sp. madrina) Godmother. (cf. manínay).

_madúgà_, Juicy, luscious, lush, succulent, sappy, full of sap or
juice. (cf. dúgà).

_madúgay_, Long, prolonged, protracted, drawn out, lasting a long
time. (cf. dúgay, mabúhay).

_maduhá-duháon_, Doubting, etc. See madinuháduháon.

_madulúm_, Dark, dim, dusk, dusky, obscure, destitute of light;
concealed or shrouded in darkness, mysterious. (cf. dulúm).

_madulúm-dúlum_, Dim. of madulúm. Dim, dusky, rather dark.

_madúlup_, Industrious, busy, occupied, very active. (cf. dúlup).

_madúmton_, See madúmut--full of hate, etc.

_madúmut_, Full of hate, spiteful, vindictive, rancorous, malignant,
malicious. (cf. dumút).

_madumúton_, Full of hate, etc. See madúmut.

_madunutón_, Rotting, decaying, decayed, carrion, decomposing,
putrifying, putrid, rotten. (cf. dúnut, dunút).

_madúrup_, See madúlup.

_madúyug_, Inclined towards, attracted, swayed, allured, warped,
biased, prejudiced, predisposed. (dúyug).


_mag-_, A prefix used chiefly in the following ways:
1) to denote the active infinitive, e.g. Hándà na kamó maglakát? Are
you now ready to set out? Malúyag akó magtán-aw sinâ. I want to see
that. Magtuón ka magsulát sing maáyo. Learn to write well.
2) to form the active imperative, e.g. Maghalín ka dirâ. Be
off. Go away from there. Magtúman ka siní. Do this. Fulfil this
faithfully. Magkáon na kamó. Now, eat your meal. Go to dinner. Indì
ka magbúhat sinâ. Don't do that. Dílì ka magsúgid sinâ sa íya. Don't
tell him that.
3) To form the active negative with "índì", expressing a
disinclination, objection or lack of intention, e.g. Indì akó
magbayó. I am not going to pound rice. I will not pound rice. Nanáy,
si Hosé índì magtúman sang ímo nga ginsógò. Mother, José is not
doing--or--will not do what you told him. Dì (dílì) siá magtámbong,
konó, sa ámon bádò. They say that he is not taking part in our
entertainment.
4) To form the past active negative with "walâ". Walâ siá magabút. He
did not come. Walâ siá magkádto dídto. He has not gone there. Walâ
pa siá magpanyága. He has not had his dinner yet.
5) to form nouns (frequently by reduplicating the first syllable
of the root, e. g. magtutúon--teacher (tuón); magbubúlung--doctor,
physician (bulúng); magsusúlat--writer (sulát); mag-amáy--father;
mag-anák--child, son, daughter; mag-ilóy--mother; magluyó--partner;
etc. etc.

_maga-_, A verbal prefix used to denote:
1) the active future, e.g. Buás magalakát akó sa Ilóngílong. To-morrow
I will walk to Iloilo. Karón sa hápon magaabút gíkan sa Manílà ang
akon amáy. This afternoon my father will arrive from Manila. Kon
bayáan mo dirâ sa ínit ang bíno tínto magaáslum. If you leave the
red wine there in the heat of the sun, it will go sour. (cf. ma-).
2) a present negation with "walâ", e.g. Si Hosé walâ magtánum kahápon,
walâ man siá magatánum karón kag índì man siá magtánum buás. José did
not plant rice yesterday, neither is he planting rice to-day nor will
he do so to-morrow. This "maga-" under 2) is never shortened into
"ma-".

_magabók_, Decaying, decayed, rotten, decomposed, dilapidated, ruinous,
falling to pieces. (gabók).

_magabokón_, See magabók.

_magágmay, magagmáy_, Small, little, tiny, wee, diminutive, slender,
thin, fine. (cf. magamáy, gágmay).

_magágming_, Dim. of magágmay. Rather small, etc.

_magahî-gahî_, The best of a bad lot, the least objectionable
among a number of things or persons not coming up to the
standard. (cf. gahîgahî).

_magáhud_, Noisy, boisterous, rowdy, loud, obstreperous, clamorous,
uproarious. (cf. gáhud).

_magalámhon_, Averse to noise or boisterousness, unsociable, retired,
one who keeps aloof from the bustle, noise and strife of social
life. (cf. gamó).

_magalámpò_, Intercessor, advocate, patron, mediator, intermediary,
arbitrator, go-between. (cf. ámpò, umalámpò).

_magalán_, Conspicuous, bright, vivid, gaudy, glaring, showy
(of colours): dandy, spruce, ostentatious, making oneself
conspicuous. Magalán ang duág nga pulá. Red colours are conspicuous.

_magalaní_, A rice-harvester, reaper. (áni). (cf. mangalaní).

_magál-um_, Cloudy, dark, lowering, covered with clouds. (gál-um).

_magalúng_, Boisterous, uproarious, obstreperous, loud, clamorous,
noisy, making a racket. (cf. galúng, magáhud).

_magamáy_, Small, little; slender, thin. See magágmay.

_magámbal_, Bulky, large; inconvenient, unwieldy, cumbrous, cumbersome,
awkward to carry on account of size or shape. (cf. mabángkag, gámbal).

_magamó_, Trouble-maker; turbulent, tumultuous, riotous, disorderly,
out of hand, disturbing, radical, rowdy, bad, a disturber of the peace,
one who causes an excitement or upsets an established (peaceful)
order. (cf. gamó, magarók).


_mág-an_, To lighten, be or become light of weight, to alleviate,
relieve, ease, mitigate, assuage, levitate. Buhíni ang ímo lúlan túbtub
nga magmág-an. Lessen your burden till it becomes light. Nagmág-an na
ang ákon kalisúd--or--namag-anán na akó sang ákon kalisúd. My trouble
has now become easy to bear. Mag-aná sing diótay ang ímo dalá, kay
támà kabúg-at. Lighten your load a little, for it is too heavy.

_magána_, (Sp. gana) Nice, savoury, tasty, delicious, delectable,
dainty, palatable; relishing, having a taste or liking for;
stimulating, exciting (whetting) the appetite, appetizing.

_maganás_, Tasteless, insipid, watery, especially applied to fruits and
vegetables. (maganás is opposed to marabó--savoury, tasty). (ganás).

_magánhop_, A kind of tree, whose leaves somewhat resemble those of
the tamarind.

_maganó, mag-anó_, A verbal form of anó. With "bisán
(kon)"--However----. Whatsoever----. Bisán (kon) maganó kadakô
ang (sang) íya kinaádman----. However great his learning may
be----. Whatever (whatsoever) the extent of his learning----.

_magánsal_, Boisterous, noisy, etc. See magáhud. (cf. gánsal,
magalúng).

_magápà_, Dense, bushy, umbrageous, of thick foliage, with drooping,
shady branches. (cf. gápà, madábung).

_magarás_, Rough, harsh, uneven, bumpy, rutty, bad, not smooth. Magarás
nga dálan. A rough (bad) road. Magarás nga hámbal. A rough (coarse,
harsh) speech or saying. (cf. garás).

_magarís_, Harsh, fierce, violent. (garís; cf. mabarís).

_magarók_, Rotten, decayed, carrion, decomposed, putrid, in a state
of corruption or putrefaction, turbulent, disturbing the peace,
tumultuous, riotous, causing a commotion. (cf. garók, kagarokán;
magamú; gabók).

_magarót_, Noisy, boisterous; voluble of speech, gabbling, talking
very quickly and consequently not distinctly, pouring forth a flood
of words; dense, thick, crowded, near together. (cf. garót).

_magásto_, Expensive, dear, costly, extravagant, wasteful. (cf. gasto,
kostóso, maámbas, mahákug, mahinguyángon).

_magátaw_, Bright, glaring, showy, vivid, conspicuous, outstanding,
visible from afar. (cf. gátaw, magalán).

_magáy_, A kind of roughly made, transparent cloth used for decoration,
etc., bunting.

_magayón_, Beautiful, handsome, nice, etc. (gayón; cf. maayóáyo,
maányag, maayádáyad, matahúm, madálig, maámbong).

_magbabálus_, Retributive, rewarding or retaliating, meeting out a
fitting recompense or a condign punishment, (bálus).

_magbalántay_, Guard, watchman, watch, sentinel, sentry, shepherd,
guardian, keeper, look-out, observer. (bántay).

_magbubúhat_, Maker, creator, manufacturer, artificer. (búhat).

_magbubúhis_, Tax-gatherer, toll-taker, collector of customs. (buhís).

_magbubúlung_, Doctor, physician, medicine-man, medical man, leech,
healer. (bulúng).

_magbubúnyag_, One who baptizes, baptist, minister of baptism; one
who waters gardens, etc. (búnyag).

_mághat_, Violent, ferocious, brutal, fierce, cruel; wild, not tamed,
uneducated. (cf. maísug, mapíntas, mabangís; mailá, simarón).

_maghilihátì_, This term seems to be employed only after a negative
particle (índì, dílì) and then conveys the meaning of: very loud,
uproarious, boisterous, so as to interfere with any ordinary
conversation, etc. Dílì maghilibátì nga ulán, dagúob, etc. A very
heavy downpour of rain, a very loud thunderclap, etc. Waláy lábut sang
índì maghilibátì nga sinínggit sang mga táo----. Notwithstanding the
deafening shouts of the men----. (cf. batî).

_magí_, Maguey, agave, century plant that yields a fibre used in the
manufacture of ropes and clothes. (cf. píta).

_magílok_, (H) Full of fine, dusty chaff. (cf. gílok).

_magím-ang_, Mud-stained, dirty, soiled, sludgy, miry. (cf. gím-ang).

_maginal-úmon_, Cloudy, full of clouds; beclouded, confused,
fuddled. (cf. gálum).

_maginanyáton_, Alluring, enticing, captivating, bewitching,
attractive; cheating, deceitful. (cf. gányat).

_magín-ot_, Close, sultry, hot, stuffy, torrid, sweltry,
boiling, roasting, baking, stifling, scorching, suffocating (of
heat). (cf. gín-ot, mabóhot).

_magirámon_, Active, busy, handy, always occupied in some work;
tranquil, peaceful, at ease, without worry, going one's way
undisturbed, leading a quiet life. (cf. girámon; mapísan, matándus,
makarî, mabúhat).

_magisáng_, Rough, rasping, raspy, grating, painful to the touch,
not smooth. (cf. gisáng, magísrang).

_magíska_, Angry, sharp, cutting, harsh, acrimonious, severe,
dour, ironical, sarcastic, sardonic, rough, not gentle (of
speech). (cf. gíska, mapadás).

_magísrang_, See magisáng.

_magka_--, See nagaka--. The "magka--" is often shortened to ma-,
e.g. índì ka magkahádluk, magkakúlbà, magkasubô (mahádluk, makúlbà,
masubô), etc.

_magkaanák_, Children, sons and daughters. Kamí nga mga magkaanák
námon. We and our sons and daughters. Silá nga magkaanák níla. They
and their children. (cf. anák).

_magkahimatâ_, Relations, kith and kin. Kamó nga magkahimatâ nínyo. You
and your relations. (cf. bátà, himatâ).

_mágkal_, Boa constrictor.

_magkinumariháy_, The feminine of magkulumpariháy. (cf. kompári,
komári).

_magkubús_, At least, at any rate, at all events, on the lowest
estimate. Ang kasaplidánan sináng kambuyahán sa magkubús mga tátlo ka
gatús ka mángmang sa binulánbúlan. That firm, at the lowest estimate,
is making a profit of three hundred pesos a month. Sohólan ikáw dirâ
sa magkubús sing mamísos ang ádlaw. Your wages there will be not
less than one peso a day. Iníng pinunâ nga dútà, kon magkubús na gid
(sa magkubús), magapatubás sa tuígtúig sing kalím-an ka pásong nga
humáy. This piece of land produces at least fifty bushels of rice a
year. (cf. kubús).

_magkulumpariháy_, Those related to each other by a spiritual alliance,
as by means of Baptism or Confirmation. (cf. kompári).

_maglíbut_, Round about, around, encircling, enclosing,
surrounding. Maglíbut sa plása may matahúm nga kodál. Round the
public square there is a beautiful fence. Sa baláy maglíbut may isá ka
malápad nga pamulákan. A large garden surrounds the house. (cf. líbut).

_mág-o_, See pamág-o--to be new to a place, etc. (cf. bág-o, hínlaw).

_magsasákit_, Punisher, one who inflicts pain or administers
punishment, torturer, tormenter, tormentor, executioner. (cf. sákit,
sakít).

_magsusúlat_, Writer; correspondent (of a newspaper, etc.); author,
literary man. (cf. sulát).

_magtalísay_, A kind of tree.

_magtutúon_, Teacher, instructor, master, professor, preceptor, tutor,
pedagogue. (tuón; cf. manunúon).

_maguláng_, First-born, heir, the eldest brother or sister; an elder
brother or sister. (gúlang).

_magulútmon_, Hungry, famished, voracious, a great eater or feeder,
one who wants to eat very frequently. (cf. gutúm).

_magúnum_, Dark, leaden, cloudy, lowering, overcast. (gúnum).

_magúphal_, Dry and hard, difficult to swallow. (cf. gúphal, kagúphal;
maápgas, maápgot).

_magútud, mag-útud_, Brothers, sisters, brothers and sisters. Ang
mga mag-útud. Brothers and sisters. Iníng mga magútud daláyon gid
lang nagasinúay. These brothers are always quarrelling. (cf. útud).

_mahábul_, Blunt, dull, said of edged instruments; opposed to
matalúm--sharp of edge, cutting well. (hábul; talúm).

_mahádluk_, Afraid, frightened, affrighted, scared, alarmed,
panic-stricken, fearful, shy, timid, timorous, funky. (hádluk).

_mahadlúkon_, See mahádluk, mahaladlúkon.

_mahádok_, Wavy, billowy, undulating, ruffled. (hádok).


_mahágak_, Boasting, bluffing, bragging, boastful, braggart,
talking proudly of one's achievements, vaunting, talking big,
ostentatious. (cf. hágak, maándak, maagrót).

_mahágbong_, Shady, shaded, shadowy, overshadowed, sheltered from
the glare of light; dark, cloudy. (hágbong).

_mahágnop_, Haunted, ghostly, mysterious, visited by strange
apparitions. (hágnop).

_mahágò_, Hard, heavy, tiresome, toilsome, exacting, difficult,
strenuous, laborious, fatiguing, said of work; mahágò is opposed to
mahúay--easy, light. (hágò; húay).

_mahág-os_, Lean, etc. See mahágwos.

_mahágpis_, Lean, thin, emaciated, wan, skinny, spare. (cf. hágpis,
maníwang, kalamanít).

_mahágpok_, Crisp, brittle, friable, easily crumbling, crumbly, short,
fresh (said of bread, cakes, or the like). (cf. hágpok).

_mahagúp_, Tame, docile, gentle, mild, domesticated,
inoffensive. (cf. hagúp).

_mahágwos_, (B) Lean, thin, pale, wan, lank, gaunt, emaciated, skinny,
spare, wasted. (cf. hágwos, mahág-os, mahágpis).

_mahákug_, Expensive, wasteful, needing much, greedy, avid, avaricious,
ambitious, causing great outlay. (cf. hákug, maámbas, kostóso).

_mahál_, Dear, high-priced, expensive, costly, precious, esteemed,
valuable, estimable; to make or become dear, cost much; to appreciate,
esteem highly. Nagmahál na ang humáy. Rice has become dear. Mahalá ang
ímo ginabalígyà. Sell your wares dear or at a high price. Indì mo siá
pagpamahalán siníng mga sapátos nga ímo ginabalígyà. Don't sell him
your boots at a high price. Kon dílì mahál báklon ko iní. If it is
not dear I'll buy this. Ang Mahál nga Diós. The good God. Ang Mahál
nga Bírhen. The Blessed Virgin. Minamahál ko nga ábyan. My dear friend.

_mahaladlúkon_, (H) Afraid, timid, fearful. (cf. hádluk, mahádluk,
mahadlúkon).

_mahalapoón_, (H) Out of breath, panting--, gasping--, for breath,
short of breath, breathless, wheezing, one who soon becomes exhausted
for lack of breath. (cf. hápò, mahapoón).

_mahaláron_, Ready--, willing--, to sacrifice or to contribute;
generous, liberal. (cf. hálad).

_mahalimbawáon_, (H) Metaphorical, figurative, in the form of a
comparison or illustration. (cf. halimbáwà).

_mahálit_, Destructive, injurious, obnoxious, baneful, poisonous,
painful, noxious; envious, spiteful, insidious, ready to cause
damage. (cf. hálit).

_mahalíton_, See mahálit.

_mahál-mahál_, Dim. of mahál. Rather dear, expensive, costly,
precious, valuable.

_mahalúngon_, (H) Cherishing, careful, solicitous, affectionate,
bestowing great care or attention upon, appreciative. (cf. hálung,
mahinalúngon).

_mahalús_, Famished, etc. See mahálwos.

_mahalús-halús_, Neither poor nor rich, moderate, mediocre, middling,
satisfactory, not too much nor too little, of moderate means, rather
well off, middle-class. (cf. mahumánhumán, mahingánhingán, dawâdawâ,
dirâdirâ).

_mahálwos_, Famished, exhausted, hungry, weak (on account of lack of
food (cf. hálwos).

_mahámtang_, Even, smooth, level, steady, placed firmly or evenly,
on a firm foundation. (butáng).

_mahám-ug_, Wet, damp, moist, dank, dewy. (hám-ug).

_mahamúg_, See mahám-ug. (hamúg--hám-ug).

_mahamungayáon_, Peaceful, tranquil, happy, quiet, felicitous,
blessed; abundant, plentiful, fruitful, plenteous, teeming,
copious. (cf. hamungáyà).

_mahamúok_, Deep, profound, restful, sound, said of
sleep. (cf. hamúok).

_mahamút_, Scented, aromatic, fragrant, perfumed, odorous, odoriferous,
sweet-smelling, emitting a sweet or pleasant odour (hamút; cf. mahumút
id.).

_mahanáhay_, Wide, spacious, roomy, extensive, ample, vast. (hanáhay).

_mahanáyak_, Open, clear, unobstructed; extensive, wide. (hanáyak).

_mahanáyap_, See mahanáyak.

_mahánip_, Orderly, well arranged or regulated: smooth,
sleek. (cf. hánip).

_mahánlud_, (B) Open, wide, spacious, said of a country-side. (hánlud).

_mahanús_, (B) Slender, thin. (hanús).

_mahápay_, Inclined, tilted, leaning sideways, bent down,
stooping. (hápay; cf. hapáy).

_mahápdì_, Smarting, sore, raw, tender, painful, racking, excruciating,
agonizing, severe, shooting, burning, gnawing, sharp, stabbing,
said of pain. (cf. hápdì).

_mahápò_, Now and then used as an adjective, but in reality only a
verbal form of hápò.

_mahapoón_, Out of breath, short of breath, breathing hard, panting--,
gasping--, labouring--, gulping--, for breath, breathless, winded,
blown, wheezing; liable to suffer from shortness of breath. (cf. hápò,
mahalapoón).

_mahapús_, Easy, facile, not difficult to accomplish. (hapús;
(cf. mahulás).

_mahásà_, Much in demand, popular, frequented, much resorted to. (hásà;
cf. maáka, mabákal).

_mahasoón_, One who is amenable to flattery, easily duped or cheated;
tricky, sharp, cunning. (cf. hásò).

_mahátal_, Talkative, communicative, chatter-box, chatty, gossip,
garrulous, loquacious. (cf. hátal, buraán, wakalán).

_maháwan_, Clear, open, unobstructed, treeless, a clearing, said
especially of fields or country-sides. (cf. háwan).

_mahî_, Nice, beautiful, perfect, flawless, unblemished, faultless,
uninjured, without flaw or defect; to be or become nice, etc. Tagái
akó sing isá ka pánid nga mahî (mamahî) nga tabákò, kay himóon ko
nga kapóti. Give me a flawless tobacco-leaf, for I am going to use
it as a wrapper. Nagmahî na ang guyá sang bátà. The child's face has
developed beautifully,--has become nice, or the like. (cf. mamahî,
ayóáyo, maayóáyo, hímpit, lántip, gayón, ányag).

_mahibaloánon_, Knowing, wise, sapient, learned, experienced, clever,
dexterous, skillful. (cf. hibaló, aláman, manginalámon, maábtik).

_mahidláwon_, Home-sick, yearning to see, longing after, wishing to
meet or see absent friends and relatives, nostalgic. (cf. hídlaw).

_mahigál_, Lewd, unchaste, dissolute, immoral, wanton, libertine,
rakish, debauched. (cf. higál, hiwalán).

_mahigayónon_, Opportune, convenient, advisable,
proper. (cf. kahigayónan, kahigayonán).

_mahígkò_, Dirty, tarnished, soiled, stained, sullied, foul, filthy,
grimy, mucky, defiled, unclean, impure, obscene. (cf. hígkò, músing,
dágtà, bulíng, lagôlagô).

_mahígmaw_, Not adjective, but a verbal form of hígmaw--to relish
new things and experiences, etc.

_mahigugmáon_, Loving, tender, kind, warm, affectionate,
tender-hearted, full of kindness and tenderness. (cf. gúgma, higúgma).

_mahigús-higús_, Less or smaller than required, not as large as, not
enough, not quite sufficient, below the size or standard of a thing
serving as a comparison. (cf. higúshigús, kúlang, kabús, kulábus).

_mahíkaw_, Envious, invidious, envying another his position, quality
or property. (cf. híkaw, mahikawón, mahísà, mahisaón).

_mahikawón_, See mahíkaw.

_mahikayón_, Censorious, fault-finding, cynical, captious, carping,
hypercritical, slighting, disparaging. (cf. híkay, mamulayón).

_mahílab_, (H) Empty of stomach, feeling a turning of the stomach
due to hunger, fear, a severe shock or excitement. (cf. hílab).

_mahilabtánon_, Meddling, interfering, meddlesome, officious,
intrusive, apt to intervene or take part in; a busybody. (cf. lábut,
hilabút).

_mahilákon_, (H) Regretting, regretful, full of regret, bewailing or
missing the loss or absence of, cherishing the memory of something;
careful, solicitous, taking good care of, unwilling to part
with. (cf. hílak).

_manilás_, Ticklish, irritating, having a creepy or ticklish feeling,
easily tickled; nervous, excited. (cf. hilás).

_mahilawáson_, Fornicating, lecherous, lustful, lewd,
unchaste. (cf. hiláwas, maúlag, mahigál, hiwalán).

_mahilidláwon_, Yearning after, longing for, etc. See mahidláwon.

_mahilíton_, Retired, modest, unobtrusive; in a corner, out of the way,
hidden. (cf. hilít).

_mahílway_, Well-ordered, properly arranged, orderly; free,
independent. Pangolohán nga mahílway (hílway). A well ordered
government, an orderly national government that is not under the
control of a foreign power, a free or independent government. The
simple hílway is more in use as an adjective than mahílway.

_mahî-mahî, mahî-máhì_, Dim. and Freq. of mahí--to be or become
nice, etc.

_mahimalúson_, Retaliating, revengeful, longing for--, taking--,
revenge, resentful, vengeful, vindictive. (cf. bálus, himálus,
himalús).

_mahimayáon_, Glorious, blessed, blissful, happy, enjoying the
happiness of heaven; splendid, grand, brilliant, fine. (cf. himáyà).

_mahímpit_, Now and then used for hímpit--perfect, consummate, ideal,
complete. (cf. lántip).

_mahimud-úson_, Energetic, diligent, active, making great efforts,
vigorous, striving hard. (cf. himúd-os, mapísan, maúkud, matinguháon).

_mahimulatón_, Desirous, anxious, wishing, eager, earnest, zealous,
longing. (cf. himúlat).

_mahimulús_, Useful, of use, serviceable, advantageous, profitable,
of service. (cf. pulús, himulús, kapuslánan, mahimulúslon).

_mahimulúslon_, See mahimulús. Also: taking advantage of, profiting
by, making good use of an opportunity.

_mahimulusulón_, See mahimulúslon id.

_mahimúnung_, Quiet, calm, soundless, tranquil. (cf. púnong, himúnung).

_mahimunúngon_, See mahimúnung.

_mahimúyung_, See mahimúnung id. (himúyung--himúnung).

_mahimuyúngon_, See mahimúnung.

_mahínà_, Scarce, difficult to obtain or encounter,
rare. (hínà). (cf. maíwat).

_mahinakíton_, Hurtful, something that hurts, inflicting pain, painful;
spiteful, revengeful, vindictive. (hinakít, sákit, sakít).

_mahinalakhákon_, Very funny, ridiculous, exciting laughter or
merriment. (cf. halákhak).

_mahinalángpon_, Intelligent, apt, smart, sharp or quick of
understanding, grasping readily an idea or insinuation. (hangúp).

_mahinalúngon_, Cherishing, solicitous, taking great care of,
regardful, kind, fond, affectionate, treating with tenderness and
affection, paying great attention to. (hálong).

_mahinandáon_, Ready, prompt, getting things ready, providing,
provident, thoughtful, preparatory, prepared. (cf. hándà).

_mahinandúmon_, Ambitious, desirous, covetous, anxious. (cf. hándum).

_mahinangpónon_, See mahinalángpon id. (hangúp).

_mahinangúpon_, See mahinalángpon--intelligent, etc.

_mahinatágon_, (H) Liberal, generous, free, munificent, bountiful,
open-handed, giving freely, not stingy. (cf. hátag, maálwan).

_mahínay_, Slow, tardy, leisurely, unhurried, deliberate, noiseless,
careful, tender, soft, gentle; dawdling, loitering, sauntering,
laggard. (cf. hínay, pákok, búndul; mainamlígon, matinatápon).


_mahingabúton, mahingabutón_, Pursuing, prosecuting, persecuting,
revengeful, vindictive, aggressive, hostile; hankering after, desirous,
ambitious. (cf. hingabút).

_mahingamóhon, mahingamohón_, Desirous of, wishing for, wishful,
wistful, craving, hankering after, yearning for, longing for, covetous,
ambitious. (cf. hingamó).

_mahingán-hingán_, (B) Of some means or use, neither poor
nor rich, possessed of moderate means, neither much nor very
little. (hingánhingán). (cf. mahumánhumán, mahalúshalús).

_mahinguyángon_, (H) Spending much, wasteful, prodigal, lavish,
extravagant, spendthrift, making great out-lays in money,
etc. (hinguyáng; cf. magásto, palagásto).

_mahíning_, (H) Lustrous, shining, shiny, polished, gleaming,
burnished, furbished, bright. (híning). (cf. masilíng).

_mahiníphípon_, Bribing, suborning, corrupting. (híphip).

_mahínlas_, Clean, not rusty, shiny, shining, bright (of steel,
etc.). (cf. hínlas, mahíning).

_mahinláwon_, Home-sick, nostalgic, feeling out of sorts in a new place
or in new surroundings, not growing well in new soil (said especially
of plants transferred to another site). (cf. hínlaw, mahidláwon).

_mahínlò_, Clean, smooth, even, fair (of skin, etc.). (cf. hínlò,
matínlò).

_mahinoklógon_, Compassionate, tender, mild, merciful, commiserating,
condoling, kind, clement. (cf. hinóklog, malolóy-on, maawáon).

_mahinulsúlon_, Repentant, penitent, contrite, regretting, remorseful,
sorry for past wrongs or mistakes. (cf. hinúlsul).

_mahinunâhunáon_, Thoughtful, pensive, mindful, heedful, careful,
wary. (cf. hunâhúnà).

_mahinusáyon, mahinusayón_, Well ordered, well regulated, inclined
to order, averse to disorder, orderly, regular. (cf. húsay).

_mahiól_, Hard, trying, difficult; poor, miserable. (hiól).

_mahípid_, (H) Neat, trim, dapper, spruce, smart, smug, spick and span,
well groomed, well dressed, well arranged. (cf. hípid).

_mahípig_, (B) See mahípid.

_mahípus_, Silent, quiet, keeping quiet, keeping one's counsel,
taciturn, sparing of words, not talkative, uncommunicative, mum, dumb,
holding one's tongue, keeping one's mouth shut; retired, reserved,
modest. (cf. hípus, mahipusón).

_mahipusón_, See mahípus.

_mahíras_, Miserly, stingy, closefisted, niggardly, mean,
parsimonious. (cf. híras, maímot, maínot).

_mahirinláwon_, Home-sick, nostalgic. See mahinláwon.

_mahírup_, Intimate, very confidential, affectionate, friendly,
familiar, close, close friend, crony. (cf. hírup).

_mahísà_, Envious, invidious, jealous, spiteful, grudging, malicious,
malignant. (cf. hísà, mahisaón, maníkaw).

_mahisaón_, See mahísà.

_mahiugyónon_, Helping, helpful, cooperating, assisting one another,
in agreement, harmonious, united, working in unison for the common
good. (cf. hiúgyon, mabinulígon, matinatabángon).

_mahiutúron_, Fraternal, brotherly, sisterly. (cf. útud).

_mahiwál_, With lolling tongue, lolling the tongue, putting out
the tongue, hanging out the tongue (as a dog panting for breath);
garrulous, frivolous, restless, loose (of morals. (cf. hiwál, hiwalán,
mahulág, mahigál).

_mahiwaóson_, Difficult, trying, hard, miserable,
distressful. (cf. hiwáos).

_mahómok_, Soft, tender, kind, gentle, yielding, impressible,
impressionable, moldable, malleable; intelligent, sharp, keen,
quick, acute (of discernment). Mahómok siá sing--tagiposóon,--ólo. He
is--tender-hearted,--intelligent. (cf. hómok, malúm-ok).

_mahomót_, Fragrant, etc. See mahamút.


_mahúay_, Light, easy, facile, causing little fatigue, said of work;
it is opposed to mahágò--tiresome, heavy. (cf. húay).

_mahubagón_, Swelling, puffy, tumid, turgid, swoln, swollen, liable
to swell up, subject to ulcers, swellings, tumours, skin-diseases,
etc. (cf. hubág).

_mahúbol_, Weak, feeble, frail. (cf. húbol, malúya, malumíng, mapígaw).

_mahúgmay_, Soft, gentle, mild, tender, indulgent, relenting, placable,
soon forgiving or forgetting injuries. (cf. húgmay, mahúmoy, mahómok,
malolóy-on, mahinoklógon).

_mahúgud_, Diligent, assiduous, zealous, with application. (cf. húgud,
mapísan).

_mahúkmay_, See mahúgmay. (húkmay--húgmay).

_mahulág_, Stirring, moving, restless, vicious. (húlag).

_mahulápay_, Very sleepy, drowsy, almost unable to keep one's eyelids
open. (hulápay).

_mahulás_, Easy, facile, requiring little work or knowledge. (hulás;
cf. mahapús.

_mahúlas_, Hot, warm, steaming, steamy, vaporous. (húlas).

_mahulugyáwon_, Cheerful, jolly, hilarious, frolicking, jubilant,
merry, mirthful. (cf. húgyaw).

_mahúlung_, (H) Having a strong, pungent, penetrating smell. (húlung).

_mahulúy-on_, (H) Bashful, shy, shame-faced. (huyâ).

_mahumán-humán_, Rather much, a good amount or considerable
quantity. Mahumánhumán ang gingásto níya sa íya bátà túbtub nga
natápus níya ang íya pagtoón. He spent a good deal of money on his
son till he finished his studies. (cf. hingánhingán).

_mahúmoy_, Soft, gentle, yielding, pliable, supple,
flexible. (cf. húmoy, mahúgmay).

_mahumúg_, See mahamúg. (humúg--hamúg).

_mahunágay_, Relieved, improved, recovered, better,
rallying. (hunágay).

_mahúnit_, Tough, strong, resisting, wearing well, lasting, enduring,
durable, difficult to make an impression on, hard. (húnit; cf. mapátol,
maáwot).

_mahúnlit_, See mahúnit. (húnlit--húnit).

_mahún-ob_, See mahún-og. (hún-ob--hún-og).

_mahún-og_, Moist, wet, damp. (hún-og).

_mahuól_, See mahiól--trying, etc.

_mahúpit_, Closely woven, neat, trim, applied to textiles and
wickerwork. (húpit).

_mahúrung_, (B) See mahúlung.

_mahúsay_, Well ordered, in order, settled, orderly, trim, tidy,
snug, tight, well-arranged. (húsay).

_mahutúhut_, Hearty, sincere, honest, frank, straightforward,
ingenuous, genuine, candid, open, not merely formal. (cf. hutúhut).

_mahuyágpà_, Low, inclined, not steep, sloping. (cf. huyágpà,
mahuyátà).

_mahúyang_, Unstable, shaky, weak, wobbling, wobbly, unsteady, rocking,
swaying. (cf. húyang).

_mahuyáon_, (H) See mahulúy-on--shy, shame-faced, etc.

_mahuyátà_, See mahuyágpà--low, etc.

_mahuyút-húyut_, Miserable, wretched, poor, bad, trying,
difficult. (cf. huyúthúyut).

_maíbgon_, Covetous, ambitious, etc. See maíbug, maibugón.

_maíbug_, Covetous, ambitious, passionately desirous of, craving for,
avid, greedy, fond of, eager for, hankering after. (cf. íbug).

_maibugón_, See maíbug.

_maíd-id_, Exact, precise, diligent, punctual, painstaking, wary,
circumspect, careful, with application or zeal. (cf. íd-id).

_maid-irón_, See maíd-id.

_maídlab_, Sparkling, glittering, sending off sparks, twinkling,
flashing. (cf. ídlab, maídlak, maígpat).

_maídlak_, Twinkling, sparkling, glittering. (cf. ídlak, maídlab).

_maígpat_, Flashing, twinkling, sparkling, shining. (cf. ígpat,
maídlab).

_maíkit_, Close together, close set, thickset, dense, serried,
crowded, narrow-spaced, with but little interval or interstice
between. (cf. íkit, magarót).

_mailáon_, (H) Desirous, covetous, wanting very much, avid, fond of,
having a liking for. (ílà).

_mailíbgon_, Sensual, sensuous, lustful. (cf. íbug, maíbgon, maíbug).

_maililáon_, (H) See mailáon id.

_mailóg-ilógon_, Following, imitating, imitative, copying, aping,
mimicking. (cf. ílog, ilógilóg).

_mailóm_, Dark, swarthy, dusky, dun, brown, blackish. (cf. maitúm,
kayománggì, alimbúyug, ilóm).

_mailóm-ilóm_, Dim. of mailóm.

_mailúbon_, Patient, long-suffering, forbearing, forbearant, enduring,
tolerant, tolerating, bearing with, putting up with, overlooking,
undergoing pains, trials, etc., without complaint. (cf. ílub).

_maímon_, Jealous. (ímon).

_maímot_, (B) Stingy, close-fisted, miserly, niggardly, parsimonious,
mean. (ímot).

_mainabiánon_, Friendly, amicable, companionable, amiable,
sociable. (ábyan).

_mainabláwon_, Affable, sociable, conversing amicably,
friendly. (cf. áblaw).

_mainagápon_, An early riser, rising early, up early, up betimes,
starting work in the early morning. (cf. agáp).

_mainagdáhon_, Inviting, alluring, enticing, charming, attractive;
hospitable, generous. (cf. ágda).

_mainakígon_, (H) Irascible, bad-tempered, choleric, getting angry
soon, quarrelsome, easily excited to anger, irritable, touchy, testy,
techy, wrathful, hot-tempered. (cf. ákig, akíg, pikón, tarádyon).

_mainakúpon_, Hospitable, charitable, looking after the needy, kind
to visitors, receiving them with an open heart and hand. (cf. ákup,
inakúp).

_mainalág-agón_, Undecided, wavering, hesitating, etc. See maalág-ag).

_mainaláypon_, Helpful, sympathetic, compassionate, ready to assist
those in need of shelter or food. (cf. ayóp).

_mainaliláon_, Taking care of, etc. See maaliláon.

_mainalóyon, mainaloyón_, Feigned, pretended, sham, fake, put on,
make-believe, hypochondriac, pretending, applied to illness as well
as to the one that feigns or imagines himself to be sick. (cf. áloy,
aloyán).

_mainalungáyon_, An importunate beggar, one who is always
asking for some special favours, privileges, etc.; burdensome,
troublesome. (cf. alungáy).

_mainamlígon_, Careful, circumspect, cautious, wary, chary,
watchful. (cf. ámlig, mainandámon).

_mainampóon_, Devout, praying much, pious, man of prayer, given to
prayer, prayerful, devout, contemplative. (cf. ámpò).

_mainamuláwon_, Watchful, vigilant, etc. See maamuláwon.

_mainamúton_, Contributing, generous, liberal, open-handed. (cf. ámot).

_mainandákon_, Boastful, boasting, braggart, bragging, self-praising,
bluffing, talking big, boaster, bragger, a vain fellow, a
braggadoccio. (cf. ándak).

_mainandámon_, Careful, circumspect, with foresight, watchful, wary,
cautious. (ándam).

_mainantúson_, Bearing, suffering affliction or hardship, undergoing
with fortitude, patient, forbearant. (cf. ántus, mailúbon).

_mainapínon_, Helpful, assisting, seconding, supporting, protecting,
defending, defensive, vindicating, taking sides with. (cf. ápin).

_mainató-atohón_, One possessing, some intelligence or capacity,
capable of handling or managing a job tolerably well, rather smart,
of moderate intelligence, or ability. (cf. atóáto).


_mainawáon_, Compassionate, sympathetic, taking pity on. (áwà).

_mainawáton_, Detaining, hindering, hampering, impeding, keeping one
busy, encroaching on one's time. (cf. awát).

_mainawáyon, mainawayón_, Warlike, martial, anxious or ready for a
fight, pugnacious. See maawayón.

_mainayóhon_, (H) Mending, repairing, patching up. (áyo).

_maínggat_, Twinkling, sparkling, glittering, scintillating. (ínggat;
cf. maígpat, maídlab).

_maínghit_, Loose, shaky, unsteady, not firm, shaking, rocking,
wobbly. (ínghit).

_maíngol_, (B) Scarce, rare, difficult to obtain. (íngol; cf. maíwat,
mahínà).

_maínit_, Warm, hot, heated, sultry, sweltry. (cf. ínit).

_maínot_, (H) Economical, parsimonious, niggardly, mean, sparing,
not wasting. (ínot; cf. makínot, maímot).

_maíntok_, (B) Small, little, wee, tiny, minute, fine, consisting of
small, tiny pieces or particles. (cf. íntok; magamáy, diótay, etc.).

_mainugdángon_, Self-respecting, formal, modest, decent, proper,
not frivolous. (cf. úgdang, maúgdang).

_mainugyónon, mainugyonón_, United, in unison, closely attached to each
other, cooperating, collaborating, pulling well together. (cf. úgyon).

_mainuligáon_, Scoffing, jeering, jibing, mocking, making, game of,
jesting, deriding, ridiculing. (cf. uligâ).

_mainulúgton_, Angry, cross, furious, wild, rabid, irate, apt to
become angry, etc. at the slightest provocation. (cf. ugút).

_mainumpíton_, Scoffing, mocking, insulting. (cf. úmpit, mainuligáon).

_mainumúron_, Restraining oneself from, abstaining, abstemious,
mortifying, abstinent, temperate. (cf. úmud, paúmud, malihíon).

_mainunúngon_, Attached to, partial to, adhering to, united with, ready
to help or assist out of natural affection or sympathy. (cf. únung).

_mainuslitánon_, Joking jesting, mocking, making game of, making a
butt of, ridiculing. (cf. úslit; uslitán).

_mainusmúron_, Leading to--misery,--bankruptcy,--poverty; sinking,
falling, liable to come to grief. (cf. úsmud).

_mainuswagón_, Progressive, prosperous, extending, making progress,
getting on, making one's way in the world; postponing, procrastinating,
prolonging, protracting. (cf. úswag).

_mainutihón_, Circumspect, careful, diligent, zealous,
assiduous. (cf. úti, mautihón).

_mái-om_, To guess, conjecture, surmise, suppose, think, imagine,
judge, opine. Sa ákon pagmái-om----. According to my opinion or
guess----. Anó, ang namai-omán mo sa íya nahanungúd sang pagkasúnug
sang íya baláy? What is your conjecture about him as to the burning
down of his house? Mai-omá sing maáyo, básì malagpatán mo ang
matúod. Make a good guess, perhaps you may hit on the truth. (cf. bánà,
bántà, hunâhúnà, pakót, lágpat).

_mái-ong_, (H) Sack, bag especially one made of buri-leaves and used
to pack sugar. (cf. bayóong).

_maís_, (Sp. maiz) Maize, Indian corn, corn.

_maísip_, Selfish, calculating. (ísip).

_maisót_, Little, small, slight. (cf. diótay, ikî).

_maísug_, Brave, valiant, intrepid, bold, courageous, violent, strict,
harsh. (ísug).

_maitúm_, Dark, dusky, black, sable, ebon. (itúm; cf. mailóm, ágta).

_maíwat_, Scarce, rare, not easy to obtain. (íwat; cf. mahínà,
maíngol).

_maiyáiyáhon_, Selfish, egotistic. (cf. íya--his, etc.).

_maka-_, A prefix used in the following ways:
1) To form the potential future tense of the active voice (cf. ma-
for the passive voice), e.g. Makabúhat ikáw sinâ? Are you, or shall
you, be able to do that? Makadángat siá sang íya nga ginatúyò, kon
mapísan siá. He will be able to obtain his desire, if he is earnest
about it. Makabáyad na siá sang íya útang, kay dakô ang sináplid níya
sa pangomérsyo. He can now pay his debt, for he has made a large profit
in business. Walâ siá makaabút, kay madámol ang ulán. He could not
come, for there was a heavy rain. Indì siá makahalín. He cannot leave
or get away. N.B. Quite frequently this "maka-", particularly in verbs
expressive of any mental or sensitive operation, has the meaning of the
present, e.g. Makahibaló ka siní? Do you understand this? Makabatî ikáw
sang tunúg sang linggánay? Do you hear the sound of the bell? Makakítà
na akó sa íya dirâ. Now I see him over there. (cf. naka-).
2) to form adjectives meaning "able to, capable of, giving rise to
or causing" what the root implies. "Maka-" is either simply prefixed
to the root, e.g. "makaákò--powerful, mighty (ákò) or, as is more
frequently the case, the first syllable of the root is reduplicated
and then "maka-" prefixed, e.g. "makalilípay--causing joy or pleasure,
joyful, pleasing (lípay); makalilísang--inspiring terror, causing
great fear, terrible, shocking (lísang); makangingíl-ad--exciting
nausea, loathsome (ngíl-ad), etc.
3) to form multiples corresponding to the English -times,
e.g. makalíbo--a thousand times; makaduhákapúlò--twenty times;
makaisá--once, etc.

_makaákò_, Powerful, mighty, potent, holding sway, ruling; capable,
able. Ang Mahál nga Diós nga Makaákò sa ngatanán (sang tanán)----. God
who is almighty----. (cf. ákò, makagagáhum).

_makabibígne_, (H) Exciting horror or fright, terrible, dreadful,
frightful, awful, horrible, horrid, horrific, terrific, fearful,
shocking to look upon, etc. (cf. bígne, makakulúgmat, makalilísang,
makahahádluk).

_makabibíhag_, (H) Captivating, alluring, taking, enchanting, charming,
enticing, bewitching, enthralling. (cf. bíhag).

_makabilígne_, (H) See makabibígne.

_makabulúlag_, (H) Blinding, dazzling. (cf. búlag, bulág).

_makabulúngul_, (H) Causing deafness, deafening,
ear-splitting. (cf. bungúl).

_makabulúsug_, (H) Satisfying, satiating, filling, gratifying to
repletion. (cf. busúg).

_makadámò_, (H) Often, oft, frequently, ofttimes, many times,
repeatedly, over and over again, again and again. (cf. dámò, masamí,
masúnsun).

_makaduhá_, (H) Twice, a second time. (cf. duhá).

_makag_--, Often used instead of maka-, e.g. makagbúlig--makabúlig;
makagdángat--makadángat; makaghupút--makahupút, etc. etc.

_makagagáhud_, (H) Rowdy, noisy, etc. See makagulúlà. (cf. gáhud).

_makagagáhum_, Having power or authority, powerful, mighty, potent,
ruling, holding sway, influential, puissant, strong, great. (cf. gahúm,
gamhánan, makaákò).

_makagalánya_, (H) Alluring, enticing, enthralling, bewitching,
captivating, taking, charming. (cf. gánya, makabibíhag, makailílà,
makalulúmay).

_makagalányat_, See makagalánya.

_makághà_, Sad, sorry, regrettable, grievous, sorrowful, afflicting,
afflictive. (cf. kághà, makakalághà).

_makágud_, Greedy, voracious, gluttonous, covetous, ambitious,
avid. (cf. kágud, dalók, maíbgon, maibugón).

_makagulúlà_, (H) Rowdy, boisterous, exciting, disturbing, noisy,
uproarious, causing, or leading to, a disturbance, a disorder, or
the like. (cf. gúlà, makagagáhud).

_makahahádluk_, Causing fear, terrific, horrid, horrible, horrific,
fearful, terrible, dreadful. (cf. hádluk; makakulúgmat).

_makahaládluk_, (H) See makahahádluk.

_makahalágnop_, (H) Uncanny, weird, queer, unearthly, causing an
uncanny or weird feeling. (cf. hágnop).

_makahalám-ut_, (H) Delightful, delicious, pleasing, pleasant, funny,
ridiculous, laughable, exciting laughter, comic, comical, amusing,
exhilarating. (cf. hám-ut).


_makahalangúyus, makahalanguyús_, (H) Shocking, awful, terrible,
dreadful, tremendous. (cf. kuyús, hanguyús, makahahádluk).

_makáhan_, Sharp, acerb, acid, acrid, bitter, burning, astringent,
hot or biting to the taste. (cf. káhan).

_makáhang_, See makáhan id.

_makahanóklog_, Piteous, miserable, forlorn, wretched, doleful,
pitiful, exciting sympathy or compassion. (cf. hanóklog;
mahinoklógon--tender, gentle, compassionate).

_makahanúsbò_, Sad, dreary, sorrowful, doleful, dismal, dolorous,
grievous, exciting grief, sorrow or sadness. (cf. subô).

_makáhas_, Audacious, daring, reckless, rash, foolhardy, venturesome,
temerarious, impertinent, shameless, bold. (cf. káhas).

_makahihílak_, Regretful, regrettable, lamentable, missed, longed for,
causing regret or longing for something lost or absent. (cf. hílak;
makangingílin).

_makahihílas_, (H) Tickling, itching, titillating, irritating;
exciting, disturbing. (cf. hilás).

_makahihílò, makahihílo_, Poisonous, venomous, baneful,
virulent. (cf. hilô).

_makahilígkò_, Loathsome, abominable, shameful, filthy, dirty, making
one blush. (cf. hígkò).

_makahilílak_, (H) See makahihílak.

_makahilílò, makahilílo_, See makahihílò.

_makahuhúyà_, Shameful, disgusting, disgraceful, exciting shame,
putting to shame. (cf. huyâ).

_makahulúbug_, (H) Intoxicating, inebriating, causing
drunkenness. (cf. hubúg).

_makahulúyà_, (H) See makahuhúyà.

_makaíbug_, Desirable, delectable, enticing, seductive, exciting a
passion or longing. (cf. íbug).

_makaibúg-íbug_, Dim. of makaíbug.

_makailíbug_, (H) See makaíbug.

_makailílà_, (H) Charming, bewitching, captivating, attractive,
causing a desire or liking for. (cf. ílà).

_makailímol_, (H) Impoverishing, reducing--, leading--, to
poverty. (cf. ímol).

_makairíbug_, (B) See makaíbug, makailíbug.

_makairíma_, (B) Attractive, enticing, charming, pleasing, tantalizing,
alluring. (cf. íma; makailílà).

_makaisá_, (H) Once. (cf. isá; kásra).

_makakaládlaw_, (H) Ridiculous, comic, laughable, risible,
ludicrous, comical, amusing, exciting laughter, causing merriment,
funny. (cf. kádlaw; makahalám-ut).

_makakalághà_, (H) Grievous, painful, distressful, distressing,
afflicting, afflictive, causing pain and grief, sorrowful. (cf. kághà,
makahanúsbò).

_makakulúgmat_, (H) Awful, fearful, tremendous, terrific,
terrible, horrible, horrid, inspiring fear or terror, frightful,
shocking. (cf. kúgmat; makalilísang).

_makakulúlbà_, (H) Intimidating, abashing, disconcerting, causing
nervousness or shyness. (cf. kúlbà).

_makakulúnyag_, (H) Gladdening, gladsome, cheering, cheerful, joyous,
joyful, inspiriting, sprightly, blissful, happy, gay, causing joy and
gladness. Ipalánog nínyo sa madalî ang makakulúnyag nga balítà. Publish
at once the joyous news. (cf. kúnyag; makalilípay).

_makalalámon_, (H) Ticklish, one who is easily tickled. (cf. kalám).

_makalalamón_, (H) Causing total blindness, blinding. (cf. lamón).

_makalalánag_, (H) Indigestible, unwholesome, bad for the stomach,
causing indigestion, flatulence, indisposition or disorder of the
stomach (especially said of tainted fish). (cf. lánag).

_makalalánag_, (H) Causing or giving moisture, wet, damp, moist,
humid. (cf. lánag).


_makalalás-ay_, (H) Tedious, disgusting, noisome, causing disgust or
aversion, loathsome. (cf. lás-ay).

_makalaláton_, (H) Contagious, infectious, catching, taking,
spreading. (cf. latón, manlaláton).

_makalám_, Itching, titillating. Makalám siá sing kamót. He has an
itching hand, i.e. he is dishonest, a thief, light-fingered.

_makalilímas_, Bad, injurious, deleterious, aggravating, causing a
disease to become worse. (cf. límas).

_makalilíngaw_, Distracting, diverting, amusing, providing relaxation
or diversion, entertaining. (cf. lingáw).

_makalilípay_, Gladdening, cheering, gladsome, comforting, joyful,
joyous, blissful, consoling, giving joy or pleasure, cheerful,
heartening. (cf. lípay).

_makalilípong_, Benumbing, stunning, stupefying, causing a fit or
swoon. (cf. lípong, lipóng).

_makalilísang_, Terrible, terrific, fearful, awful, tremendous,
shocking, horrid, horrible, astounding, dreadful, frightful. (lísang).

_makalimá_, Five times. (cf. limá).

_makalulúgpay_, (H) Tender, mild, calming, lessening, softening,
assuaging, mitigating, alleviative. (cf. lúgpay).

_makalulúmay_, (H) Bewitching, captivating, charming, enchanting,
enthralling, entrancing, casting a spell upon, infatuating. (cf. lumáy,
lúmay).

_makalulúod_, Emitting a stench, stinking, evil-smelling,
fetid, nauseating, abominable, horrible, exciting loathing or
aversion. (cf. lóod).

_makalulú-oy_, Exciting compassion or sympathy, miserable, wretched,
poor, pitiful, piteous. (ló-oy).

_makalulúyag_, Likeable, desirable, lovable, pleasing, delightful,
attractive. (lúyag).

_makamamátay_, Deadly, deathly, mortal, killing, death-dealing,
mortiferous, fatal, destructive of life. (cf. patáy, matáy).

_makamimíngaw_, Dreary, sad, doleful, sorrowful, causing a feeling
of sorrow, loneliness or dejection. (cf. míngaw).

_makamulúsmus_, (H) Ruinous, destructive, reducing to misery, leading
to poverty. (cf. músmus).

_mákan_, Bamboo-matting. See amákan.

_makán_, A kind of rice ripening rather late and usually harvested
during the month of December. (cf. arabón).

_makánat_, Tiresome, slow, tedious, retarded. See makúnat.

_makangilídlis_, See makangingídlis--shocking, etc.

_makangilíl-ad_, Loathsome, etc. See makangingíl-ad.

_makangingídlis_, Shocking, awful, horrid, horrible, horrific,
terrible, frightful, causing one's hair to stand on end. (cf. ngídlis,
makakulúgmat, makalilísang, makahahádluk, makabibígne).

_makangingíl-ad_, Loathsome, exciting nausea or aversion, abominable,
noisome, sickening, disgusting, nauseous. (cf. ngíl-ad, makalulúod).

_makangingílin_, Regrettable, deplorable, exciting regret or sorrow
for the loss of something valuable, causing remorse. (ngílin).

_makán-um_, Six times. (ánum).

_makapadungúg_, Giving distinction, honourable, to the honour of,
adding honour or dignity. (dungúg).

_makapalá-ul, makapalául_, (H) Tiresome, exhausting, tiring, fatiguing,
toilsome, wearisome, causing fatigue. (pá-ul, pául).

_makáp-at_, Four times. (ápat).

_makapitó_, Seven times. (cf. pitó).

_makápog_, (B) Stale, cold, old (of rice, etc.). (cf. kápog; mabáhaw).

_makapúlò_, Ten times. (cf. púlò).

_makapulúng-aw_, (H) Dreary, weary, sorrowful, causing grief or
sorrow. (cf. púng-aw).

_makapulúto_, (H) Ruinous, leading to bankruptcy,
impoverishing. (cf. púto).


_makaralamón_, Blinding, depriving of sight. See makalalamón.

_makárat_, Pungent, acrid, etc. See maádat.

_makarî_, (B) Diligent, handy, obsequious, prompt and willing (of
servants or the like). (cf. mapísan, matándus, sagád, maábtik, batíd).

_makasasálà_, Sinful, sinner, wicked, evil-doer, delinquent, offender,
transgressor, guilty, prevaricator, wrong-doer. (cf. salâ).

_makasiám_, Nine times. (cf. siám).

_makasilígne_, (H) Horrible, terrible, etc. See makabibígne.

_makasisílaw_, (H) Dazzling, bright, shining, very bright or clear,
splendid. (cf. sílaw).

_makasisígne_, (H) See makabibígne, makasilígne id.

_makasolómo_, (H) Loathsome, disgusting, nauseating, sickening,
abominable. (cf. sumó).

_makataláka_, (H) Disgusting, abominable, causing aversion,
sickening. (cf. taká).

_makatalándog_, (H) Touching, affecting; charming,
captivating. (cf. tándog).

_makatalanhágà_, (H) Marvellous, astounding, amazing, astonishing,
wondrous, wonderful, stupendous, miraculous, extraordinary,
phenomenal. (cf. tanhágà).

_makatíbal_, Surfeiting, nauseating, sickening, loathsome, exciting
aversion or nausea. Ginmúlay siá níya sing makatíbal. He abused
him soundly in very strong language. Ginkán-an níya ang báboy sing
makatíbal nga pangáon. He ate of the pork--or--partook of the pork
till he felt a loathing for it. (tíbal; cf. makasolómo, makataláka).

_makatilingála_, (H) Wonderful, astounding, wondrous, amazing,
stupendous, astonishing, admirable, strange, exciting, causing
astonishment or admiration. (cf. tingála, makatitingála, makatalanhágà,
katingaláhan).

_makatitingála_, See the foregoing makatilingála.

_makátlo_, Thrice, three times. (tátlo).

_makatulúyo_, (H) Exciting sleep, sleepy, lulling, drowsy,
soporiferous, soporific, slumbrous, somniferous, somnific. (tuyó).

_makaulúgtas_, (H) Exasperating, irritating, nettling, trying
one's patience, tiring, tiresome, wearisome, troublesome, wearying,
toilsome. Ang pagpanúdlò sa mga kabatáan amó ang ísa ka butáng nga
makaulúgtas kaáyo. Teaching children is a hard, toilsome or burdensome
task. (úgtas).

_makaulúgut_, Exasperating, nettling, irritating. (cf. ugút).

_makáw_, A kind of roughly made boots and shoes of Chinese manufacture
from Macao; roughly made (but strong and durable). Makáw nga
trabáho. Rough work, not well made. Sapátos nga makáw. Boots from
Macao, boots that are not well made.

_makawaló_, Eight times. (cf. waló).

_makáwat_, (H) Thief, sneak, cheat, embezzler, pilferer, pick-pocket,
robber, burglar. (cf. káwat, matákaw, makáwtì, maniníkas, swítik,
sagumár).

_makawiwíli_, Pleasing, pleasant, delightful, lovely, alluring,
enticing, likeable, nice, charming, beautiful, entrancing, taking,
enchanting. (cf. wíli, makalulúyag, makalilípay, makabibíhag).

_makáwtì_, A petty thief, filcher, pilferer. (cf. káwtì, makáwat).

_makáyhà_, A kind of skin-disease somewhat similar to measles, but
usually passing off in a few days. Also used as a verb. Ginamakáyhà
siá. He has the skin-disease makáyhà. Minakáyhà siá sang isá ka
túig. Last year he had the skin-disease makáyhà. Andam ka, agúd índì
ka pagmakayhaón. Be careful not to catch the skin-disease makáyhà.

_maki-_, A prefix denoting an attachment to, a wish, desire or love
for, what the root implies, e.g. makipílak--desirous of making money,
looking for profit; makitábang--seeking or asking help. Attached to
verbs maki- (magapaki-, magpaki-) is used for an incomplete or future
action, whilst nagapaki-, naki- and pagpaki- are used for the present,
past and the infinitive respectively. Magapaki- for the future is
seldom used. (cf. paki-, pakig-).


_makiambúngon_, A lover of what is beautiful; an artist, one skilled
in the fine arts; actor, actress, dancer. (cf. ámbong; artísta).

_makiangáyon_, Desirous of equality, democratic. (cf. ángay).

_makibúton_, Nervous, etc. See makilibúton, makinugmáton).

_makíd-ol_, Just right, done to a turn, not too hard and not too soft,
tasty, nice, said of tubers, bananas, boiled rice, etc. (cf. kíd-ol).

_makig-_, See maki-. These two prefixes have the same meaning and may
be used promiscuously. Custom and euphony decide which of the two is
to be employed in any particular case.

_makigás_, Very dry, exsiccated, parched, arid, waterless; barren,
desert, unproductive (of soil). (cf. kigás).

_makigdaíton_, Peaceful, peaceable, pacific, quiet, meek, loving
peace and quiet, wishing to live in peace with everybody. (cf. dáit).

_makigpulóng-púlong_, Conversationalist, orator; loving to talk or
speak, addicted to--, given to--(public) speaking.

_makihariánon_, Attached to royalty, fond of royal customs and manners,
royalist, imperialist, not democratic. (cf. hárì).

_makihilawáson_, Fornicator, lewd, unchaste, wanton, lecherous,
lustful, sensual, carnal, erotic, immoral, attached or addicted to
sensual pleasures, inclined to sins of the flesh. (cf. láwas, hiláwas).

_makiíya_, Egoistic, egotistic, egotistical, conceited, self-important,
selfish, self-seeking, self-sufficient. (cf. íya).

_makilás_, Trembling (as from an electric shock), shivering, quaking;
shaking, cringing, quivering with fear or surprise, as a bird when
caught, as a timid dog when approached by a stranger. (cf. kilás).

_makilibúton_, Nervous, excitable, easily agitated, soon upset or
afraid for the slightest reason. (cf. kibút).

_makilímos_, Beggar, mendicant, poor fellow. (cf. limós, póbre,
próbe, ímol).

_makilitán-on_, Seeing well, having good eyes, sharp or keen of sight,
hawk-eyed, lynx-eyed. (cf. kítà).

_makilitáon, makilitaón_, See makilitán-on.

_makiná, mákina_, (Sp. máquina) Machine. (cf. galingán, dawdáwan).

_makinabudláyon_, Industrious, active, energetic, working hard,
exerting oneself, assiduous, sedulous. (cf. búdlay).

_makinagháon_, Sighing, sighful, grieving, lamenting,
complaining. (cf. kághà, makakalághà).

_makinaugalíngon, makinauga1ingón_, Attached to one's own, hence:
nationalistic, independent. (cf. kaugalíngon, makiugalíngon;
makiangáyon----democratic; makihariánon----imperialistic).

_makínì_, Parsimonious, frugal, thrifty, sparing, saving, economic,
economical, economous, spending little. (cf. kínì).

_makinísta_, (Sp. maquinista) Machinist, mechanician,
mechanic. (cf. inhenyéro).

_makínot_, Frugal, thrifty, parsimonious, saving, close, miserly,
niggardly, mean, sparing in expenditure; economical. (cf. kínot,
makínì, maínot, maímot).

_makinugmáton_, Nervous, easily frightened. (cf. kúgmat, makilibúton).

_makinúton_, See makínot.

_makinuyáwon_, Shy, bashful, avoiding the society of men. (cf. kuyáw).

_makísdong_, Pouting, frowning, sulky, scowling, black-looking,
lowering, dark-browed, sullen, crabby, cross, threatening, morose,
peevish, surly, pettish, petulant, showing discontent or anger in
one's face. (cf. kísdong, lárong, súngon, ariwaróng, kolisáw).

_makisdúngon_, (H) See makísdong.

_makisúm_, (B) Sour, acidulous, acrid, acerb. (cf. kisúm, maáslum).

_makitíd_, Narrow, contracted, circumscribed, limited, restricted,
straitened, confined within a small space. (cf. kitíd).


_makiugalíngon, makiugalingón_, See makinaugalíngon,
makinaugalingón--nationalistic, independent, etc.

_mákmak_, To strike, beat, smite, slap, smack, spank, thwack, whack,
cudgel, thrash. Ginmakmakán akó níya sang biní-al. He beat me with a
piece of split bamboo. Makmakí siá sang sinílas. Spank him with the
slippers. Imákmak sa íya ang bilogón, bulunál, lalámpus, etc. Beat
him with the rod, the whip, the stick, etc. (cf. búnal, hánot, hámpak,
bálbal, lámpus, lámba, pókpok, pakáng, núsnus).

_makóbot_, Burying one's teeth in, holding on to with one's teeth,
adhesive, adhering, sticking to. (cf. kóbot).

_makó-makó_, To like or appreciate the taste of something new, not
having tasted the like before; to be selfish, haughty, stuck-up,
to despise, look down upon one's former friends with indifference or
even contempt, as sometimes happens in the case of those that have
risen from a humble position to one of power and wealth. Tilawí
iníng mga kalan-ónon, kay mamakómakó (magakamakómakó) ka gid sinâ
sa ákon bántà. Taste this pastry, for you will like it very much, I
think. Namakómakó siá sang lansónes, kay walâ siá pagpanghátag. He
likes (He is very partial to) lansónes, for he does not give
any (of them) away. Namakómakó siá sang pílak, kay walâ na siá
pagpanámyaw. On account of his newly obtained wealth he has become
so stuck-up (haughty) that he does not salute any more (his old
friends). (cf. hígmaw).

_mákol_, A kind of mushroom. See amamákol.

_mákon_, (B) A contr. of máan kon--I don't know what will happen, or
the like. Indì ka magbúhat sinâ; mákon ánhon ka ni Fuláno. Don't do
that, for otherwise I don't know (God knows) what N.N. will do to you.

_mákot_, To blaze up, begin to burn well after having been kindled,
to flame, flare up, burn well, said of fuel (and metaphorically of
passions, or the like). Nagamákot na balá ang daíg mo? Is the fire
you lighted (lit) burning well? Indì mo pagtandugón ang gatóng,
kay walâ pa magmákot ang kaláyo. Don't shift the firewood, for the
fire is not yet burning well. Pamakóta ang kaláyo. Let the fire burn
well. Wait till the fire burns well. Pamakóti ang kaláyo. Make the
fire burn brightly (by putting some kindling material, as shavings,
straw, etc. on it). (cf. haráhará).

_makúgi_, Diligent, assiduous, industrious, zealous, attentive,
careful, with zeal or application. (cf. kúgi, mapísan, maúkud,
matinatápon, matúl-id, maíd-id).

_makugmáton_, Nervous, timid, easily frightened or scared. (cf. kúgmat,
makilibúton).

_makúl-aw_, Bad, poor, being a failure, turning out badly, said of
crops, etc. (cf. kúl-aw).

_makúlì_, (H) Slow, difficult, tedious, irksome, tiresome, tiring,
fatiguing, requiring much work and great patience. (cf. kúlì).

_makulî-kúlì_, Dim. of makúlì. Somewhat slow, etc.

_makululbáon_, (H) Timid, shy, bashful, timorous, nervous. (cf. kúlbà).

_makúnat_, Slow, tedious, irksome, ticklish, requiring much patience;
tough, durable, lasting long. (cf. kúnat, makánat).

_makúsug_, Robust, strong, muscular, brawny, sinewy, powerful, mighty,
vigorous. (cf. kúsug, kusúg).

_makutíkutí_, Bustling, stirring, hustling, pushing, a busybody;
curious, prying, inquisitive. (cf. kutíkutí).

_makutí-kutihón_, See makutíkutí.

_mala_--, A diminutive particle: Like, as, like to, about, somewhat
similar to, resembling, nearly, almost, as (large, small, thick,
thin, good, bad, etc.) as--. Malakárbaw, malakarabáw--somewhat like
a buffalo; malabitík--like a flea; as small as a flea; malapásì--as,
like, about as large as, unhulled grains of rice; malabínlud--very
small, as small as fine particles or fragments of hulled rice;
malabaláy--like a house, almost as big as a house; malapálad--as large
as the palm of a hand, very little; malakalibútan--as large as the
world, nearly (almost) everywhere. Ginhatágan níla akó sing tinápay
nga malatingá (Gintáw-an nánda akó ti tinápay nga malatingá). They
gave me just a very little (a bite of) bread. Ang lúpà (dútà)
námon malapálad. Our farm-land is as large as the palm of the hand
i.e. it is very small. Ang íya dungúg malakalibútan (daw kalibútan
kadakô). His reputation (fame) is spread all over the world. (cf. daw,
súbung, oloánggid).

_málà_, (B) Pillow, cushion. (cf. ulúnan).

_malá_, Dry, exsiccated, drained, seasoned; to be or become dry, arid,
desiccated, parched, drained, sear; seasoned (of timber). Malá nga
káhoy, tápì, etc. Dry wood, seasoned boards, etc. Nagmalá na ang ákon
panápton nga ginbulád ko. My clothes which I spread in the sun are
dry now. Ang pawíkan nga namálhan. The turtle deprived of water. The
stranded turtle. Pamalahá (pamálha, pamál-a, pamád-a) sa ínit ang
linábhan. Put the wash out in the sun to dry. Namád-an sing túbig
iníng mga ísdà kag dinakúp ko. These fishes were stranded (ran aground)
and I caught them. Namalahán--namálhan--namál-an--namád-an. (cf. ugá,
láyà, layóng).

_malábà_, Long, lengthy, extended, extended in length. (cf. lábà,
malábug, láwhan).

_malabáab_, Lukewarm, tepid, slightly warm, pleasantly warm, not
hot. (cf. maalabáab).

_malabâ-lábà_, Dim. of malábà. Malabâlábà siá sing pangguyáhon. He
is rather long-headed, has a long face. (cf. mabayóg).

_malabárok_, Well cooked, properly cooked, done to a turn; very
soft boiled (of rice). (cf. balatanóg--insufficiently cooked;
alibútdan--underdone, still hard inside; lágdos--hard-boiled;
basâ--soft-boiled, boiled in too much water; buád-ad--split, burst
in boiling, overdone).

_malábtoy_, Weak, feeble, flabby, flaccid, flimsy,
drooping. (cf. lábtoy, malúya, malumíng, mahúyang, mapígaw).

_malábug_, (B) Long, lengthy, elongated, extended in
length. (cf. lábug, malábà).

_malabulánon_, Obscure, dim, not clear, not bright, weak-eyed,
dim-sighted, half-blind, purblind. (cf. búlan, mabinulánon).

_malabútkon_, About as thick as an arm. (cf. bútkon).

_malabúyò_, Tasteless, insipid, mawkish, flat, neither sweet nor sour;
like the taste of búyò-leaves. Ang tubâ karón nga hápon malabúyò. The
toddy this evening tastes flat.

_malád-ang_, Tasteless, insipid, stale, flat, vapid. (cf. lád-ang,
malás-ay).

_malagáw_, Roaming, roving, wandering, rambling, loafing, travelling
about; a loafer, vagabond, idler, tramp, hobo. (cf. lágaw, landólándo,
haráyháray, tiógtióg).

_malágbà_, Long, etc. See malábà.

_malágday_, Slow, leisurely, deliberate, plodding, jogging, tardy,
laggard, dawdling. (cf. lágday, malágway, mahínay, pákok, lamínday).

_malagílok_, Resembling--, like--, as fine as--, as small as--, fine
or small chaff called "gílok", etc. Walâ siá sing bisán malagílok nga
salâ. He is not at fault at all. He does not deserve the slightest
blame.

_malágnat_, (H) Slightly feverish, sickly, having a cold, suffering
from a sore throat, a catarrh or a slight headache. (cf. lágnat).

_malágpad_, Wide, broad, etc. See malápad.

_malágsing_, Shrill, loud, resounding, piercing, lusty, penetrating,
sonorous, far-reaching, carrying far, said of sounds. (cf. lágsing,
masílik, masulánting).

_malágtik_, Ticking, clicking. (cf. lágtik).

_malágting_, Strong, firm, hard, tough. (cf. lágting, mabákud,
matíngting, mahúnit, mapág-on, hámrus, purús).

_malágting_, Tinkling, tingling, jingling, clinking, clanking,
chinking. (cf. lágting).

_malágtok_, Cracking, crackling, crepitant; falling with a bang,
thud, thump or crash. (cf. lágtok).

_malágtom_, Dark black, dark green, very pronounced, deep, decided
(of colour); lusty, flourishing (of plants). (cf. lágtom).

_malágtoy_, See malábtoy--weak, etc. (lágtoy--lábtoy).

_malágway_, Slow, etc. See malágday.


_malahálon_, (H) Precious, dear, costly, high-priced, highly
priced, valuable, highly esteemed, expensive, of great price,
priceless. (cf. mahál, hamílì, bilídhon).

_malahóg_, Joking, jesting, rallying; jester, joker,
clown. (cf. lahóg).

_maláin_, Bad, wrong, wicked, evil, noxious, injurious,
disadvantageous; ill, sick, infirm; unwholesome, bad for one's
health. (cf. láin, maláut, kinaláin).

_malaísan_, Corn-field; fit--, suitable--, for growing or planting
corn. (cf. maís).

_malakâ_, Spaced wide apart, thin, not dense or near together,
far between. Talágsa sa malakâ----. Few and far between----. Very
rarely----. Scarcely ever----. (cf. lakâ).

_malála_, Insidious, cruel, treacherous (of diseases,
etc.). (cf. lála).

_malalágyo_, A run-away, one who shuns work, escapes from confinement,
etc. (cf. lágyo).

_malálang_, (H) Cunning, plotting, resourceful, adept at contriving
ways and means to gain one's end. (cf. laláng).

_malaláton_, Infectious, contagious, spreading, catching,
epidemic. (cf. latón, manlaláton).

_malaláw_, Mourning, mournful, sad, in grief or mourning, wearing
mourning dress. (cf. laláw).

_malalím_, (H) Tasty, delectable, savoury, toothsome, dainty, nice,
palatable. (cf. lalím, manámit).

_malalíson_, Disobedient, rebellious, neglecting to comply with orders
or precepts, unruly, disregarding restraint, disposed to violate laws,
ungovernable, unsubmissive, undisciplined, insubordinate, lawless,
wicked, bad. (cf. lális, malinapáson).

_mál-am_, (B) Adult, of age, grown-up. (cf. mál-it, hámtong, tigúlang).

_malámad_, To grasp, etc. See marámad, marásmas.

_malá-malá_, A kind of insect that in size and appearance somewhat
resembles a cricket; a mole-cricket. It never appears to be wet,
even in rain. Hence the name (malá--dry).

_malám-an_, Receptacle containing materials for chewing betelnut;
a morsel (mouthful), of betelnut, etc., sufficient for one
chewing. (cf. mamâ).

_malámbò_, Growing well, thriving, flourishing, growing luxuriantly,
(cf. lámbò).

_malamíg_, Cool, cold, frigid, keen; raw, sharp, piercing, cold and
stiff. Malamíg nga bángkay. A corpse cold and stiff. (cf. lamíg,
matúgnaw, maramíg).

_malám-on_, Materials for chewing betelnut, including betelnut, lime,
búyò--and tobacco-leaves. (cf. mamâ, malám-an).

_malamungâ_, Somewhat like a hen; the larynx, windpipe. (cf. mungâ).

_mál-an_, From malá--dry, etc. (cf. mád-an, málhan).

_malána_, Fat, oily, yielding lard or coconut oil, etc. (cf. lána).

_malánay_, Shining, shiny, lustrous, glossy. (cf. lánay).

_malangályaw_, Tourist, traveller; emigrant,
home-seeker. (cf. mangangályaw).

_malánggab_, Covetous, desirous of, ambitious, wishful, avid, eager
for, avaricious, wishing or anxious for. (cf. lánggab, maibugón).

_malángiaw_, Fluid, liquid, flowing freely, thin, said of
liquids. (cf. lángiaw; maátoy, malapúyut--thick, condensed).

_maláng-ig_, Smelling of fish. Ang mga ginabaligyáan sang mga ísdà
maláng-ig. The fish-market smells of fish. (cf. hurô--smelling of
rotten fish).

_malangís_, Harsh, grating, squeaking, setting one's teeth on edge,
said of sounds like the filing of a saw, or the like. (cf. langís).

_malángkag_, Anxious, desirous of, expectant, worried, weary,
disappointed, tired of waiting. (cf. lángkag).

_malangkágon_, See malángkag, malinangkágon.

_malángsa_, Stale, tasting or smelling of fish, fishy, mawkish,
insipid. (cf. lángsa, maláng-ig).


_malángto_, Nauseating, insipid, tasting or smelling offensively so as
to make one vomit, said of badly cooked peas and beans, etc. (lángto).

_malángyaw_, See malángiaw id.

_malánhig_, (H) Reappearing after death; to reappear or haunt after
death. Si Fuláno, konó, nagmalánhig. N.N. they say, has risen from
the grave or reappeared in the flesh. Ginamalanhigán, konó, ang íla
baláy. Their house, it is said, is haunted by a ghost. (cf. maránhig,
amamánhig, amaránhig).

_malániog_, High, tall; high-pitched. Malániog nga tíngug. A
high-pitched voice; falsetto. (cf. lániog, lányog).

_malán-o_, Foul, stale, rotten, vapid, insipid (of water, coconut milk,
etc.). (cf. lán-o).

_malánoy_, Tender, fresh, green, soft, young, impressionable; loud,
high-pitched, far-sounding (of voices, music, etc.). (cf. lánoy).

_malanóy-lánoy_, Dim. of malánoy. Rather soft, etc.

_malántiog_, High, tall, large. Malántiog nga táo. A tall
man. (cf. lántiog, malániog, maláyog, matáas).

_malántyog_, See malántiog, id.

_malányog_, See malániog id.

_malaóg, mala-óg_, Vagabond, loafer, tramp. (lá-og).

_malaóy-láoy_, Loud, strong, far-reaching, sonorous, stentorian,
resounding, noisy, ear-splitting, deafening, obstreperous (of
sounds). (cf. laúy-láuy, malániog, sílik, sulánting, singgítan).

_malápad_, Wide, broad, extensive, expanded, large, vast,
ample, spacious, wide-spread; free from narrowness or bigotry;
covetous, greedy, avid. Malápad ang íya nga palangúmhan. He has
a large farm. Malápad siá sing panghunâhúnà. He is broad-minded,
liberal-minded. Malápad siá sing matá. He is covetous, greedy,
ambitious. (cf. lápad, maálway, mahanáhay).

_malapáson_, Trespassing, unobservant, unobserving, non-observant,
lawless, unduteous, undutiful, neglecting, neglectful, heedless,
failing to comply with, omitting the fulfilment of a duty or
precept. (cf. lápas, malinapáson, malalíson).

_malapít_, By, near by, hard by, close by, fast by, nigh, near, near
at hand, close at hand, in the proximity of, in the neighbourhood
of, neighbouring, adjacent, adjoining, close to, approximate,
about. Malapít sa simbáhan. Near the church. Malapít sa duhá ka
líbo. About (more or less, approximately) two thousand.

_malápsì_, Ghastly, wan, pale, blanched, gaunt, lean, bloodless,
anemic. (cf. lápsì, malúspad, malún-ad).

_malapúyut_, (H) Thick, thickened, condensed, stiff, viscous, viscid,
inspissated, treacly (of liquids); severe, heavy, vehement, violent
(of fighting, or the like). (cf. lapúyut, malásaw; sugúng, masángsang).

_malasádo_, Soft-boiled. Itlog nga malasádo. A soft-boiled egg.

_malasahón_, What is to--be kneaded,--be made or pressed into
dough. (cf. mása).

_malásaw_, Thick, stiff, treacly, as molasses, etc. (cf. lasáw,
malapúyut).

_malás-ay_, Insipid, nauseous, nauseating, mawkish, tasteless,
revolting, loathsome, disgusting, unappetizing, uninviting,
vapid. (cf. lás-ay).

_maláspì_, Ghastly, wan, pale, etc. See malápsì. (láspì--lápsì).

_maláut_, (H) Bad, wrong, evil, wicked, ill, sinful, criminal,
unprincipled, vicious, depraved, malignant, malevolent, malicious,
base, mean. (cf. láut, maláin).

_maláw-ay_, (H) Ugly, forbidding, repulsive, nasty, hideous, improper,
indecent, dirty, unclean, impure, immodest, unchaste, obscene, foul,
lewd, pornographic. (cf. láw-ay, mahígkò, kadô).

_maláwhan_, Long, large. See láwhan, malábà, malápad.

_maláwid_, Long, etc. See maláwig.

_maláwig_, Long, lasting a long time, kept up, enduring, sustained,
prolix, continued, prolonged, protracted, extended. (cf. láwig,
mabúhay, madúgay).

_maláwlaw_, Long (of space and time); loose, not fixed, equivocal
(of a word, speech, or the like); protracted, prolonged, confused (of
thinking conjecturing); patient, forbearing, prudent, considerate,
liberal, broad (of mind). Maláwlaw nga pagpainóíno. A prolonged--,
protracted--, confused--, way of thinking. Maláwlaw siá sing
hunâhúnà. He is broad-minded, liberal-minded, patient, prudent,
or the like. (cf. láwlaw).

_malawóg_, (B) Large, big, above the ordinary size. (cf. lawóg).

_malayáng_, Wide, spacious, extensive. (cf. layáng).

_malayáng-láyang, malayáng-layáng_, Dim. of malayáng--wide, spacious.

_maláymay_, Scarce, rare, seldom, difficult to obtain. (cf. maíwat,
mahínà, tumalágsa).

_malayô_, (H) Far, far away, far off, a great or long way off, remote,
far distant. (cf. layô).

_maláyog_, High, tall, lofty, towering. Maláyog nga lubí. A tall
coconut palm. (cf. láyog, matáas, malántyog, malányog).

_malay-ómon_, Conjecturable, what is to--, can--, should--, be
guessed. (cf. máy-om).

_malbabísko_, (Sp. malvavisco) The marsh-mallow.

_málbas_, (Sp. malva) Mallow.

_maldisyón_, (Sp. maldición) Malediction, imprecation, execration,
curse, malison. (cf. panghimaláut).

_maldíta, maldíto_, (Sp. maldita, -o) Accursed, cursed, damned; to
curse, damn, imprecate, wish evil upon. Ginsilíng (Gintawág) níya
akó nga maldíta. He called me accursed. (cf. gátud, tinagudilían;
panóloy, panghimaláut, maldisyón).

_maléta_, (Sp. maleta) Valise, handbag, suitcase, portmanteau,
grip, bag.

_málhan_, See mád-an, mál-an, malahán, from malá--to be dry, etc.

_málhas_, (B) Advantage, benefit, profit; good, well; maybe,
perhaps. Warâ ti málhas kon ikáw ang silótan tungúd kang salâ ni
Fuláno. It's bad enough, if you should be punished for the fault of
N.N. (Literally: There is no advantage in it, if--). Warâ ti málhas kon
índì tána magabút. Perhaps he is not coming. It would be too bad, if
he were not coming. Indì ikáw magpanúgid nga nagasugál kamí adláwdlaw;
bokón ti (warâ ti) málhas kon idakúp (dákpon) támon kang polís. Don't
tell (anybody) that we are gambling every day; it would be hard lines
for us, if we were caught by the police. (cf. águd, agúdagúd, pulús;
áyhan, torán, básì, dámlag).

_málhus_, In order that not, so that not, lest. (cf. agúd índì, agúd
(nga) dílì).

_malí_, Excuse, pretence, appearance, make-believe, trap; to put
forward (as a pretext, etc.). (cf. pasúnì, balíbad).

_malibákon_, Detracting, disparaging, backbiting, scandal-mongering,
talebearing, talking evil of one's neighbour. (cf. libák).

_malibúg_, Confusing, confused, bemused, perplexed, distracted,
perplexing, worried, upset. (cf. libúg).

_malibúgon_, See malibúg.

_malídan_, Passing, transitory, quick. Sa labíng malídan----. Very
quickly----. In a short while----. (cf. madalî, tióntión).

_malígdong_, Modest, self-respecting, formal, proper, unassuming,
honest, decent, tactful. (cf. lígdong, maúgdang).

_malígno_, (Sp. maligno) Malign, malignant, wicked, evil, perverse. Ang
espiritú nga malígno. The devil. (cf. maláut).

_malíg-on_, Stable, firm, solid, durable; lasting, resolute,
determined. (cf. líg-on, mapág-on, mabákud, mabáskug).

_malígpot_, Short, brief (particularly in the plural). (cf. malíp-ot).

_malígsi_, Swift, quick, agile, nimble, lithe (of
movements). (cf. lígsi, madásig, mapágsi).

_malígwa_, (Sp. legua) A mile off, a mile distant, a mile far, rather
far in general; wide, spacious, extensive, broad. (cf. lígwa).

_malígwis_, Pointed, spiky, sharp. (lígwis; cf. matalíwis).

_malihíon_, Forbidding, abstaining from, having an objection
to. (cf. lihî; mainumúron).


_malíksi_, See malígsi.

_malikúmon_, Secretive, concealing, keeping the truth from, doing
something on the sly. (cf. likúm).

_malilígbon_, Nervous, excited, irritable, easily upset or
flurried. (cf. libúg).

_malí-máli_, Dim. and Freq. of malí. Also: to insinuate, hint at,
use indirect language, enlighten another's mind by allusions, speak
in parables, often practised by one who wishes to obtain a favour
from another or to come to an agreement, to throw out a "polite hint"
in a round-about way. Ginmalímalíhan níya kamí nga ang íya nónoy buút
mangasáwa sa ámon índay. He politely insinuated that his son wants to
marry our daughter. Malímalíha ang paghámbal mo sa íla. Talk to them
with polite insinuations or allusions. Nagamalímáli silá nga buút
magsímpon sa ámon sang íla anák. They are insinuating their desire
or wish of having their boy stay with us. Masúnsun ang hámbal sang
Aton Ginúo malímáli. Our Lord often spoke in parables.

_malímbong_, (H) Deceiving, tricksy, cheating, defrauding,
fraudulent, overreaching, cunning, sly, tricky, tricksey, tricksome,
trickish. (límbong).

_malímbong_, Sheltered, quiet, free from wind, not exposed to the
wind. (cf. límbong).

_malimbóngon_, (H) See malímbong.

_malimóson_, Giving alms, open-handed, free in giving, bounteous,
bountiful, generous, munificent, liberal, charitable. (limós).

_malimóton_, (H) Forgetful, absent-minded, unmindful,
oblivious. (cf. límot, malipáton).

_malinakasón_, (H) Overbearing, excessive, extreme, abusive,
one who over-steps the bounds or does something to excess;
radical. (cf. lakás).

_malinangkágon_, Disappointing, wearying, worrying. See malangkágon.

_malinapáson_, See malapáson id.

_malinaúmon_, Hopeful, confident, sanguine, full of
expectation. (cf. láum).

_malínaw_, Calm, quiet, still, smooth, tranquil, peaceful,
unruffled. (línaw).

_malíndog_, A large rice-container of woven bamboo, capable of holding
as much as thirty bushels or even more, but mostly of a size to hold
about ten bushels.

_malíngin_, Confused, perplexed, giddy, swimming, dizzy; fuddled,
drunk, dazed. (lingín).

_malíng-og_, Noisy, boisterous, obstreperous, tumultuous, clamorous,
vociferous, rowdy. (cf. líng-og, magáhud, magáhud, magamó, magalúng,
magarók, makagulúlà).

_malínis_, Shiny, shining, bright, polished. (cf. línis, mahíning).

_malinóng_, Peaceful, quiet, calm, tranquil, undisturbed,
noiseless. (cf. linóng, matáwhay, matínong).

_malipáton_, (H) Forgetful, oblivious, unmindful,
absent-minded. (cf. lipát; malimóton).

_malipáyon_, Cheerful, glad, jolly, joyful, merry, happy. (cf. lípay).

_malipayón_, Pleasure-loving, addicted
to--amusements,--diversions,--entertainments. (cf. malipáyon).

_malíp-ot_, (H) Short, brief, curt, curtailed, abridged,
laconic, concise, reduced (of length of time as well as of linear
extension). (cf. líp-ot, malígpot, mabugô).

_malísaw_, Watery, insipid, flat, vapid, tasteless, unsavoury,
said especially of stale tubers that, having been dug out, are not
boiled within a reasonable time and in consequence have lost their
flavour. (cf. lísaw, kalísaw, maganás).

_malisô-lísò_, Turning round, revolving, swinging, oscillating, turning
in all directions. Síya nga malisôlísò. A swivel chair. (cf. lísò).

_malisúd_, Troublous, troublesome, irksome, hard, difficult to bear
or suffer; very ill, at death's door, dying. (lisúd).

_mál-it_, (B) Old, adult, advanced in age, frequently applied to
people of about sixty years of age. (cf. mál-am). Also used as a
verb. Nagmál-it siá. He has become old. Namal-itán akó sa íya. I
consider him old. N.B. Mál-it is often used in contempt. Mál-it nga
táo (babáe). An old fogey (hag).


_maliwánon_, Changeable, variable, fickle,
not--steady,--reliable,--firm; retracting, repenting. (cf. liwán).

_málmal_, Full-grown, grown-up, strong; to become full-grown. Málmal
siá nga táo. He is a full-grown man. Nagmálmal na siá. He is now
full-grown. (cf. dakô, hámtong, hánggud).

_malmálan_, Full-grown, etc. See málmal.

_málo_, (Sp. malo) Bad, wicked, evil. (cf. maláin, maláut).

_malô_, Rice-flower; to flower (of rice). (cf. marô).

_mál-od_, (B) See mál-am, mál-it, málmal.

_malolô_, Mild, tender, kind, benevolent, benign, benignant, gracious,
affectionate, sympathetic, full of kindness, mild-tempered. (lolô).

_malólot_, Tender, affectionate, kind-hearted. (lólot; cf. malolô).

_malolóy-on_, Merciful, compassionate, pitiful, having pity on,
condoling, commiserating. (ló-oy).

_malomó_, Soft, softened, tender, yielding, impressionable,
impressible, giving way to pressure. (lomó; cf. mahómok, malúm-ok).

_malóng_, (B) See pamulúng--to stare or gape at with open mouth (in
disappointment, failure, or the like). Namalóng akó, kay walâ akó
makadayón pakádto sa Ilóngílong. I am (was) greatly disappointed,
because, after all, I could not go to Iloilo (as intended). Namalóng
akó, kay walâ akó makatámbong dídto tungúd sang madámol nga ulán. I was
sorely disappointed (I could go and whistle for it), because the heavy
shower of rain prevented me from being present there. (cf. gamón).

_malubáron_, Fading, changeable, changing, fickle, not steadfast,
not reliable. (cf. lubád).

_malubáy_, Young, tender, soft, impressionable,
impressible. (cf. lubáy, línghod, lanúbò, mahómok, malúm-ok, malomó,
bataón).

_malubáy-lúbay_, Dim. of malubáy. Rather young, etc.

_malúbhà_, Treacherous, cheating, insidious, mean, worming out secrets
and then publishing them abroad. (lúbhà).

_malubhaón_, See malúbhà.

_malubúg_, Turbid, impure, dirty, especially said of water. (lubúg).

_malúd-ak_, Faded, pale, light, faint (of colours; cf. malús-aw).

_malúgpis_, Emaciated, lean, haggard. (cf. mahágpis).

_malúgtì_, Fragile, weak, easily broken or snapped, brittle, said of
thread, strings, rattan, etc. (cf. lúgtì).

_malúgus_, Selfish, covetous, cheating, violent, applying force to
gain one's end. (cf. lúgus; mahákug, makágud, dingót, maímot).

_malugúson_, See malúgus. Also: oppressing, harsh, cruel, tyrannical.

_maluíb_, Traitorous, treacherous, betraying, untrustworthy, disloyal,
perfidious; a traitor. (cf. luíb, mabúdhì, malubhaón).

_malulô_, (H) See malolô.

_maluluyagón_, (H) Liking, desirous of, pleased with. (lúyag;
maluyagón id.).

_malúmbay_, New, fresh, young, tender, supple, flexible, said of
leaves and shoots of plants. (lúmbay).

_malumíng_, Weak. (lumíng; cf. malúya).

_malúm-ok_, Soft, pliable, tender. (lúm-ok; mahómok, malomó).

_malún-ad_, Pale, pallid, blanched, bloodless, wan, sallow,
ghastly. (lún-ad; cf. maláspì, malúspad).

_malúnay_, Soft, melting, pliable, tender, supple, yielding,
impressible, impressionable. (cf. lúnay, mahómok, malúm-ok).

_malunáy-lúnay_, Dim. of lúnay, malúnay. Malunáylúnay siá sing
tagiposóon. She is tender-hearted, soft-hearted.

_malúpig_, Oppressive, arbitrary, masterful, tyrannical, tyrannic,
tyrannous, cruel, severe, dour, despotic, dominating, domineering,
harsh. (cf. lúpig, mapigusón).


_malupigón, malupígon_, See malúpig.

_malúpsì_, Pale, pallid, wan, blanched, bloodless, white, sallow,
colourless. (cf. lúpsì, malúpsì, maláspî, malúspad, malún-ad).

_málus_, Itch, pain; to itch, hurt, pain (of a healing wound).

_malús-aw_, Faded, fading, of a fading colour. (cf. lús-aw).

_malus-áwon_, See malús-aw.

_malúspad_, Wan, pale, pallid, etc. See malúpsì.

_malúya_, Weak, frail, feeble, nerveless, enervated, debilitated,
unstrung, strengthless, powerless. Malúya ang íya láwas. Malúya
siá sing láwas. He is weak. His health is impaired. Malúya siá sing
buút. He lacks will power. He is weak-kneed. (cf. lúya, malumíng,
mapígaw).

_maluyagón_, (H) Fond of, liking, having a liking or passion for,
desirous of, etc. See maluluyagón id.

_mamá_, (Sp. mama) Mother, mama, mamma; a wet-nurse. (cf. nánay,
ilóy; yáya).

_mámà_, (B) To flatten, make flat (by pressure or by pounding), to
crush or beat flat. Mamáa (lubáka, báyha) ang ságing, kay láktan ko
sing kalámay. Pound the bananas soft (flat), for I am going to mix
them with sugar. Mamái siá sing búnga, kay índì siá makadulút. Crush
the betel-nut for him, for he is unable to bite it through. Imámà
akó ánay siníng mga ságing nga tinanók. Please pound these boiled
bananas for me. (lumâ, pusâ, lúbak, bayó).

_mamâ_, (B) To chew betel-nut; betel-nut chewing. Malúyag ka
magmamâ? Do you like to chew betel-nut?

_mámà_, Old man, father.

_má-má_, To low, moo (of cattle). Ang báka nagamámá. The cow lows.

_mamádlus_, (H) Strong, stiff, fresh, fierce, violent, rushing,
blustering (of wind; cf. mádlus).

_mamadór_, (Sp. mamador) The nipple of a baby's feeding bottle;
nursing bottle; instrument to draw off milk. (cf. beberón, lulutgútan).

_mamág-an_, Light, airy, easy to bear or carry, not heavy or
weighty. Mamág-an ang íya lúlan, pagbátyag, panghunâhúnà, etc. His
burden is light, he is much better or feels only a slight pain,
his mind is at ease, etc. (cf. mág-an; mabúg-at--heavy).

_mamahî_, Perfect, entire, whole, blameless, without blemish or defect,
particularly applied to tobacco-leaves, etc.; good-looking, handsome,
nice, attractive, beautiful, comely, pretty (of face, etc.) (cf. mahî,
bilóg, maáyo; maányag, magayón, matahúm, maámbong).

_mamahî-mahî, mamahî--máhì_, Dim. of mamahî. Rather well developed,
not much torn or fissured, pretty well, etc.

_mamalá_, Dry, exsiccated, desiccated, arid, waterless, parched, free
from moisture, drained; seasoned (of wood). Mamalá nga pagkádlaw. A
dry laugh i.e. not a hearty smile, not an honest laugh, but a forced
smile. (cf. malá; mabasâ--wet).

_mamalátyon_, Mortal, subject to death. (cf. patáy, palátyon,
namátyan).

_mamalayád_, Payer, one who pays. (cf. báyad).

_mamaláybay_, Poet; poetical, imaginative. (cf. baláybay, binaláybay).

_mamáli_, A kind of shrub with clusters of flowers and berries.

_mamalígyà_, Seller, merchant, vender. (cf. balígyà).

_mamamáhoy_, Bogey, imp, sprite, goblin, elf, hobgoblin, bad fairy,
wicked spirit; scarecrow; phantom. (cf. báhoy, pamáhoy).

_mamamángan_, Lying in wait for, ambushing, waylaying; robber,
brigand. (cf. bángan).

_mamamáwì, mamamawî_, Saviour, redeemer, liberator. (cf. báwì).

_mamánhig_, A ghost, shade, spectre, disembodied spirit, apparition,
wraith, soul appearing after death, etc. See malánhig.

_mamantálà_, Publisher, reporter, journalist, publicity agent,
disseminator of news, correspondent, (cf. bantálà).

_mámaw_, Elf, goblin, sprite, fairy, ghost, etc. (cf. mamamáhoy,
tamáo, tumáo, kamâkamâ, etc.).


_mámbis_, Fold, kilt, plait; to fold, kilt, plait. Butangán sing
mámbis--or--mambisí ang íya bestído. Plait her dress.

_mámbis_, A kind of tree with edible fruit. (cf. támbis).

_mamilúko_, (Sp. mameluco) Mameluke; dolt, simpleton; half-breed;
a kind of rompers or underwear for small children.

_mamimilî_, One who chooses or selects something; voter,
elector. (cf. pílì, pamílì, pumilílì, palapilián, piniliáy).

_mamíngaw_, Dreary, lonely, sad, dismal, dejected, doleful,
sentimental, melancholy, mournful, gloomy, depressing, cheerless,
joyless. (cf. míngaw).

_mamísos_, One peso each, a peso for each. Nabayáran ko silá sing
mamísos ang inádlaw. I paid them each a peso a day. Mamísos karón
ang kílo sang kapé. A kilo of coffee costs one peso now. (cf. písos).

_mámnà_, (B) A contr. of mamun-á--from munâ--to tarry, loiter,
remain a long time, protract one's stay; to be at ease, be calm or
tranquil. Indì ka mámnà dídto. Don't stay there a long time, don't
loiter there. Indì gid mámnà ang íya hunâhúnà túbtub nga masayóran
níya kon nakadángat na sa Manílà ang íya anák nga bág-o pa lang
magsakáy. She cannot rest at ease till she knows whether her son,
who a short while ago embarked for Manila, has safely arrived
there. (cf. munâ, dúgay, lúsgò).

_mamón_, (Sp. mamon) Cake, tart, sweet bread, sponge-cake.

_mám-on_, For mamaón from mamâ--to chew betelnut.

_mamónog_, Thick, stout; heavy (of rain). (cf. madámol, madákmol).

_mámsà_, A kind of fish of a considerable size and much esteemed
as food.

_mamulayón_, Disparaging, carping, captious, fault-finding,
hypercritical, finding fault with, an adverse critic,
fault-finder. (cf. múlay).

_mamumugón_, A workman, peasant, hind, yokel, unskilled or agricultural
labourer, farm-hand. (cf. pógon, púgon, hornaléro).

_mamumunák_, One who washes clothes; washerwoman, laundress, washerman,
laundry-man. (cf. búnak, labandéra).

_mamumúni_, Decorator, embellisher, adorner. (cf. puní).

_mamumúnò_, Stabber, slayer, killer, murderer, gangster, thug,
assassin, cut-throat. (cf. bunô).

_mamurô-múrò_, A constellation, a cluster of stars.

_mamúrong_, (B) Shady, thick, dense, leafy (of foliage). (cf. múrong,
madábung, magápà).

_man_, Also, too, as well as; well! now! Look here! Nagupúd man ikáw
sa íya? Did you also accompany him? Siá malúyag magkádto man. He would
like to go too. Man, nagsilíng akó sa ímo nga----. Now, look here,
I told you that----.
Quite frequently "man" seems to be employed as a mere decorative
particle, e.g. Daw alóla man lang inâ sa ímo. That is only a trifling
matter for you. Kon amó man lang ang ákon pangabúhì dirí, maáyo pa
nga mapaúlì akó sa ákon bánwa. If my life here is to be only this,
it would be better for me to return to my home-town. Kon sa isá man ka
bágay matúod inâ----. If on the one hand--or--in one respect that is
true----. Amó man gihápon. The same as ever, no change or variation,
matters stand as before.

_maná_, (B) He says (said) or thinks (thought). (cf. silíng níya).

_maná_, (Sp. maná) Manna.

_manabâ_, (B) Low, not high. (cf. nabâ, manobô).

_manábaw_, Shallow, not deep. (nábaw).

_manáda_, (Sp. manada) Flock, herd. (cf. panóng, hubón).

_managwatí_, A kind of small harmless snake.

_manahî-nahî_, Rather well-to-do, neither rich nor poor, satisfactory,
sufficient. (cf. dawâdawâ, hingánhingán, dirâdirâ).

_manák_, Children of a husband or wife by a former wife or husband;
step-children.


_manákon_, (B) I say (think) or said (thought). (cf. maná, silíng ko).

_manalágnà_, Prophet, seer, foreteller, prognosticator. (cf. tágnà).

_manalálay_, Musician; musical. (találay, tulálay; cf. manulálay id.).

_manámì_, Nice, beautiful; delightful, delicious. (námì).

_manámit_, Savoury, tasty, nice, delicious, lovely, palatable, said
of food and drinks. (námit).

_manamporók_, A kind of rice that is highly esteemed on account of
its whiteness and fine flavour. (cf. arabón).

_mananábang_, Protector, helper, upholder, intercessor, patron;
lawyer, advocate, attorney-at-law. (cf. tábang).

_mananagát_, Fisher, fisherman. (cf. panágat, mangingísdà).

_mananágit, mananagít_, Pouncing upon like birds of prey, grabbing,
tearing to pieces (as a bird of prey does). Píspis nga mananágit. A
bird of prey. (cf. dágit).

_mananágnà_, Prophet. (cf. manalágnà). (tágnà--lágnà).

_mananáhì_, Tailor, seamstress. (cf. tahî)

_mananákay_, Passenger, traveller on any vehicle on land, sea or in
the air. (sakáy; cf. sumalákay id.).

_mananáklam_, Usurper, transgressor, encroacher. (cf. sáklam).

_mananám_, Palatable, tasty, nice, said especially of nuts (nanám;
cf. manámit--tasty (in general).

_mananán-aw_, Eye-witness, spectator, onlooker. (cf. tán-aw).

_mananánum_, Planter, farmer; gardener. (cf. tanúm).

_mananáp_, Domestic animals; meat of animals that live and breed
on land.

_mananáway_, A critic, one who censures or finds fault with, a
fault-finder. (cf. sawáy).

_mánang_, The eldest sister. Si mánang mo diín? Diín si mánang
mo? Where is your eldest sister. (cf. mánong--eldest brother).

_manáng_, The vocative of mánang.

_manaól_, A kind of bird of prey; a hawk.

_manára_, See manáda.

_manaúl_, See manaól.

_manáy_, (H) Familiarly used for mánang--eldest sister.

_manayá-náya_, Complacent, cheerful, merry, jolly, gay. (nayánáya).

_manáyap_, Open, clear, unobstructed, extensive, wide, spacious
(said of fields, etc.). (cf. náyap, mahanáyap, mahanáyak, mahanáhay).

_manayók-náyok_, Far away, distant, remote, a long way
off. (cf. nayók-náyok).

_mandadáug_, Victor, conqueror, winner; victorious,
triumphant. (cf. daúg).

_mandátos_, (B) (Sp. mandato) Order, command, mandate, injunction,
regulation, precept; leader; ringleader, originator, one who starts
or is chiefly responsible for an act. Ikáw gid ang mandátos sinâ. It
was you who started that. You are the one who is responsible for
that. (cf. sógò, kasogoán; pangúlo, manugpahítò, kábo, manugdumála).

_mánding_, Aunt; stepmother, foster-mother; dear old woman. (cf. tíà,
tíyà, darâ, áling, bóboy).

_mandô_, (Sp. mando) Authority, office, power, sway, rule,
command. (cf. gahúm, palangakóan, dumála, batúta).

_mándò_, (Sp. mandar) To rule, guide, direct, govern, sway, regulate,
control, have authority over, hold sway, command, lead. Iámpò ta nga
mandoán sang Diós si N.N. sa pagdumála sa áton sing maáyo. Let us pray
to God that he may direct N.N. so that he may govern us well. Sín-o
ang nagamándò? Who is in charge? Who commands or rules? (cf. gahúm,
dumála, pasunúd, sógò, buót).

_mandragóra_, (Sp. mandragora) Mandrake, mandragora.

_mangahátì, mangahatión_, See manghátì, manghatión--twenty-five
centavos each, etc. (cf. kahátì).


_mangalályaw_, Tourist, sight-seer, traveller; emigrant, home-seeker,
one who goes to live or moves to another place. (cf. malangályaw,
mangangáyaw, pangáyaw).

_mangalaní_, (H) Reaper, harvester, one who reaps rice by means of a
"kayóg". (cf. áni, manganganí, manuganí).

_mangaláyo_, An insect with a very painful sting. See alingáyo,
kamaláyo.

_mangangabayó_, Rider, horseman, cavalry. (cf. kabáyo, kabayó).

_mangangágsa_, Lease-holder, tenant. (cf. ágsa, agsadór).

_mangangákò_, One who is--responsible,--in charge,--in authority;
official, functionary. (cf. ákò, palangakóan).

_mangangalámpay_, Shell-gatherer, shell-collector; whoremonger,
one who runs after girls. (cf. kalámpay, pangalámpay).

_mangangámba_, Singer. (cf. ámba, kantór, kantóra).

_manganganí_, Reaper, harvester. See mangalaní.

_mangangáon_, Eater, feaster. (cf. káon).

_mangangapín_, Helper, supporter, assistant, second, upholder,
protector. (cf. ápin, umalapín).

_mangangatubáng, mangangatúbang_, A representative, delegate, senator;
proxy, one who presents himself or confronts a situation. (cf. atúbang,
tigpangatubáng).

_mangangawáy_, Fighter, warrior, soldier; martial. (cf. áway, soldádo).

_mangangáwtì_, Thief, etc. See makáwtì, makáwat.

_mangangáyaw_, Stranger, foreigner, sojourner, tourist, traveller. See
mangalályaw, etc.

_mángay_, A small sea-shell so called. (cf. búskay, búli, sigáy).

_mángga_, (Sp. mango) The mango-tree and its fruit. (cf. páhò).

_mángga_, (Sp. manga) Sleeve. (cf. pakô, pákpak, sóol).

_mánggad_, Riches, possessions, property, wealth, assets, capital;
to become rich, acquire property, etc. Ang kalabánan sang mga táo
nagapaningúhà magmánggad. The majority of men strive to become
rich. Nagmánggad siá sa íla nga palatikángan. He got rich in their
business. (cf. pagkabutáng).

_manggáran_, (H) Rich, wealthy, well-to-do, possessed of property,
propertied, affluent, opulent, man of means. (cf. mánggad,
manggaránon).

_manggaránon_, Rich, etc. See manggáran. (cf. pilákan, bangkílan,
aligyanán).

_mánggo_, (Sp. mango) Penholder, handle, helve, haft (of tools,
etc.). (cf. ápal, kaláptan, pólo, uluyatán).

_manggugúbat, manggugubát_, Trouble-maker, rowdy, gangster,
turbulent fellow, ruffian, riotous, revolutionary, disturbing the
peace. (cf. gúbat, huróng, manriríbok, magamó).

_manghár_, To arrange, put in order, sort, assort, classify, manage
well. (Perhaps from the Sp. manejar). Manghará ang baráha mo. Arrange
your cards in order according to their suits. (cf. kaláging, húsay).

_manghátì_, Twenty-five centavos each, costing twenty-five
centavos. Ginabalígyà níya iní sing manghátì. He sells it at
twenty-five centavos a piece. (cf. kahátì, mangahátì).

_manghatión_, Worth or costing twenty-five centavos. (cf. manghátì,
kahátì, mangahatión).

_manghir-óhon_, (B) Merciful, compassionate, feeling for,
commiserative, condoletory, ruthful, pitiful, etc. See
malolóy-on. (cf. ngír-o).

_manghohókom_, One who judges, a judge, justice. (cf. hokóm,
panghokóm).

_mánghud_, A younger brother or sister; not of age, minor; not ripe,
unripe, immature, green (of fruits). (cf. libáyon, kalibáynan;
línghod).

_manghúdan_, A kind of very tasty banana. (cf. balángon, barángon).

_mangilínon_, Considerate, thoughtful, careful, solicitous; attentive,
mindful, heedful, regardful. (cf. ngílin).


_mangílo, mangiló_, (B) Setting the teeth on edge, etc. See manílo.

_mangin_--, A contr. that often stands for magapangin--, magpangin--and
(rarely) for nagapangin--. Indì ka mangintigúlang, kon índì nímo
pagduláon ang maláut mo nga kaduyugán. You won't grow old, unless you
give up your bad habits. Iníng dakô nga minurô manginbánwa kunína. This
large village will finally become a township or Municipality. Sa
dílì madúgay manginkabangdánan iní sang íya nga pagkapúto. This,
before long, will be the cause of his bankruptcy, will make him
bankrupt. N.B. Mangin--is also, but seldom, used to form nouns and
adjectives, e.g. manginalámon--a wise man. (cf. nangin--).

_manginalámon_, A wise, learned, clever man, a doctor, sage,
savant. (cf. mangin--, álam).

_manginbabáe, manginbabáye_, A verbal form of panginbabáe,
panginbabáye, but sometimes used as an adjective like
palanginbabáe--addicted to women, etc.

_mangingílaw, mangingiláw_, One who eats raw meat, etc.; a
cannibal. (cf. kílaw).

_mangingísdà_, Fisherman, fisher, angler. (cf. ísdà, pangísdà).

_manginlaláki_, A verbal form of panginlaláki, but sometimes used as
an adjective like palanginlaláki--addicted to men, etc.

_manginngínhas_, A shell-gatherer, collector of sea-shells; grabber,
grafter, boodler. (cf. pangínhas, pakinháson).

_mangirir-óhon_, (B) Compassionate, merciful. See manghir-óhon.

_mangir-óhon_, (B) Merciful. See manghír-óhon id. (ngír-o).

_mangítngit_, Troublous, boiling, throbbing, pricking, stinging,
stabbing, gnawing, hard to bear or suffer. Mangítngit nga pangabúhì. A
troublous or hard life. Mangítngit nga konsiénsya. A conscience that
pricks. (cf. ngítngit, malisúd, mangótngot).

_mangitó-ngitó_, Dark, obscure, black, dusky, ebon, sable,
opaque. (cf. ngitóngitó, maitúm, ilóm, átà, áta, ágtà, madulúm,
pitípit).

_mángkà_, (B) Jack tree and jack fruit. (cf. lángkà id.).

_mangkóno_, A kind of hardwood tree and its valuable timber.

_manglalághap_, Seeker, one who looks for something. Manglalághap
sing palangágdan. A job-hunter, an office-seeker. (cf. lághap).

_manglalagúyaw_, Tourist, traveller, one who takes a vacation or
travels for pleasure. (cf. lagúyaw).

_manglalákat_, One who walks on foot, a footman, foot-soldier,
infantry-man; infantry. (cf. lakát).

_manglaláksam_, One who encroaches upon--, usurps--, wrongfully takes
possession of--, another's property. (cf. láksam).

_manglalantáka_, Bombardier, artilleryman; artillery. (cf. lantáka).

_mángmang_, A peso of Philippine money. (cf. písos).

_mángmang_, To widen, be or become wide. Kon dugángan magadiótay,
kon ibánon nagamángmang. Anó inâ?--Búhò inâ. If something is added,
it grows smaller, if something is taken away from it, it grows
wider. What is that?--That is a hole. (cf. wángwang, bángbang).

_mangmángan_, Rich, having plenty of money. (cf. mángmang, pilákan,
manggáran, manggaránon; bankílan, aligyanán).

_mangô_, Dull, stupid, brainless; an ass, fool. (cf. tipangág, pangág,
pángog, balingág, balingá, búngaw, tampuháw, búang, kólò).

_mangongólo_, Head, chief, director, manager, leader, boss, spokes-man,
ruler, authority, official. (cf. ólo).

_mangótngot_, Palpitating, quivering, throbbing (of wounds, the
conscience, etc.). (cf. ngótngot, mangítngit).

_mángtas_, Brave, courageous, fearless, reliable, trustworthy,
fierce. Mángtas nga idô. A good watchdog. (cf. mántas).

_mungungulipón_, Slave-holder, slave-driver, tyrant,
subjugator, conqueror, one who subjects another to slavery or
drudgery. (cf. olípon).


_mangungúma_, Farmer, tiller of the soil, agricultural
labourer. (cf. umá).

_mangungúnung_, One that is attached; supporter, friend, helper,
assistant, partner. (cf. únung).

_mangungútang_, Debtor, one who owes a debt or borrows
money. (cf. útang).

_mangustán_, (Sp. mangostán) Mangosteen.

_mangwawáli_, Preacher, missioner, clergyman. (cf. wáli).

_manháwà_, Open, roomy, spacious; well off, well to do, prosperous;
to be well to do, etc. Manháwà na ang íya kahimtángan. He is well
off, has some property, is living in easy circumstances. Mangabúdlay
kamó sing may kapísan, agúd maluás kamó sa kaimolón kag magmanháwà
ang ínyo pangabúhì. Work hard and assiduously to free yourself from
poverty and to get on well in life. (cf. háwà, manwáhà, dawâdawâ,
dir-á-dirâ, kaayohán).

_maní_, (Sp. maní) Peanut, earthnut, groundnut, goober.

_manibéla_, (Sp. manivela) Steering wheel.

_manídnid_, Trim, neat, tidy. See mahípid, mahípig. (cf. nídnid).

_man-ihí_, (B) See panghimál-i, kalibutáni id. Man-ihí ko kará. How
can I know it. I know nothing about it. (cf. máan).

_manikî_, Little, small, tiny, wee, diminutive. (cf. tikî, maisót,
diótay, ikî).

_manílo, maniló_, (B) Tingling, grating, squeaking, sharp, gritty,
setting one's teeth on edge, said of sensations, etc. (cf. nílo,
mangílo, mangiló).

_maní-maní_, A plant that in its leaves resembles the peanut plant.

_manínay_, Godmother. (cf. padríno, panínoy--godfather; madrína).

_maningáon_, Agonizing, in one's last agony, on one's death
bed. (cf. tingâ).

_manínggol_, Docile, obedient, submissive, submitting, yielding,
dutiful, but mostly used in the negative form dìmanínggol--stubborn,
disobedient, headstrong, obdurate, intractable. (cf. tínggol,
panínggol).

_maninihón, maniníhon_, A potter, one who makes or sells earthenware
vessels; manufacturing, industrial. (cf. díhon).

_maniniíd_, Watchful, observing, observant, prying, spying;
spy, detective, sleuth. Polís nga maniniíd. Secret service
man. Detective. (cf. tíid; maninilág, tíktik, lampitáw).

_maniníkas_, A thief; pilfering, thievish. (tíkas).

_maniníkmà_, Thief, petty thief, pilferer, sneak. (cf. tíkmà,
maniníkas).

_maninilág_, An observer, spy. (panílag).

_maninínà_, A kind of a dark-coloured snake growing to a considerable
size and very harmful to chickens, eggs, etc., but non-poisonous.

_maniníndot_, Setting fire to, an incendiary, one who commits
arson. (cf. síndot).

_maniningád_, A listener, eavesdropper, one who overhears a
conversation, a spy. (cf. tingád).

_maninít_, Trickling, flowing sparsely or slowly. (cf. ninít).

_manipís_, Thin, fine, light, flimsy (of paper, cloth, boards,
etc.). (cf. nipís; madámol, madákmol--thick).

_manipólon_, (H) Round, spherical, rotund, circular, annular,
cylindrical. (cf. tipólon, matimbúlug, matibúnug).

_maníwang_, Lean, thin, spare, lank, emaciated, meagre, gaunt,
skinny, slight, slender. (cf. níwang, mahágpis, kanít, kandínggal;
matámbok--fat, stout).

_maniwáng-níwang_, Dim. of maníwang. Rather lean, slightly emaciated.

_maníya_, (Sp. manilla) Manacle, gyve, shackle, handcuff; to fetter;
to entangle, get entangled, be caught, become involved (in a rope,
sling, etc.). Nagmaníya ang karabáw. The buffalo entangled itself
with the tether or rope. (cf. gápus, gapús; bulíbud).

_mánkà_, See mángkà--jackfruit.


_mánlà_, A kind of large-eyed (broad-eyed) frog; vermin; a wild boar
or pig; wild beasts in general.

_manlalagúyaw_, See manglalagúyaw--a tourist.

_manlalámon_, Devouring, swallowing, gobbling up; fierce,
bloodthirsty. (cf. lámon, manunúkub, mananágit).

_manlaláton_, Spreading, catching, taking, infectious, contagious,
epidemic, epidemical. (cf. latón, malaláton).

_manliríbuk_, Revolutionary, riotous, mutinous, agitator, exciting
a commotion or tumult. (cf. ribók).

_mánlot_, A kind of small octopus. (cf. kugíta--a large octopus).

_mánlot_, A large sea shell.

_manlulúas_, Redeemer, saviour, liberator, rescuer,
deliverer. (cf. luás, mamamáwì, manunúbus).

_manlulúpad_, Flyer, aviator; winged. (cf. lupád).

_mánngà_, A contraction of manungâ. Also: middle-aged, from
about thirty-five to fifty-five years of age. Daw anó kamál-am
(katigúlang) si Fuláno?--Mánngà (siá). How old is N.N.?--He is
middle-aged. (cf. médya bída).

_máno_, (Sp. mano) The hand; the lead, a hand of cards (in
card-playing); the right side; direction to a driver of a vehicle to
turn to the right or to the side opposite the "sílya". (cf. kamót,
manohán, sílya).

_manobô_, Low, depressed, short, not high or tall. (cf. nobô; manabâ).

_manobô-nóbò_, Dim. of manobô. Rather low, rather short, of low
stature, a little less than normal in height. Maníwang siá kag
manobônóbò. He was lean and rather low in stature.

_manog-_, A prefix denoting occupation with what the root or term
implies to which it is attached, e.g. manogarádo--a plougher;
manogdumúg--a wrestler; manoghábul--a weaver; manoglála--a
basket-weaver, one who makes wickerwork; manogabút--one about,
or expected, to arrive; manogkádto--one about to leave or go
somewhere, manogtapús--one about to finish or complete (his studies,
a job, etc.). N.B. Very frequently the prefix manog- produces
a shifting of the accent of the term to which it is attached,
e.g. manogdumúg (dúmug); manoghábul (habúl); manogtapús (tápus)
and many more. (manug--id.).

_mán-og_, Snake, serpent, viper. (cf. sawá).

_manogpalungsúnug_, A member of a fire-brigade, fireman. (cf. pálong,
súnug).

_manohán_, An object played from the hand in various games, as a ball,
stone, marble, card, etc. (cf. máno).

_manók_, Fowl, chicken; cock, gamecock; poultry. (cf. agák, sulúg,
mungâ, pisô, sumaláyhaw, kilawát; dumalága, damulága).

_manók-manókon_, Somewhat like or resembling a chicken; squinting
slightly.

_manól_, Low, mean, boorish, uncultured, very common, rough,
coarse, rude, vulgar, not fit or proper for educated or refined
people. (cf. bástos).

_mán-ol_, To benumb, cause numbness by a blow or knock. Namán-ol
ang síko ko, kay nakasúnggò akó sa díngding. My elbow was benumbed,
for I knocked it against the wall.

_mánong_, The eldest brother. (cf. mánang--the eldest sister).

_manóng_, The vocative of mánong.

_manóso_, (Sp. manojo) A handful; a bunch, batch, string of, rope
of, bundle; a bundle of one hundred tobacco leaves on a string,
or the like.

_manóy_, (H) Eldest brother (familiar). (cf. mánong, manóng).

_mánsa_, (Sp. mancha) Stain, blotch, blur, taint, spot, blot, blemish,
dirt. (cf. dágtà, bulíng, hígkò, etc.).

_mansánas_, (Sp. manzana) Apple.

_mansanílya_, (Sp. manzanilla) The common chamomile, a medicinal plant.

_mansebádo_, See amansebádo--one living in concubinage.

_mansisiwá_, Nurse, wet-nurse, children's nurse. (cf. yáya, sisiwá).


_mansistér_, (English: manchester) White cotton cloth, twill, drill,
Manchester goods or wares.

_mánso_, (Sp. manso) Tame, domestic, domesticated, gentle, meek,
willing, broken in, well trained, subdued, tractable. (cf. mahagúp,
mabúot, antâ).

_mánta_, (Sp. manta) A woollen blanket; shawl, travelling
rug. (cf. hábul, abláy, kúnop, kápay).

_mántas_, Reliable, etc. (of watch-dogs). See mángtas id.

_mantéka, mantékà_, (Sp. manteca) Lard, fat, dripping. (cf. támbok).

_mantékilya_, (Sp. mantequilla) Butter.

_mantél_, (Sp. mantel) Table-cloth, altar-cloth,
table-cover. (cf. tabón).

_mantelyína_, (Sp. mantellina) Mantilla, a woman's head-shawl,
woman's veil. (cf. kúnop, kúmbung, takuróng, tákdong, kúdong).

_mantenér_, (Sp. mantener) To maintain, keep up, hold out, support,
keep alive, manage to go on. Nagamantenér gid lang silá sang íla
pangabúhì. They are just managing to keep alive, they are supporting
themselves rather poorly or with difficulty. Mantenehón mo ánay
ang kalát, kay kuháon ko pa ang tigíb. Hold the rope in position,
for I am going to fetch the chisel. Komústa kamó?--Nagamantenér
kamí. How are you?--We are getting along pretty well. Nagaduhádúha akó
kon makamantenér siá dídto sing maláwig nga tión. I wonder (doubt),
whether he will be able to support himself there (remain there) for any
length of time. Mantenér lang. It will do--for the present,--to go on
with. It is only--a make-shift,--a temporary substitute, or the like.

_manteníya_, See mantenér.

_mantéu_, A ghost. See mantíw.

_mantihón_, Bewitched, charmed, wonderful. (cf. mantíw).

_mantíw_, A bugbear, a ghost supposed to be of gigantic proportions
and of terrible aspect; jinnee, jinn.

_mantiwón_, Bewitched, etc. See mantihón.

_mántò_, (Sp. manto) A head-covering, head-shawl (for
women). (cf. mantelyína).

_mántyo_, A ghost. See mantíw.

_manúbad_, Preying upon, devouring, ravening, rapacious, catching
and tearing to pieces. (cf. subád--sibád, síbà; manunúkub).

_manug_--, See manog--.

_manúgang_, (B) Daughter-in-law. (cf. umágad--son-in-law; in some
places manúgang and umágad are used promiscuously for son-in-law and
daughter-in-law). (cf. dúgang, ágad).

_manugáyo_, Doing well, recovering, getting well, improving
(of sick persons); promising, likely to turn out well (of crops,
etc.). (cf. áyo, marayádon).

_manugbákal_, Buyer, purchaser, customer. (cf. bakál, súkì).

_manugbalígyà_, Seller, salesman, saleswoman, dispenser, vender,
vendor, retailer, dealer, merchant. (cf. balígyà).

_manugbánsil_, Dentist. (cf. bánsil).

_manugbántay_, Watch, watchman, guard, keeper, sentry,
sentinel, shepherd, custodian, observer; tutor, warder, warden,
guardian. (cf. bántay).

_manugbíbit_, One who is an adept at working various designs into
cloth. An expert in arranging and adapting the thread of the warp
for making multicoloured designs. (cf. bibít).

_manugbúhat_, Maker, artificer, craftsman, manufacturer, creator,
builder, constructer, constructor. (búhat). (cf. magbubúhat).

_manugbúlung_, Doctor, medical man, physician, healer, leech. (bulúng).

_manugdaigón_, A singer of Christmas carols. (cf. daígon).

_manugdumála, manugdumalá_, Governor, director, administrator, manager,
ruler, boss. (dumála).

_manuggahíd_, An expert in removing foreign bodies from the eye,
eye-cleaner, oculist. (cf. gáhid).

_manuggúnting_, Hair dresser, barber. (gúnting).


_manughilót_, Masseur, masseuse, one who practises
massage. (cf. hílot).

_manughimalád_, A palmister, fortune-teller, chiromancer, one who
practises palmistry. (cf. pálad, himálad).

_manug-íhaw, manug-iháw_, Butcher, slaughterer, dealer in
meat. (cf. íhaw).

_manug-ísdà_, Fisher, fisherman, angler, fishmonger or dealer in fish,
seller of fish. (cf. ísdà).

_manugkahóy_, Collector--, gatherer--, seller--, of firewood; dealer
in wood. (cf. káhoy).

_manuglagarî_, A sawyer, one who saws wood. (cf. lagárì).

_manugláygay_, Preacher, adviser, counsellor, admonisher. (cf. láygay).

_manugpakigbáis_, Debater, disputant, controversialist. (báis).

_manugpalápnag_, Propagator, disseminator, distributer,
agent. (cf. lápnag).

_manugsírko_, A circus-master, an acrobat, tumbler. (sírko--Sp. circo).

_manugsiúg_, One who pushes or presses forward. Manugsiúg sang
tigbató. A type-setter. (cf. síug).

_manugsúlat, manugsulúlat_, Author, writer, a literary man. (cf. sulát,
magsusúlat, manunúlat).

_manugsúsi, manugsusí_, Investigator, inspector,
examiner. Manugsusipuód. Manugsusipuodnanon. Provincial
Inspector. (cf. súsi).

_manugtábas, manugtabás_, Tailor, cutter. (cf. tábas, sástre).

_manugtágnà_, Prophet, seer, fore-teller, predictor. (cf. tágnà,
manalágnà, mananágnà).

_manugtátap_, Manager, care-taker, administrator. (tátap).

_manugtúndà_, Messenger, harbinger, bringer of tidings, angel. (túndà).

_manumbadór_, (Probably from the Sp. tumbar) A stunner, surprising,
amazing, overwhelming, overpowering.

_manumbálay_, One who is a frequent caller or likes to visit from
house to house. (panumbálay).

_manúmhon_, A farmer, tiller of the soil, peasant; rustic, rude,
uncultured. (cf. umá, umánhon).

_manungâ_, A half, one half each. (cf. tungâ, mánngà).

_manúnggal_, A kind of vine whose bitter juice is used as an antiseptic
in cleaning wounds, etc.

_manunóytoy_, Guide, leader. (cf. tóytoy).

_manunúblag_, A disturber; disturbing, interrupting, interfering with,
causing a disturbance. (cf. túblag).

_manunúbus_, Redeemer, saviour, deliverer, liberator. (cf. manlulúas,
mamamáwì, tubús).

_manunudángsudáng_, An unwelcome visitor, a parasite,
sycophant. (cf. panudángsudáng).

_manunúgma_, Seer, prophet, propounder of riddles, riddle maker,
riddle solver; wise, sage. (cf. túgma).

_manulúndà_, Messenger; angel. (cf. manunúndà, manugtúndà, anhél).

_manunúkub_, Tearing to pieces, pouncing upon, devouring, preying,
(beast) of prey. (cf. tukúb).

_manunúlat_, A writer, author. See magsusúlat, manugsúlat.

_manunúlay_, A tempter; the devil. (cf. suláy, panuláy).

_manunúmbung_, Accuser, plaintiff. Manunúmbung puodnánon. Provincial
Fiscal. (cf. súmbung).

_manunúon_, Teacher, professor, master, tutor, instructor. (cf. toón,
magtotóon, magtutúon).

_manunúyò; manunuyô_, Plotter, gangster, murderer, conspirator, one
who intends to harm, or to wreak vengeance upon, others. (cf. tuyô).

_manwáhà_, To go on well, prosper, make progress, be
well-to-do. (cf. manháwà).

_manyági_, An exclamation of remonstrance, or disappointment,
etc. Manyági, kay nagahípus ang bátà, ginapahibî mo! Good heavens,
as the baby is quiet, don't make it cry! Manyági, kay nagapahimúyong
ang alimángo sa búhò, ginkúot mo; tî, kóndì ginkagát níya ikáw. There
now, you disturbed with your finger the crab at rest in its hole;
of course it bit you and it serves you right. (cf. yádi, yádan).

_maóg_, (B) Greedy, voracious, ravenous, wolfish, gluttonous. The
verb is minaóg--to be greedy, eat greedily. Maóg siá nga táo. He is
a greedy man. He is a voracious eater. Indì ka magminaóg. Don't be
greedy. (cf. hákug, dalók, dinalók).

_mápa_, (Sp. mapa) A map, plan, drawing, topographic outline; to map,
map out, make a map. Mapáha iníng papél. Use this paper to draw a plan
on. Mapáhi ang ákon dútà. Make a map of my lands. Mapáhi akó sang
ákon talámnan. Make me a map of my fields. Buás ugáling pagasóklon
kag pagamapáhan ko ang ímo nga dútà. Not just now, but to-morrow I
will measure your grounds and draw a map of them.

_mapa-_, A prefix composed of "ma" and "pa-". Sán-o mo mapabúhat
ang ímo bág-o nga baláy? When shall you be able to have your new
home built? "mapa--" frequently stands for "magapa--", e.g. Sán-o
ka mapamanílà (magapamanílà)? When are you going to Manila? Ang
mga matárung mapalángit, ang mga mamatáy sa salâ nga ikamatáy
mapainpiérno. The just will go to heaven, those that die in mortal
sin will go to hell. (cf. nagapa--, naga--, pa--).

_mapáang_, Hot, stuffy, sultry, close, sweltry,
oppressive. (páang). (cf. mabóhot, magín-ot).

_mapabuyán-buyánon_, Negligent, careless, letting things take their
course without any serious reflection or effort at remedying the
state of affairs, putting off, procrastinating, (cf. pabuyánbúyan).

_mapadalá-daláhon_, (H) Amenable to persuasion or bribery, easily led,
easily won over by argument or bribes. (dalá).

_mapadás_, Sharp, cutting, caustic, sarcastic, ironic, mordent,
biting, pointed (of speech); to be or become sharp, etc. (cf. padás,
maparás, magíska).

_mapadinaláhon_, One easily swayed or carried along, not steadfast,
not firm of character, unreliable, vacillating. (cf. dalá, padalá).

_mapág-on_, Firm, steady, strong, solid, stable, unshakable, stanch,
staunch. (cf. pág-on, malíg-on, salalígan, mabákud).

_mapágrus_, Strong, firm, solid, robust. (cf. págrus, mapág-on,
mabákud).

_mapágsi_, Quick, agile, nimble, swift. (págsi). (cf. mapágsik,
malígsi).

_mapágsik_, See mapágsi. (págsik--págsi).

_mapahayágon_, Open, frank, candid, plain spoken. (cf. paháyag).

_mapahaylóhon_, Changeable, mutable, variable, unstaid, inconstant,
not reliable or trustworthy, fickle. (cf. paháylo).

_mapailúbon_, Patient, meek, tolerant, submissive, resigned, gentle,
long-suffering, bearing with. (cf. paílub).

_mapainubsánon_, See the following mapainubúson.

_mapainubúson_, Humble, lowly, submissive, self-effacing, unassuming,
modest, meek. (cf. ubús, paubús).

_mapainulúbon_, See mapailúbon.

_mapainumúron_, (H) Abstinent, abstemious, frugal, self-denying,
temperate or moderate in eating and drinking. (úmud).

_mapa-ít_, Bitter, acrid, biting, piquant, pungent; cruel, severe,
painful, poignant. (pa-ít).

_mapákok_, Weak, slow; dull, stupid, obtuse, backward, (pákok;
cf. malúya, mabúndul, malúyò, kagúng, kalóng).

_mapaligáron_, (H) Postponing, dilatory, putting off, procrastinating,
letting things pass by, paying no attention to, heedless. (lígad).

_mapánas_, Wiping out, destroying, obliterating, rubbing out, removing
all trace of, erasing. (cf. pánas).

_mapanghatágon_, Generous, liberal, munificent, free, open-handed;
giver, giving. (cf. hátag, maálwan).

_mapanginlamánon_, (H) Circumspect, prudent, watchful,
wary, chary, cautious. Ang táo nga mapanginlamánon malayô sa
katalágman. A cautious man is far removed from danger. Forewarned,
forearmed. (cf. panginláman).


_mapángsot_, Urinous, smelling--of urine,--like urine. (cf. pángsot).

_mapanhatágon_, See mapanghatágon.

_mapanilágon, mapanilagón_, Observant, watchful, open-eyed, alive to,
awake to, vigilant, wide awake, guarded, on the lookout. (cf. panílag).

_mapántok_, (B) Assiduous, diligent, with zeal or
application. (cf. pántok, mapísan, maúkud, mabákas, matútum).

_maparás_, (H) See mapadás--cutting of speech, etc.

_mapasinalamáton_, Thankful, grateful, indebted to, obliged, under
obligation. (cf. salámat, pasalámat).

_mapasulabíhon_, Partial, one-sided, inequitable, giving preference
to, prejudiced, narrow-minded. (cf. labí).

_mapátag_, Open, plain, clear, unobstructed, said of land and
fields. (pátag). (cf. mahanáyak, mahanáyap).

_mapati-patíhon_, Credulous, gullible, easily believing any story or
report, easily taken in. (páti).

_mapátol_, (B) Tough, hard, difficult to manage. (pátol; cf. mahúnit,
mahúnlit, maáwot).

_mapatawáron_, Forgiving, indulgent, lenient, tolerant, forbearing,
ready to pardon, forgetful of wrongs or injuries, not given to revenge
or retaliation. (patáwad).

_mapatubáson_, Prolific, productive, fertile, fruitful, frugiferous,
fecund, yielding a good crop. (cf. patubás, palatúbson).

_mapatugsilíngon_, Considerate, thoughtful, mindful of, having regard
or consideration for, conscientious. (cf. patugsíling).

_mapatumbayáon_, Negligent, unconcerned, careless,
heedless. (patumbáyà; cf. mapabuyánbuyánon).

_mapatuyángon_, Selfish, egoistic, pleasing oneself, self-indulgent,
worldly-minded. (cf. patúyang).

_mapaubúson_, Humble, etc. See mapainubúson, mapainubsánon.

_mapáya_, Clumsy, cumbrous, unwieldy, awkward to carry on account of
bulky size or great length, as a large drum, a bird-cage, arm-chair,
a long pole, flag-staff, etc. (cf. páya, mabángkag, magámbal).

_mapidâ_, One who is very particular about his food, fastidious,
dainty, difficult to please. (cf. pidâ).

_mapígaw_, Weak, frail, feeble, collapsible. (cf. pígaw, malúya,
mahúyang).

_mapígus_, Harsh, oppressive, exploiting, cruel. (cf. pígus, malúpig).

_mapigúson, mapigusón_, Harsh, etc. See mapígus, malupígon.

_mapílì_, Choosing, fastidious, exacting, selecting, particular about
one's food, dress, etc.; finical, finikin, finicking, difficult to
please or satisfy, nice in the matter of food, etc. (cf. pílì, mapidâ).

_mapilít_, Sticky, adhesive, viscous, gummy, cohesive, gluey,
glutinous, clammy, adhering to. (cf. pilít).

_mapilitón_, Insisting, persistent, urging, pressing, importunate;
sticking to. (cf. pílit, pilít).

_mapinadayúnon_, Lasting, enduring, permanent, constant,
persevering. (cf. dáyon).

_mapinahamut-ánon_, Obliging, pleasing, considerate, thoughtful,
ingratiating, tactful, regardful. (cf. buút, hamúot, pahamúot).

_mapinailúbon_, Patient, etc. See mapailúbon.

_mapinalanggáon_, Doting, petting, caressing, fondling, cherishing,
kind, kindly, tender, affectionate. (cf. palánggà).

_mapinangadíon_, Devout, pious, a man of prayer. (cf. pangadî).

_mapinasapayánon, mapinasapayanón_, Mindful, regardful. Dílì (dî)
mapinasapayánon--indifferent, careless, thoughtless. (cf. sapayán,
waláy sapayán, pagkadilìmapinasapayanón).

_mapinasipaláhon_, Insulting, affronting, deriding, mocking, scoffing,
blaspheming, blasphemous, scurrilous, gibing, abusive, jeering,
vilifying. (cf. pasipála).


_mapinasúdlon_, Filling, absorbing, taking in, devouring, absorbent,
stuffing, cramming; one who learns well or has a good memory;
one who takes things to heart, sensitive, full of feeling,
impressionable. (cf. sulúd, pasulúd).

_mapinatíhon_, Credulous, gullible, unsuspecting, easily deceived or
tricked. (cf. páti, mapatípatíhon).

_mapinatókon, mapinatokón_, Founding, establishing, erecting, laying
the foundations of, instituting; inventing, making up (a story, lie,
etc.). (cf. pátok).

_mapinatôpatóon_, Imaginative, inventive, creative, illusory,
fictitious; an adept in getting up plausible stories, or the
like. (cf. patôpátò).

_mapinatuyángon_, Self-indulgent, etc. See mapatuyángon.

_mapinaumúron_, (H) Abstemious, abstinent, mortifying, mortified,
self-denying. (cf. paúmud).

_mapín-ot_, Clogged, contracted, narrow of aperture, difficult to
breathe, asthmatic, choked (of the windpipe, etc.). (cf. pín-ot).

_mapíntas_, Cruel, pitiless, inhuman, savage, ferocious, fierce,
brutal, destitute of mercy or compassion, harsh, atrocious, tyrannical,
unjustly severe. (cf. píntas, mabangís, mabarís).

_mapinuslánon_, Useful, of use, of utility, of some good
or service, serviceable, profitable, gainful, remunerative,
advantageous. (cf. pulús, mapulús, mapuslánon).

_mapíot, mapí-ot_, Strict, close, narrow, contracted, straitened,
dense, crowded, packed, pressed together, hard-pressed; hard,
difficult, severe. (cf. píot).

_mapísan_, Diligent, assiduous, sedulous, hard-working, zealous,
industrious, active, energetic, with application. (cf. písan, maíd-id,
matúl-id, maúkud, mabákas).

_mapúg-a_, Hard, hardened, clotty, clotted, cloddy; lumpy, coagulated,
full of clods or lumps (of earth, sand, etc.); dry, brittle, hard to
swallow (of bread, etc.). (cf. púg-a).

_mapulá_, Red, reddish, ruddy, rufous, florid, sanguine,
rosy, incarnadine, carroty, fiery, copper-coloured, crimson,
flushed. (cf. pulá).

_mapúlaw_, Waking, watching, watchful, wakeful, keeping awake,
awake, keeping watch or vigil, vigilant, assiduous, not sleepy or
lazy. (cf. puláw, mapuláwon).

_mapuláwon_, See mapúlaw. Also: Wanting little sleep, staying up long,
keeping late hours, sleepless.

_mapulús_, See mapinuslánon--useful, etc.

_mapúng-aw_, Lonely, solitary, isolated, dreary, desolate,
dismal. (púng-aw).

_mapungáy_, Weak, feeble, frail, debile. (pungáy; cf. malumíng,
malúya, mapígaw).

_mapúrus_, Strong, robust; loud (of voice). (cf. purús).

_mapuslánon_, See mapinuslánon--useful, etc.

_mapúsug_, (B) Thick, not thin or slender. (púsug; cf. madámol id.).

_maputî_, White, snowy, chalky, hoar, hoary, blanched; pure, unsullied,
untarnished, candid, uncontaminated, snow-white. (putî).

_marabílyas_, (Sp. maravilla) A kind of flowering plant, marigold;
deep pink colour.

_marabó_, Tasty, succulent, delectable, dainty, nice, toothsome,
savoury, of good flavour (of fruits and tubers); opposed to
maganás--insipid. (cf. rabó).

_maragáng_, Spotted, soiled, disfigured, blotched, blotchy,
stained, bloodstained; full of pustules or eruptions (of
skin-diseases). Maragáng ang báyò níya sing dugô. His jacket is
blood-stained. Maragáng (nagamaragáng) siá sang katúl. His body is
covered with eruptions of the skin-disease called katúl. (cf. ragáng,
pamaragáng).

_maragíting_, Creaking, cracking, squeaking. (cf. ragíting).

_maragkót_, (B) Sticky, viscous, adhesive, stiff. Mabúdlay ang
paglakát sa maragkót nga lalaó. Walking through sticky mud is
tiresome. (cf. ragkót, mapilít).


_marágnat_, (B) Slightly feverish, etc. See malágnat.

_maragomó_, Crisp, short. (cf. ragomó, mahágpok).

_marágtas_, Story, history, event, incident, anecdote, chronicle,
record. (cf. histórya).

_maragtásnon_, Historical, eventful, momentous, memorable. Maragtásnon
nga hitabô. An historical event. Maragtásnon nga túig. An eventful
year.

_maraháy-ráhay_, Quick, swift, very agile, nimble, lithe,
lithesome. (cf. raháyráhay, mapágsik, malígsi, maábtik, madásig,
kisáy).

_maraháy-raháy_, Mediocre, neither poor nor rich, neither much nor
little, middle-class. (cf. hingánhingán, dawâdawâ, dirâdirâ).

_mara-íng, maraíng_, Dirty, ugly, nasty, abominable, sullied,
soiled. (cf. raíng, mahígkò, maláw-ay, magím-ang, kalaímnan, marígkam,
marísmò).

_marál_, The male of the singgálong (fox; civet cat).

_maralasgáon_, (B) Liable to attract--, to become infested with--,
ants called lásgà, particularly said of eatables. (cf. masulubáyon).

_marámad_, (B) To be wide awake, be fully aware of, to grasp,
comprehend, understand, take in. Warâ akó kamarámad kang ginkoón
na. (Walâ akó makahangúp (makamarásmas) sang ginsilíng níya). I
don't (did not, didn't) understand what he says (said). Kamarámad
(makamarámad) kaw kará? (Makasáyod, makahibaló ka sinâ?). Can you
understand it? Do you know that? (cf. malámad, marásmas, hibalú,
sáyod, balintúnod, áto, hántup, hangúp).

_mará-mará_, (B) The mole-cricket. See malámalá.

_maramíg_, (B) Cold; stiff. (cf. ramíg, malamíg, matúgnaw).

_maránhig_, (B) A ghost, spectre, etc. See malánhig.

_marapúg_, (B) Stinking, smelling, having a bad smell, giving off a
stench, of an evil or obnoxious smell or odour. (cf. rapúg, mabahô,
mabáhò, makalolóod, makangingíl-ad).

_marárang_, (B) Daring, bold, defiant, impertinent, audacious,
insolent, froward; cunning, resourceful. (cf. rárang, makáhas, masúpug,
maaháng, malálang).

_marása_, (B) Good, well, etc. See maáyo. Dílì marása ang íya památì
(pagbátì). His health is not good. He is sick. Marása gid ang íya
nga batásan. His behaviour (character) is excellent. His manners are
engaging. (cf. rása).

_marásmas_, To be wide (fully) awake, be awake to, to grasp,
comprehend, understand, take in, take. Walâ siá makamarásmas sang ákon
nga gin silíng. He could not understand what I said. Namarasmasán
níya ang tanán nga ginpaháyag ni Fuláno. He comprehended all that
N.N. expounded. Namarasmasán akó sang dídto na akó sa baláy. I
recovered my senses when I got to the house. (cf. marámad, mádmad,
hangúp, hántup, balintúnod, áto, sáyod, másngà).

_marayádon_, (B) Getting well or better; promising. See
manugáyo. (cf. ayád).

_marayô_, (B) See malayô--distant, far away, etc.

_margába_, (Sp. marga, margajita) Pyrites, mispickel; marl.

_margaríta_, A kind of flowering plant, the common daisy.

_margóso_, See amargóso.

_maribók_, Disturbing the peace, rebellious, riotous, tumultuous,
turbulent, disorderly, revolutionary, mutinous. (ribók).

_maribúok_, (B) Thick, stout, round, plump, fat of arms, calves,
cheeks, etc. (ribúok). (cf. matibúnog, matipúlon, manipólon).

_maribusól_, (B) See maribúok. (ribusól).

_marído_, (Sp. marido) Husband. (cf. bána).

_marigábot_, Hot, sultry, stuffy, sweltry, close; disturbed, upset,
perplexed, confused, excited through overwork or through having too
many things to attend to. (rigáhot). (cf. magín-ot, mabóhot; gomón).

_marígkam_, Dirty, filthy, nasty, nauseating. (cf. rígkam, mahígkò,
makalolóod, makangilíl-ad, raíng).


_maríit, mariít_, Haunted, weird, dreary, desolate, depressing,
lonely, lonesome, inspiring fear, uncanny, said particularly of lonely
places. (cf. ríit).

_marikót_, Complicated, mingled, combined, confused,
involved. (rikót). (cf. gomón). Marikót nga pangabúdlay. Complicated
work that requires great patience, etc.

_marímis, marím-is_, (B) Sweet, sugary, syrupy. (cf. rímis, matám-is,
dólse).

_marimís-rímis_, (B) Dim. of marímis. Rather sweet, sweetish.

_marírong_, (B) Hidden, secret, difficult to find, out of the way,
concealed, not open to view or inspection. Marírong nga lugár ang
tinagóan níya sang ákon líbro. He has hidden my book in a secret
place or hidden nook. (cf. maríit).

_marísmò_, (B) Dirty, soiled, stained, old and torn. (cf. rísmò;
mahígkò, etc.).

_márka_, (Sp. marca) Mark, sign, brand, trade-mark, standard; to
mark, sign, brand. Markahí ang karabáw. Brand the buffalo. Bákli
akó sing agás nga márka manók. Buy me some kerosene of the Cock
brand. (cf. pát-in, doón, timáan).

_markés, markésa_, (Sp. marques, marquesa) Marquis, marquess;
marchioness, marquise.

_mármol_, (Sp. marmol) Marble. Batungdáan nga mármol (bukáy). A marble
monument. (cf. bató nga bukáy).

_marô_, The rice-flower; to flower (of rice). Ang humáy nagamarô
na. The rice is now flowering or in bloom. Sa duhá ka simána magamarô
ang humáy sa ákon talámnan. Within two weeks the rice on my field will
be in flower. Namaroán na akó sang ákon humáy. My rice has flowered,
blossomed.

_marón_, (B) Wild, untamed. (cf. simarón id.).

_marót_, A kind of small fish.

_márpil_, (Sp. marfil) Ivory.

_márso_, (Sp. Marzo) March. (cf. dagangbúlan).

_martabána_, A large earthen jar somewhat resembling a tádyaw, but
more cylindrical in shape.

_mártes_, (Sp. Martes) Tuesday.

_martílyo_, (Sp. martillo) Hammer, mallet. (cf. palapâ, palô).

_mártir_, (Sp. martir) Martyr. (cf. tigbatás).

_marúd-an_, (B) The East. (cf. murúd-an, sidlangán).

_mása_, (Sp. masa) Dough, mass, lump; to knead. Masáha ang arína. Knead
the flour. Masáhi akó sing isá ka sáko nga arína. Knead one sack of
flour for me. (cf. lamás, malasahón).

_mása_, (Sp. maza) The hub, nave of a wheel.

_másà_, (H) To waste, squander, throw away, spend to no
purpose. (cf. kamásà, uyáng, úsik, pilák).

_más-a_, (H) Ever. Dílì nga más-a--never. (cf. mugís).

_masábad_, (H) Inconvenient, awkward, unmanageable, unwieldy,
unsuitable (through being too long, said of sticks, poles, etc.,
that are too long for a given purpose). (cf. maságway, mapáya).

_masádya_, Cheerful, jolly, merry, gleeful, blithe,
blithesome, mirthful, animated, lively, gay, cheery, sprightly,
high-spirited. (cf. sádya, makalilípay, makalulúyag, makawiwíli,
malipáyon, malipayón).

_masagíl-om_, (H) Dark, shaded, dim, dark-coloured, brown, dun,
obscure, not very light. (cf. sagíl-om; itúm, ilómlóm, dulúm).

_masagúron, masinagúron_, Taking care of, rearing, bringing
up. (cf. sagúd).

_maságway_, Awkward, clumsy, inconvenient through being too long,
or the like. (cf. masábad, magámbal, mabángkag).

_masakít_, Sick, ill, infirm, ailing, unwell, poorly, sore, out
of sorts, seedy, painful, aching, poignant, smarting, hurting,
excruciating; sharp, harsh, rough, cutting (of speech). (cf. sakít).

_masakitón_, Sickly, invalid, unhealthy, having poor health, inclined,
or liable, to be often sick; causing pain, painful; sharp, cutting
(of speech). (cf. masakít).

_masakít-sakít_, Dim. of masakít. Slightly ill, indisposed, rather
sore, a little painful, paining a little, not quite well, a little
out of sorts.

_masákò_, Keeping one very busy, engrossing, causing or giving
much work, bustling, hustling, very much occupied, busy,
engaged. (cf. sákò).

_masál-ag_, Disagreeing, at variance, quarrelling, falling out,
at logger-heads, having a difference with. (cf. sál-ag).

_masaláypon_, (H) Erring, mistaken, making a--mistake,--blunder,--mess
of, blundering, doing a thing wrong, committing a fault or
blunder. (cf. sayúp, masinaláypon).

_masalingáya_, Pleasing, pleasant, cheerful. (cf. alikáya, masádya).

_masámbol_, Thick, stout, big; near delivery, pregnant, at the last
stage of child-bearing. (cf. sámbol).

_masamí_, Often, ofttimes, often-times, recurrent, many a time,
frequent, many times; again and again, over and over again,
repeatedly. Sing masamí áton mapanilágan----. Often we can
observe----. (cf. samí, masúnsun, himánhimán, makadámò).

_masámok_, Interfering, disturbing, bothering, causing annoyance or
making oneself a nuisance. (sámok).

_masanáaw_, Glimmering, crepuscular, faint light, said of twilight;
half-light, dim, obscure. (sanáaw).

_masánag_, Clear, bright, light, broad daylight, illuminating, glaring,
strong, dazzling; manifest, evident. (cf. sánag, dayág).

_masángkad_, Wide, broad, of large breadth, ample, extended,
vast. (cf. sángkad, malápad, mahanáhay, etc.).

_masángsang_, Vehement, fierce, heavy, violent (of fighting, war,
etc.). (sángsang). (cf. hinugúng, sugúng).

_masányog_, Enduring, lasting, continuous, permanent, persisting,
abiding, perpetual; extending, advancing, progressing. Masányog siá
sing panghunâhúnà. He is liberal-minded, broad-minded, advanced or
progressive in his ideas or way of thinking. (cf. sányog).

_masápnot_, Rough, difficult of passage; not easy to swallow. Masápnot
ang kán-on nga maitúm, labí na gid, kon walâ sing tinóla. Black rice
is difficult to swallow, especially, if there is no side-dish with
sauce. Masápnot iníng dálan sa paggúyud, sing kawáyan. This road is
difficult to get through when hauling bamboo. (sápnot).

_masariwáol_, Hard, difficult, tiresome, said of work, life etc.;
clumsy, awkward of speech. (sariwáol).

_másaw_, To feast, attend a banquet, eat much or to one's heart's
content. (cf. páskwa, tábad, laód, pasáy, páskon).

_masáw-a_, Disgusting, loathsome, antipathetic, improper, unbecoming,
exciting aversion or dislike. (cf. sáw-a).

_masáwhung_, Abominable, loathsome, stinking, emitting a bad
smell. (cf. sáwhung, bahô, makataláka).

_masáyo_, Often, frequently; frequent. (cf. sáyo, masúnsun, masamí,
makadámò).

_masayón_, Continuous, continual, constant, always. (dáyon, daláyon).

_masáyon_, Easy, facile. (cf. mahapús, mahulás).

_masetéra_, (Sp. maceta) Flower-pot. (cf. masíta).

_masiádo_, (Sp. demasiado) Excessive, more than enough, very much,
too much, overdone. (cf. támà, lám-ag).

_masídlak_, Shining, dazzling, very bright, like sunlight, sparkling,
glittering, gleaming, glowing, scintillating, beaming, vivid,
brilliant, resplendent, refulgent, effulgent. (sídlak).

_masidlákon_, Shining; bright, splendid, clear, etc. See masídlak.

_masídlaw_, See masídlak. (sílaw).

_masig_--, See under nasig--.

_masíga_, Bright, brilliant, good, shining, powerful, vivid, dazzling,
shedding--, casting--, light, giving much light, said of a lamp or
the like. (síga).

_masigka-_, A prefix denoting equality of condition, e.g. masigkatáo--a
man like ourselves, a fellow-man, neighbour. (cf. isigka--).

_masílak_, (H) See masídlak id.

_masílaw_, See masídlaw id.

_masílì_, (H) Dazzling white, shining with a white lustre, very
bright. (cf. masídlak, masílaw). (sílì).

_masílik_, Far-reaching, resounding, sonorous, lusty, reverberating,
loud, carrying far, said of sounds and voices. (cf. sílik, malágsing,
matágsing, masulánting, matúnug).

_masilíng_, (B) Shining, polished, burnished, furbished, bright,
shiny, gleaming, glossy, said of smooth surfaces that have been
burnished. (cf. silíng, mahíning, masílì).

_masilin-íton_, Sympathetic, regardful, considerate, thoughtful,
affectionate, compassionate; emotional, sentimental. (cf. sín-it,
kasín-it).

_masimbáhon_, A frequent church-goer; devout, pious, religious,
a man of prayer. (cf. símba, simbáhan, silimbáhon, mainampóon).

_masím-ong_, (B) Solitary, desolate, dismal, lonely, dreary,
secluded. (sím-ong). (cf. mapúng-aw id.).

_masinabíton_, Discontented, displeased, unsatisfied, grumbling
on account of having received less than others, envious,
spiteful. (sabít).

_masinadyáhon_, Cheerful, jolly, etc. See masádya. (cf. maluyagón).

_masinág_, Transparent, translucent, pellucid, translucid, transmitting
light, crystal. (sinág).

_masinagúron_, Taking care of, etc. See masagúron.

_masinakdágon_, Supporting, helpful, assisting, looking after, taking
care of. (cf. sákdag, maampínon, mainapínon).

_masinaláypon_, Erring, etc. See masaláypon. (cf. sayúp).

_masinalígon_, Trustful, confiding, confident, hopeful, full of trust
or confidence. (cf. sálig, salalígan).

_masinampáton_, Accomplished, well trained, practised, expert, adept,
experienced; giving or providing a good training. (cf. sampáton).

_masinapákon_, Heedful, mindful, attentive, taking notice of, attending
to, careful to observe or attend to; sensitive. (cf. sapák).

_masinapopóhon_, Generous, hospitable, taking care of, giving shelter
and food, sympathetic. (cf. sapópo).

_masinaulúgon_, Praising, exalting, giving honour or praise
to. (cf. saúlug).

_masínaw_, Clear, transparent, pellucid, crystal. (cf. sínaw,
matín-aw).

_masíngkal_, Very warm, hot, ardent, aglow, burning, white-hot, fiery,
incandescent, said of the passions as well as of the temperature of
substances. (cf. síngkal).

_masíngkì_, Hot, fiery, excited. Masíngkì siá sing panimúot. He is
very hot-tempered. (cf. síngkì, masíngkal).

_masinimbáhon_, Adoring, worshipping, church-going; one who
adores, worships or frequently goes to church; pious, a man of
prayer. (cf. símba).

_masinulúb-on_, Sorry, sad, desolate, dismal, dejected, mournful,
doleful, dolorous, distressed, dreary, sorrowful. (cf. subô, masubô).

_masinulúgton_, Conform, conformable, agreeing, willing,
ready, complying, compliant, obliging, obedient, docile,
yielding. (cf. sugút).

_masinulúndon_, Obedient, dutiful, submissive, docile, yielding,
complying with orders. (cf. sunúd).

_masinundánon_, See masinulúndon--obedient, etc.

_masiók_, (B) Dense, overgrown, jungle-like, full of high grass or
underbrush. (cf. siók).

_masíot_, (H) Dense, etc. See masiók.

_masípat_, Avenging, vengeful, resentful, revengeful, vindictive,
retaliating, spiteful, mischievous, malicious. (cf. sípat).

_masípat_, Sharp, keen (of eyes); wasteful, squandering,
prodigal. (cf. makilitán-on; buhahâ, mausíkon).


_masípong_, Close--, near--, together, tied closely, strung or bound
together. (cf. sípong).

_masipót_, (B) Narrow, of little breadth or extent, limited,
circumscribed, not wide or broad. (cf. sipót, makitíd).

_masírì_, (B) See masílì--shining, glossy, lustrous, bright.

_masiriwáol_, See masariwáol. Masiriwáol is more in use.

_masirúm_, (B) Dim, obscure, getting dark, fading light, twilight,
crepuscular, gloaming, said of nightfall. (sirúm).

_masíta_, (Sp. maceta) Flower-pot. (cf. masetéra). Also: Plants and
flowers set out in flower-pots.

_maskabádo_, (Sp. mascabado) Unrefined sugar, muscovado.

_maskáda_, (Sp. mascar) Tobacco-leaves used for chewing together with
betel-nut, lime and búyò-leaves.

_máskara_, (Sp. máscara) Mask, disguise, face-mask; masquerade.

_máskin_, (Sp. por más que) Even if, though, although,
notwithstanding. (cf. bisán).

_máslut_, To be or become aware of, know, understand. See
namaslután. (cf. marásmas, malámad).

_másna_, (B) Clear, bright, said of light or sight. Dílì másna iníng
kínki, kay may bíro ang túbo. This lamp is not bright, because the
chimney is sooty. Dílì na másna ang panúluk ko, kay tigúlang na man
akó. My sight is getting dim, for I am quite old. (cf. masánag).

_másngà_, To know, understand. Indì siá makamásngà magbása kag
magsulát. He does not know how to read and write. Walâ siá sing
namasngaán nahanungúd sináng mga butáng. He hasn't an inkling of
those matters. (cf. hibaló, balintúnod, marásmas, etc.).

_máso_, (Sp. mazo) A mallet, a heavy hammer, sledge-hammer, mall,
maul, beetle.

_masomó_, Nauseating, sickening, revolting, exciting a feeling of
loathing, uninviting, unappetizing, applied especially to food cooked
in too much fat. (cf. somó, makasolómo, mabútlà, masúm-od).

_masón_, (Sp. mason) Freemason.

_masonería_, (Sp. masoneria) Freemasonry.

_masosuélo_, A convulsive choking fit that often attacks young children
and may easily end in death, unless help is rendered at once.

_másrut_, See máslut--to be aware of, etc.

_masubô_, Sad, sorrowful, mournful, dejected, downcast, heart-sick,
doleful, melancholic, woe-begone, moping, glum, forlorn, desolate,
downhearted, despondent, depressed, unhappy. (cf. subô, masinulúb-on).

_masugíl-om_, (H) See masagíl-om id.

_masulánting_, Far-reaching, sonorous, loud, etc. (cf. malágsing,
masílik, matágsing).

_masulubáyon_, Attracting ants, etc. (cf. subáy, maralasgáon).

_masulúg_, Current, swift, rapid, strong, applied to running water;
rushing. (sulúg).

_masulukisák_, Twisted, complicated, involved, entangled.

_masulukusák_, See masulukisák. (sulukusák--sulukisák).

_masulúndon_, Following, imitating; obedient, etc. See masinulúndon.

_masúm-od_, See makasolómo--disgusting, etc. (cf. súm-od).

_masúnsun_, Frequent, many times, many a time,
often. (súnsun). (cf. masamí, makadámò).

_masunúd_, Following, succeeding, coming after, ensuing,
next. (cf. sunúd, madasón).

_masupílon_, Weak, easy to conquer or overcome. (cf. súpil; dalág-on,
mapígaw, malúya).

_masúpug_, Daring, audacious, bold, defiant, impertinent,
reckless, impudent, insolent, foolhardy, rash, venturesome, brave,
violent. (cf. súpug, makáhas, maaháng, maísug, masurísol).


_masurísol_, See masúpug.

_masurukisók_, See masulukisák--complicated, etc.

_matá_, Eye, orb, sight, vision; hole (of a needle), loop (for a
hook), etc.; eyelet; bud or shoot (of potatoes, cuttings of sugar
cane, etc.); mesh (of a net); to awake, open the eyes; to keep
vigil, remain awake. Nagmatá na siá? Is he already awake? Magmatá na
ikáw. Wake up. Open your eyes. Rise (up). Ginpamatá akó níla. They
woke me up. Pamatahá (památha) siá. Wake him. Namatahán (namáthan)
ko ang amó nga gamú. That noise woke me. I was roused from sleep by
that noise. Nagamatá gid siá magtoón, bisán kon gáb-i na. He keeps
himself awake for study till late at night. He studies till late at
night. (cf. búgtaw, puláw).

_matâ_, (B) Family, blood relation. (cf. bátà, himatâ).

_matáas_, High, tall, lofty, towering, exalted in altitude or
dignity. (cf. táas, matatáas, malántyog, matág-as).

_mataás-taáson_, Proud, self-conscious, insolent, haughty, overbearing,
arrogant, bumptious, stuck-up, supercilious, overweening. (táas).

_matáb-ang_, Light, mild (of tobacco, beverage, etc.) (cf. táb-ang;
dalísay, maísug--strong).

_matáblaw_, Impeding, hampering, hindering, obstructing, interfering,
disturbing. (cf. táblaw).

_matábnul_, Thick, fat, plump, chubby, stout, round, muscular, buxom,
fleshy (of arms, legs, etc.). (cf. tábnul; matíbsul, matibúnog,
maribúok, maribusól).

_matábya_, A kind of banana similar to kadísnon and anonóo and eaten
either raw or boiled.

_matádlung_, Straight, straight-forward, direct, right, rectilinear,
honest, frank. (tádlung).

_matag-ádlaw_, Any common day, every day, a working day.

_matág-as_, (H) High. See matáas id. tág-as).

_matágbong_, Sinking down, falling to the bottom, descending;
weighty, ponderous, heavy (of weight); grave, serious, tactful (of
speech). (cf. tágbong, mabúg-at; malígdong, maúgdang).

_matágsing_, Far-reaching, resounding, ringing, sonorous,
reverberating, loud, shrill, piercing (of voices and
sounds). (cf. tágsing, malágsing, masílik, masulánting, matúnug,
malániog).

_matagubalúson_, Grateful, thankful, mindful of, making a proper
return for favours received. (cf. bálus, matinagubalúson).

_matahápon_, Apprehensive, suspicious, fearful, afraid, in suspense,
in danger or peril; risky, hazardous. (cf. táhap).

_matahímik_, Nice, beautiful; quiet, tranquil, peaceful. Matahímik
ang pagtúlug siníng bátà. This baby sleeps nicely. Matahímik
ang pagsinalayó sináng mga táo. Those people live peacefully
together. (cf. matahúm; matáwhay, malinóng).

_matáhud_, (B) Respectful, reverent, reverential, deferential,
courteous; generous, liberal. (cf. táhud, matinahóron, maálwan,
palanghátag, paraná-o).

_matahúm_, Beautiful, beauteous, seemly, bonny, good-looking,
sightly, pretty, handsome, fine, charming, comely, nice, lovely,
splendid. (cf. tahúm, maányag, maayóáyo, maámbong, madálig, magayón,
mamahî)

_matahúm_, Nice, funny, queer. Matahúm kaáyo nga paghokóm iní! This
is a nice way of administering justice!

_matakáb, matákab_, (B) Pilfering, stealing. (cf. takáb, maniníkas,
makáwat, matákaw).

_matákaw_, (B) Thief; stealing. See makáwat. (cf. tákaw, maniníkas,
maniníkmà, kawtían, kawatán).

_matalák-on_, Apathetic, etc. See matinalák-on.

_matalás_, Unobstructed, smooth, slippery, easy of passage, easily
swallowed. (cf. talás; matánlas).

_matálaw_, Cowardly, coward, craven, scared, timid, white-livered,
poltroon, craven. (cf. tálaw).

_mataláwis_, Sharp-pointed. See matalíwis.

_matálhà_, Easy to split, separable; disjointed, spaced wide
apart. Ang sibúkaw matálhà. Sebucao-wood is easy to split. Sapan-wood
cleaves--easily,--readily. Iníng súlud matálhà sing ngípon. This reed
(of a weaving loom) has its teeth spaced wide apart. (cf. tálhà,
malakâ).

_matalíwis_, (H) Sharp-pointed, acute, prickly, barbed. (talíwis).

_matalúm_, (H) Sharp-edged, keen, cutting. (talúm).

_matalúnsay_, Quiet, tranquil, calm, comfortable, undisturbed;
straight on, continuous; pure unsullied. (talúnsay).

_matalupángdon_, Attentive, regardful, intent on,
considerate, observant, taking care of or paying attention
to. (talupangúd). (cf. tamúd).

_matámà_, Overmuch, excessive, too much, more than enough, immoderate,
exorbitant, preposterous. (támà). (cf. lám-ag, lakás, masiádo,
demasiádo).

_matámad_, Slow, lazy, indolent, sluggish, idle, slothful, otiose,
slack, inert, listless, drone. (cf. támad, tamarán, ligoyán).

_matá-máta_, Dim. of matá--eye. Also: the thin membrane surrounding
maize-kernels near the part attached to the cob; the eye, bud, shoot
(of a plant or tuber).

_matámbok_, Fat, obese, plump, fleshy, stout, corpulent. (támbok).

_matám-is_, Sweet, sugary, syrupy, delectable (of food and drink);
delightful, delicious, pleasant (of music, smells and feelings); kind,
gentle, tender (of speech, disposition and sentiments); pleasing,
beautiful, nice, pretty (to see). (tám-is). (cf. marímis).

_mát-an_, Something in sight, at hand, something that turns up,
ready for use, way of earning a livelihood. Walâ siá sing mát-an
kag sáp-an. There is (was) nothing (no means, work, help, etc.) in
sight for his need and he has (had) nowhere to go to for shelter
or protection. (cf. matá; palangitán-an, paaliwánsan, dalángpan,
aláypan, pangítà).

_mát-an_, From matá. See máthan id.

_matándà_, Aiming well, a marksman, a good shot, an adept shooter or
hitter; exact, precise, perfectly adapted or fit for. Iníng súlud waló
(ka búgkos) nga matándà. This reed (of a weaving loom) is exactly
adjusted (adapted) for eight (small bundles of yarn, i.e. stripes,
to the span (dángaw). This is a reed of exactly eight (stripes to
the span). (cf. tándà, ígò).

_matandáon_, Marking, noting, taking stock, observing well, taking
note of or paying much attention to. (cf. tándà, matinandáon).

_matándus_, Handy, practical, expeditious, zealous,
diligent. (cf. tándus; mapísan, mabúhat, makarî, maábtik, etc.).

_matanhagáon_, Wonderful, miraculous, extraordinary, marvellous,
strange, surprising, astonishing; one who wonders or is
surprised. (cf. tanhágà, makatitingála, makatalanhágà).

_matánlas_, Smooth, slippery, easy to swallow. (cf. matalás, madánlug).

_matánoy_, Loud, shrill, high-pitched, sonorous (of sounds and
voices). See malánoy. (cf. tánoy, masulánting, masílik, malániog,
matúnug, purús).

_matánsa_, (Sp. matanza) Slaughter; license to slaughter animals;
payment for the license to slaughter animals. (cf. íhaw, ilihawán).

_matanús_, Straight, erect, upright, vertical, perpendicular, growing
tall and straight. (cf. tanús).

_matápan_, Even, plain, level, smooth. (cf. tápan).

_matáp-ol_, Weak, feeble, exhausted, fragile, frail, nerveless,
enervated, debilitated, wanting strength. (cf. táp-ol, mapígaw,
malúya).

_matapúk_, Easily broken, breakable, flimsy, fragile, weak, worn-out,
brittle, frail. (cf. tapúk).

_mataráwis_, (B) Sharp-pointed. See mataláwis, matalíwis.

_matárung_, Just, honest, even-handed, honourable, fair,
equitable, impartial, square, upright, conscientious, righteous,
virtuous. (cf. tárung).

_matáslit_, Coward, etc. See matálaw.

_matatáas_, High, exalted, lofty, supreme. Ang matatáas nga mga
punoán. The highest (high) authorities. (cf. táas, matáas).

_matatahúm_, Nice, beautiful, etc. See matahúm.

_matatísdà_, A serious boil or ulcer so called from its resemblance
to a fish's eye.

_matát-ísdà_, See matatísdà.

_matáwhay_, Tranquil, quiet, undisturbed, peaceful, at peace,
untroubled, serene, calm, unruffled, halcyon, without trouble or
harassment. (cf. táwhay, malinóng, mahamungayáon).

_matáy_, To die, expire; meet death, suffer death, become
extinct. Nagakamatáy siá. He is dying. Nagkamatáy (namatáy) siá. He
died. Ang pagkamatáy. Death. Dying. (cf. patáy, kinamatáy, himatayón,
kamatáyon, namátyan, kalamatáyan).

_matáyog_, (B) Throwing--, casting--, tossing--, hurling--, flinging--,
far, an expert at throwing missiles; flying or going off to a great
distance. (cf. táyog).

_matayúyon_, Straight on, continuous, constant, without
interruption. (cf. tayúyon, dáyon).

_máthan_, For matahán from matá. See mát-an id.

_matíbsul_, Plump, thick, fat, stout, fleshy, round, chubby, rosy,
peachy (of cheeks, etc.; cf. matípsul, matibúnog, etc.).

_matibúnog_, Round, fleshy, chubby, thick, plump, stout, fat (of arms,
calves, cheeks, etc. (cf. matipúlon, manipúlon, matípsul, maribúok,
maribusól).

_matíg-a_, (H) Hard, compact, solid, incompressible, indurated,
difficult to make an impression upon, obstinate, obdurate, insensible,
unfeeling, unyielding, tough. (cf. tíg-a).

_matígdà_, Clear, distinct, sharp (of pronunciation, speech,
etc. (cf. tígdà, maáthag).

_matígdas_, Hard, not soft (particularly said of underdone tubers);
sharp. See matíg-a, matígdà.

_mátik_, News, information, notice. (cf. balítà).

_matík_, To listen in, hear, get notice of, receive news,
eavesdrop. Nakamatík ka nga may mga buyóng nga magaabút? Have you
heard that there are brigands (gangsters) approaching? Walâ akó sing
namatikán sang íla sugilánon. I could not (did not) understand what
they were talking about. (cf. mutík).

_matíkas_, Sneak, thief; pilfering, stealing, thieving, light-fingered,
a petty thief. (cf. tíkas, makáwat, matákaw, makáwtì, maniníkas).

_matík-mátik_, To listen in, eavesdrop, observe slily (slyly), watch,
spy, spy upon (out), pry, find out, be on the lookout. Matíkmatíkan
mo ang mga gího kag húlag siníng talapuánan. Find out what are the
proceedings and movements of this society. (cf. matík, mutík).

_matílhà_, Clear, bright, serene (of the sky, weather); ceasing,
stopping (of rain). (cf. tílhà).

_matimalúson_, Revengeful, vindictive, vengeful, brooding over,
resentful, retaliating, desirous of giving tit for tat, harbouring
vengeance. (cf. timalús, bálus).

_matimbúlog_, (B) Round, spherical, orbicular, globular,
circular. (cf. timbúlog, manipólon, matibúnog, matipúlon).

_matímgas_, Fleshy, meaty, plump, full (of fruits, grains, etc.);
the most conspicuous, best, prominent. The phrase "Si Fulána matímgas
sing panganák" means: "N.N. has never had a miscarriage, has no dead
children and has no godchildren".

_matín-ad_, Prosperous, flourishing, progressive, going on well,
solid, sound, solvent, proceeding on a firm basis, economically
independent. (cf. tín-ad).

_matinaghúyon_, Sighing, murmuring, rustling, rushing, soughing
(of wind, water, leaves, etc.). (cf. tághoy, panághoy).

_matinagubalúson_, Grateful, thankful, mindful of benefits received,
ready or willing to make a fitting return. (cf. bálus, kabaláslan,
matagubalúson).

_matinaháon_, Respectful, reverential, deferential, regardful,
deferring to, honouring. (cf. tahâ, matinahúron).


_matinahúron_, Respectful, deferential, reverential, deferring to,
regardful, honouring, showing esteem, paying honour or respect
to. (cf. táhud, matinaháon, katahurán, talaháon).

_matinalák-on_, Showing--aversion,--loathing,--apathy, shirking,
avoiding, disregarding, ignoring. (cf. taká).

_matinalámdon_, Careful, wary, considerate, reflecting, observant,
appreciating, thoughtful, prudent. (cf. tamúd).

_matinamarón_, Lazy, idle, indolent, slow, sluggish, slothful, slack,
otiose, inert, listless, drone. (cf. támad, matámad, tamarán, ligóy,
ligoyán).

_matinamáyon_, Contemptuous, insulting, scornful, expressing contempt
or disdain. (cf. támay, talamáyon).

_matinamyáwon_, Affable, kind, amiable, courteous, humane,
sociable. (cf. támyaw, mainabláwon, mabugnóhon).

_matinandáon_, Marking, observing, etc. See matandáon. (cf. tándà).

_matinap-íngon_, Dirtying, soiling, staining, stainful. Ang íya nga
ginhámbal matinap-íngon gid sang kadunggánan ni Fuláno. His speech
cast a slur on (was detrimental to) N.N.'s reputation (honour,
character). (cf. táp-ing).

_matinatabángon_, Helpful, ready to help or assist. See
mabinulígon. (cf. tábang, mahiugyónon).

_matinatápon_, Conscientious, administering or managing with care,
being in charge of or responsible for, looking after with great care,
mindful, thoughtful, circumspect. (cf. tátap, mainandámon, mainamlígon,
mapísan, maúkud, matútum).

_matín-aw_, (H) Clear, transparent, translucent, pellucid, crystal,
pure, diaphanous. (cf. tín-aw, masínaw; malubúg--turbid).

_matínggas_, Full, fleshy, meaty, plump (of fruits and cereals);
outstanding, prominent, the most conspicuous or best (of a
class). (cf. tínggas, matímgas; lutáw).

_matíngting_, Strong, stout, tough, resisting, not easily yielding to
strain or stress, difficult to snap, part or separate. (cf. tíngting).

_matinguháon, matinguhaón_, Active, energetic, strenuous, assiduous,
doing one's best, striving hard, making great efforts. (cf. tingúhà).

_matinipígon_, Preserving well, hiding away, guarding, saving, shutting
up, putting by, keeping, looking after with care, lest things should
be spoilt, lost or stolen. (cf. típig).

_matínlò_, Clean, pure, undefiled, untainted, immaculate, spotless,
unsullied, stainless, unadulterated, uncontaminated, cleanly, free
from stain, soil or admixture, clear of dirt or filth; honest, just,
righteous. (cf. tínlò).

_matín-od_, Peaceful, tranquil, calm, quiet, unruffled, smooth,
even, serene; retiring, reserved, not very sociable, averse to social
gatherings. (cf. tín-od, magalámhon).

_matínong_, Noiseless, quiet, undisturbed, unruffled, serene, calm,
free from disturbing movements. (cf. tínong, malinóng, matáwhay,
matín-od).

_matinoóhon, matinoohón_, Faithful, believer, follower. (cf. tóo).

_matinublágon_, Disturbing, upsetting, interfering with. (cf. túblag).

_matinubúson_, Redeeming, reclaiming, saving, liberating,
freeing. (cf. tubús, manunúbus).

_matinumánon_, Complying with, compliant, obedient to, observant,
prompt to obey, dutiful, fulfilling one's duties, disciplined,
executing orders received. (cf. túman, masinulúndon, masinulúgton).

_matinunáwon_, Soluble, dissolving, melting. (cf. túnaw).

_matinutúd-on_, True, sincere, honest, frank, loving truth and
honesty. (cf. túud, matúud).

_matinutúy-on_, Decided, determined, resolute, firm, purposeful,
having made up one's mind. (cf. túyò).

_matinuytúyon, matinuytuyón_, Directing, pointing out the way, guiding,
leading. (cf. tóytoy).

_matípsul_, Plump, thick, filled out, fat, stout. (cf. típsul,
matíbsul, matibúnog; matímgas, matínggas; kuliápis--thin, empty,
slender).


_matipúlon_, Round, etc. See manipólon, matimbúlog, matibúnog).

_matískug_, Stiff, rigid, not easily bent, inflexible,
unyielding. (cf. tískug; mabáskug).

_matístis_, Malicious, spiteful, mischievous. (cf. tístis).

_matitík_, Ulceration, suppuration, festering, infection, sepsis; to
fester, suppurate, mortify, gangrene, gather pus or matter, rankle;
to throb, pulsate, palpitate (of ulcers and boils). Nagamatitík ang
íya hubág. His ulcer suppurates or gathers pus. Nagmatitík ang nánà
sa sulúd sang pilás sa pagpangítà sing lútsan pa gwâ. The pus inside
the wound began to throb seeking an outlet. (cf. pitík, patík).

_mátmat_, To do something by degrees, step by step, gradually,
piecemeal, in slow but sure stages, do slowly, deliberately. Nagamátmat
sa pagdakô iníng tanúm. This plant is growing tall by slow
degrees. Ginmátmat níya ang kúhà (ang pagkúhà) sang íya nga galamitón
sa baláy ni Fuláno. He took away his furniture from N.N.'s house
one by one or piece by piece. Matmatá sang arádo ang ímo umá. Plough
your field leisurely or in easy stages. Ang kaámyon sang mga búlak
nagamátmat guób (sa pagguób) sang mga talámnan. The fragrance of the
flowers is slowly spreading over the fields. (cf. amát, amátamát).

_mató-mató_ Freely, gratuitously, voluntarily, spontaneously,
without obligation, of one's own accord, of one's free choice;
to do something--of one's own accord,--of one's own free will or
choice without being obliged or without orders, to act generously,
unselfishly, voluntarily, to choose to do, volunteer. Nagmatómató siá
magbayó. He pounded rice without being obliged to do so. Ginmatómatohán
(--mát-wan) níya ang pagpatíndog sang amó nga buluthúan. He built
that school of his own free will. Tumalágsa kag malakâ ang mga
táo nga magapangabúdlay kag magahálad sing matómató sa ikaáyo sang
bánwa. Few and exceptional are the men that work and sacrifice anything
gratuitously for public welfare. Indì gid akó magmatómató sinâ, kay
walâ gid man akó sing kalabtánan sinâ. I shall not do it of my own
accord, for I have not the least connection with (interest in) it.

_matóso_, (Probably from the Sp. tuso) Unreliable, untrustworthy,
treacherous, faithless, not fulfilling one's engagements, unjust, not
keeping to a bargain, not keeping one's word. (cf. tóso, dîmatárung,
walâ sing hinambalán).

_matridó, matrído_, (Sp. matrero) Cunning, tricky, tricksy, knavish,
mean, cheating; rogue, sneak, cheat. (cf. agóng, lág-it, antígo).

_matsiembrádo_, (Sp. machihembrar) Dovetailed, tongued and grooved;
to dovetail, tenon, tongue and groove.

_mátsing_, (Sp. matachin) Dirty; merry-andrew; imp, urchin, naughty
child.

_matsóra_, (Sp. machorra) An old barren cow; a cow that does not bear
any longer and is being fattened for slaughter.

_matúbò_, Growing, developing, increasing, springing up, rising,
coming up, being in a state of development or increase. (cf. túbò,
maúlì, maúkad).

_matúdos_, Determined, fixed, clear, not equivocal or ambiguous,
not involved (of a word or sentence); spinning, turning,
revolving. (cf. matúrong).

_matúgnaw_, Cold, fresh, raw, keen, chilly, cool, gelid, frigid, icy,
bleak, frosty, freezing. (cf. túgnaw, mabúgnaw, malamíg).

_matúkub_, Gobbling up, eating up, devouring, mangling, mauling,
pouncing, upon (as a beast of prey), preying, ravening, tearing to
pieces. (cf. tukúb, manunúkub, mananágit).

_matúl-id_, Exact, precise, strictly adhering or attending to, nice
punctilious; conscientious. (túl-id).

_matúlin_, Quiet, tranquil, calm, unmolested, unobstructed, orderly;
steering straight ahead, pursuing an even course, even, smooth,
straight. (cf. túlin, matáwhay, malinóng, matádlong, matanús).

_matulúyhon_, Sleepy, drowsy, nodding. (cf. tuyó, matuyó, matuyohón).

_matún-og_, Dewy, full of dew, dew-drenched, roral, roric,
roscid. (cf. tún-og).

_matúnug_, Loud, loud-sounding, emitting a strong or loud
sound, sonorous, ringing, resounding, reverberating, pealing,
far-reaching. (cf. túnug, tunúg, masílik, masulánting, malániog,
purús, mabáskug).


_matúnung_, See matínong--noiseless; quiet, etc.

_matúod_, True, correct, right, truthful, reliable, veracious,
sincere, candid, frank, open, honest, straight-forward, undissembling,
unfeigned. Matúod gid iní. This is very true. It is a fact. (cf. túod,
pamatúod, himatúod, kamatuóran).

_matúpung_, Sometimes, but incorrectly, used as an adjective: Equal,
level, on a level, of the same--, the same in--, uniform in--, size,
capacity or power, but in reality only a shortened form of magatúpung
from túpung--to be equal, etc.

_maturírok_, (B) Diligent, active, assiduous, sedulous, industrious,
doing something with care, zeal or application. (cf. turírok, mapísan,
mabákas, matándus, maúkud).

_matúrong_, Revolving, turning, spinning round quickly, whirling,
gyrating, swinging round. Matúrong nga kasíng. A quickly revolving
top. Matúrong gid ang túyub siníng kasíng. This top spins round very
quickly. (cf. túrong).

_matútum_, Brave, valiant, courageous, faithful, reliable, trustworthy,
trusty, doughty, loyal, stanch, staunch, zealous. (cf. tútum, maísug,
salalígan, matinatápon, mapísan).

_matuyó_, Often used for magakatuyó, magkatuyó and even for nagakatuyó,
but not adjective. The adjective is matuyohón, matulúyhon from tuyó.

_matuyohón_, See matuyó, matulúyhon.

_matúyum_, Strong, rank, pungent, very pronounced (of odours);
vivid, decided, deep, strong (of colours); strong, heady, potent
(of drinks). (cf. túyum, dalísay).

_maúdhà_, Wasteful, extravagant, prodigal, squandering, spending much;
a spendthrift. (cf. údhà, buhahâ).

_maúgay_, Gentle, mild, tender, lovely, modest, kind,
affectionate. (cf. malolô, malolóy-on, mahigugmáon).

_maugáyon_, See maúgay.

_maúgdang_, Decorous, decent, delicate, modest, proper, well-behaved,
tactful, self-respecting. (cf. úgdang, malígdong).

_maúgtas_, Impatient, vexed, annoyed, nettled, exasperated, fretful,
irritable, irascible. (cf. úgtas, mainakígon, sanggurút, pikón,
tarádyon).

_maugtasón, maugtáson_, Angry, irritable, very impatient, irascible,
bad-tempered, choleric, touchy, techy; annoying, harassing,
provoking. (cf. úgtas, maúgtas, makaulúgtas).

_maúhaw_, Not adjective, but a verbal form that often stands for
magakaúhaw, magkaúhaw and nagakaúhaw. The adjective is uháw--thirsty,
dry, parched. (cf. úhaw).

_maúkad_, Expanding, swelling, dilating, distending. (cf. matúbò,
maúlì, úkad).

_maúkud_, Diligent, with application, industrious, hard-working. (úkud;
cf. mapísan, matándus).

_maúlag_, Impure, lascivious, unchaste, wanton, loose, rakish,
immoral, depraved, bad, lewd, lecherous, licentious, dissolute,
voluptuous. (cf. úlag; mahigál).

_maulágon_, See maúlag.

_maulánon_, (H) Rainy, wet, showery. Ang maulánon nga panahón. The wet
(rainy) season. (cf. ulán).

_maúlì_, Making a good return, profitable, lucrative, worth while,
gainful; lasting, durable, stable, solid. (cf. úlì).

_maulikirón_, (H) Mindful of, concerned about, thinking of,
cherishing. (cf. ulikíd, mabinalíkdon, maulínggon).

_maulínggon_, Thoughtful, solicitous, careful, considerate, concerned,
bestowing care or attention upon. (cf. ulingíg).

_maulunúngon_, (H) Attached to, affectionate, fond of, bound to
by ties of blood, friendship or gratitude, cherishing. (cf. únung;
mainunúngon).

_mauná-uná_, First, foremost, at the start, beginning, "starting the
ball rolling". (cf. úna, unáuná).

_maúndag_, Shaky, moving to and fro, shaking, bumping, swaying,
rattling, jolting, tossing, said of carts, etc. (úndag).


_maúng, ma-úng_, A kind of rough cloth. Sárwal nga maúng. Trousers
made of rough cloth. A pair of rough trousers.

_maúpang_, Hindering, impeding, hampering, cramping, cumbering,
blocking, obstructive, putting an obstacle in the way of. (cf. upáng,
kaupángan).

_maupángon_, See maúpang.

_mauríka_, (B) Thoughtful, careful, circumspect, managing well. Mauríka
nga táo. A careful or circumspect man.

_mauswagón_, Progressive, making--progress,--headway, going ahead,
forging ahead, prosperous, getting on, going on well. (cf. úswag,
mainuswagón).

_maúti_, Active, occupied, bustling, industrious, busy with many
things; ticklish, exacting, requiring great patience or application,
said of work. (úti). (cf. mapísan, mabákas, matándus).

_mautitirón_, (H) Diligent, full of zeal, zealous, sedulous,
industrious, absorbed in, intent upon, careful, assiduous, attentive,
heedful. (utitíd). (cf. matinatápon, mapísan).

_mauyawón_, Unlucky, unhappy, liable to be interfered with,
particularly said of families, one of whose members met death by
drowning. A superstitious belief has it, that it will always be either
rainy or stormy, whenever such a family gets up some merry-making,
as at a marriage, baptism, picnic, etc. (cf. úyaw).

_mawayáng, mawáyang_, Wide, broad, large, extensive, spacious, vast,
ample. (cf. wayáng, mahanáhay, malápad).

_mawilíhon, mawilihón_, Liking, pleased with, taking pleasure in,
devoted to, inclined to, addicted to, partial to, gone on. Mawilíhon
siá sang síne, sang mga palagwáon, etc. He likes to go to moving
picture shows, is partial to theatres or stage-plays, etc. Mawilíhon
siá sang sa sulúd sang baláy kag matinalákon sang mga pangalípay
sa luás sang baláy. She loves her home and is averse to pleasures
outside her home. (cf. wíli, maluyagón).

_máwmaw_, An evil spirit, bogy, bogey, goblin, hobgoblin, bugbear,
bugaboo, a mischievous ghost. Karón ipadakúp ko ikáw sa máwmaw. Now I
shall hand you over to the máwmaw. Halá, ára na dirâ ang máwmaw. Look
out, the máwmaw is over there. (cf. mámaw; N.B. These terms are often
used to intimidate or threaten disobedient children).

_máwmaw_, Long, robust, strong (of limbs, etc.). (cf. maláwhan).

_máxima, maximá_, (Sp. máxima) Axiom, maxim, apothegm, sentence,
saying, saw, proverb, thought. (cf. hurubáton, hinun-ánon).

_máximum_, (Sp. maximum) The maximum, the extreme limit, the utmost,
uttermost. (dìmalabihán).

_may_, There is or exists; to have. May ulán. There is rain. It
rains. May lángit kag inpiérno. There is a heaven and a hell. Heaven
and hell exist. May kwárta siá. He has money. May baláy siá nga
kaugalíngon. He has a house of his own. May ginabátyag siá. He has
a feeling of sickness. He feels sick. May duhá siá ka útud. He has
two brothers. Malúyag akó nga may áwto akó. I should like to have
(own, possess) an automobile. Sa may káhoy----. There where the
tree stands----. Sa may pílak mahulás iní. This is easy for one
who has money. Sa may upúd siá ukón sa walâ----. Whether he has
a companion or no----. At all events, whether with, or without,
a companion----. Sa may ulán kag sa may ínit----. In rain or
(and) shine----. Kon may pílak lang akó----. If I only had (the)
money----. Sang may mánggad pa akó----. When I was still wealthy
(rich)----. Sa may lúyag ikáw ukón (kag) sa walâ----. Whether you
like or not (nolens volens)----. (cf. walá--no, none, there is not,
does not exist).

_máya_, A kind of bird, somewhat like a sparrow.

_mayaágbà_, A kind of maya-bird.

_mayab-okón_, Dusty, full of fine dusty sand. (cf. yáb-ok).

_mayabungul_, A kind of maya-bird.

_mayád_, (B) Good, well. See maayád, maáyo.

_mayakápra_, A kind of song-bird.

_mayâ-mayâ_, A fish much esteemed as food.

_mayá-mayá_ A kind of mushroom.


_mayá-máya_, Resembling a maya-bird; a kind of fish.

_mayamî_, (H) Soft, tender, yielding, impressible,
impressionable. (cf. yamî; malúm-ok, mahómok, maramî).

_mayamíg_, (H) Cool, cold, chilly. (cf. yamíg; malamíg, mabúgnaw,
matúgnaw).

_mayám-is_, Sweetish, rather or slightly sweet, less sweet than
matám-is. (yám-is).

_mayámpad_, Flat, plain (of face, etc.). (cf. kuyámpad).

_mayayát_, Extensible, extendible, ductile, elastic. (cf. yayát,
luyátyat).

_mayinuhúmyuhúmon_, Cheerful, jolly, exhilarating, mirthful, merry,
smiling, laughing and joking. (cf. yuhúm).

_máyo_, (Sp. Mayo) May, the month of May. (cf. himabúyan).

_máy-om_, To guess, etc. See mái-om. Mahapús may-omón nga----. It is
easy to guess that----.

_máy-ong_, Sack, bag. (cf. bayóong; mái-ong).

_mayordómo_, (Sp. mayordomo) Steward, butler, superintendent or
manager of a household, etc. (cf. manugtátap, manugdumála).

_mayúbit_, Jesting, joking, poking fun at. (cf. yubitán, uslitán).

_mayúgit_, See mayúbit.

_mayuhúm-yuhumón_, Smiling, with a pleasant face, with a face radiant
with good cheer, gay, gladsome, joyous, cheerful. (cf. yuhúm).

_mayúm-ok_, Soft, tender, mild, yielding, impressible, impressionable,
malleable. (cf. yúm-ok, malúm-ok, maramî, mayamî).

_mayunâ_, (B) Insipid, tasteless, causing aversion; having no taste,
void of taste. (cf. yunâ).

_mayutâ_, (H) See mayunâ. (yutâ--yunâ).

_mayuskulá, mayúskula_, (Sp. mayúscula) Capital letter, upper-case
letter. (cf. minúskula--small letter).

_mayúyum_, Sweet, delicious, delightful,
delectable. (yúyum). (cf. matám-is, makawiwíli, makalulúyag).

_medálya_, (Sp. medalla) Medal, plaque.

_medalyón_, (Sp. medallon) A large medal, locket, medallion.

_medída_, (Sp. medida) Measure, foot-rule, yard-measure,
measurement. (cf. takús, taláksan).

_médiko_, (Sp. médico) Doctor, physician, medical man,
leech. (manogbúlong).

_medisína_, (Sp. medicina) Medicine, physic, medicament, drug, potion,
nostrum. (cf. bulúng).

_médya bída_, (Sp. media vida) Middle-age, mature age;
middle-aged. (cf. mánngà).

_médyas_, (Sp. media) Stocking, hose; socks.

_médyo_, (Sp. medio) Half; means, medium, contrivance, resource,
remedy. (cf. tungâ; kalalángan, padihútan, pahitôhítò, remédyo).

_melása_, (Sp. melaza) Molasses. (cf. lasáw, pulút, arníbal).

_melíndres_, (Sp. melindre) A kind of shrub with beautiful,
rose-coloured flowers.

_melón_, (Sp. melon) Melon. (cf. sandíya).

_menór_, (Sp. menor) Minor; younger; a minor (in music). (cf. mánghud,
línghod).

_menyár_, (Sp. menear) To move, shake, stir; to wear out, dislocate,
be displaced or dislodged. Nagmenyár ang mga halígi sináng baláy
tungúd sang bágyo. The posts of this house were dislodged by the
storm. (cf. úyug, hiláy, balingíg).

_merénge, meréngge_, (Sp. merengue) Meringue, a kind of candy;
sugar plum.

_meridiáno_, (Sp. meridiano) Meridian.

_meriénda_, (Sp. merienda) Lunch, afternoon tea, collation,
snack. (cf. pamáhaw).


_mérito_, (Sp. mérito) Merit, desert, worth. (cf. palahanúngdan,
takús).

_merkádo_, (Sp. mercado) Market, mart, market-place. (cf. tiénda).

_mérma_, (Sp. merma) Waste, leakage, shrinkage. (cf. búhin, kúlpà,
kupús).

_mesáda_, (From the Sp. mesa) A certain percentage of the stakes paid
to the owner of a billard or gambling table. (cf. plasáda).

_méskla_, (Sp. mezcla) Mixture, admixture, mingling, combination,
conglomeration, jumble, hash, hotchpotch, compound, medley. (cf. lákay,
lakót, sakót, sámò, símbug).

_mestíso_, (Sp. mestizo) Mestizo, Eurasian, half-cast, half-breed,
hybrid. (cf. kalibugán).

_metál_, (Sp. metal) Metal.

_metapísika_, (Sp. metafísica) Metaphysic, ontology.

_metáte_, (Sp. metate) A primitive corn-mill, a rounded stone for
grinding maize or crushing cocoa (cacao).

_métro_, (Sp. metro) Metre, (39.37 inches); metre in poetry.

_mga_, The sign for the plural, e.g. ang idô--the dog; ang mga idô--the
dogs; iníng káhoy--this tree; iníng mga káhoy--these trees.

_mga_, About, almost, nearly. Sa mga las ótso. At about eight
o'clock. Sang mga tátlo na ka búlan----. Almost or about three months
ago. Kon mga saráng----. If possible, if you please----.

_miáw_, To mew; meaw, the cry of the cat. Ang kuríng nagamiáw. The
cat mews. (cf. ingáw).

_miéntras_, (Sp. mientras) While, whilst, as long as, during the
time that----. Miéntras tánto. (a corruption of the Sp. entre
tanto). Meanwhile. In or during the interval. (cf. sámtang).

_miérkoles_, (Sp. miércoles) Wednesday.

_míga_, (Sp. miga) The crumb of bread as opposed to the crust, the
soft or inside part of bread. Crumb, small fragment. (cf. múmho).

_míki_, A kind of Chinese food made of flour in small thin flakes or
disks. (cf. pánsit; sutánghon, míswa).

_mikróbyo_, (Sp. microbio) Microbe, bacterium, bacillus. (cf. kágaw).

_mikroskópyo_, (Sp. microscopio) Microscope. (cf. tagusílang,
tagusírang).

_mil_, (Sp. mil) Thousand. (cf. líbo).

_milâ-milâ_, See mirâ-mirâ--rheum (from the eyes), etc.

_miligrámo_, (Sp. miligramo) Milligram.

_milísya_, (S. milicia) Militia, military, soldiery; strategy, art
and science of war, warfare. (cf. mangangawáy, áway, ináway).

_milí-milí_, To squeeze, compress, flatten, crush. Milimilihá
ang kán-on nga natigánà sa linúgaw. Squeeze the rice for the
rice-porridge. Ginamilímilí siá sa kautangán. He is crushed by
debts. (cf. kúmus).

_militár_, (Sp. militar) Military, war-like, martial; soldier, warrior,
military man. (cf. mangangawáy).

_militlángon_, What is to--, should--, can--, be said or pronounced;
saying, speech, utterance; to utter, say, give out. (cf. mítlang).

_milók_, (H) Eyelash. (cf. amimilók).

_milyón_, (Sp. millon) A million. (cf. ramák, hámbad).

_milyonáryo_, (Sp. millonario) Millionaire. (cf. ramákan, hambádan).

_mîmî_, Crushed, squeezed, pressed; compressed; to crush, squeeze,
press, compress, destroy the natural condition or shape of a thing
by pressure. Kálò nga mîmî. A crushed hat. Indì mo pagmîmión ang
maléta. Don't crush (squeeze out of shape) the handbag. (cf. pusâ,
lumâ).

_mímî_, Bleating; to bleat; go to sleep, go to by-by (of children). Ang
mga karnéro kag kánding nagamímì. Sheep and goats bleat. Mamímì ka na,
totô? Do you want to sleep (now), darling?

_míming_, To call the cat. (cf. kóring, koríng).


_mimíng_, Cat, pussy. See koríng, kutî.

_mína_, (Sp. mina) Mine; to mine, to mint. Mináha ang buláwan nga
nagasímbug siníng bató. Mine the gold mixed with this rock. Ginmináhan
kitá sang pangolohán sing bág-o nga pílak. The government minted for
us new silver coins. (cf. duláng, dulángan).

_minahán_, Mine. (cf. mína, dulángan).

_minál-am_, (B) Old, of old, of yore, ancient, antique, obsolete,
archaic, primitive, according to the customs and manners--of old
folks,--of long ago. (cf. mál-am, tiniguláng, sinádto, karádto).

_minatáy_, Dead, deceased, departed, defunct; corpse, carcass,
mortal remains. Sán-o ilubúng ang minatáy? When is the corpse to be
buried? Ang ádlaw sang tanán nga mga minatáy. All-Souls' day. (patáy,
matáy).

_minatúod_, True, truthful, verified, confirmed, fact, genuine,
correct, right, real, corroborated. (túod).

_mináy-ong_, Put up in bags, packed in sacks, made up in jute-bags,
by the bag. Ginlulánan níla ang sakayán-húlas sing kalámay nga
mináy-ong. They loaded the steamer with sugar packed in jute-bags. Anó
ang pagbalígyà mo sang kalámay? Sing mináy-ong ukón sing kinílo? How
do you sell the sugar? By the bag or by the kilo? (cf. máy-ong).

_minerál_, (Sp. mineral) Mineral.

_mineralogía_, (Sp. mineralogía) Mineralogy.

_ministério_, (Sp. ministerio) Ministry, cabinet, office and
officers of the executive government. Ministério (Parroquial)
Parokyál. Parochial Administration.

_minístro_, (Sp. ministro) Minister; agent; subordinate.

_míngaw_, To be or become sad, dejected, pensive, dismal, doleful,
dreary, downcast, lonesome, sentimental, cheerless, disconsolate, glum,
desolate. Nagmíngaw iníng lugár, kútub sang paghalín sang mga táo. This
place has become dreary since the departure of the people. Namingáwan
akó dirí. I feel sad or lonely here in this place. (cf. subô).

_minínyo_, Married, wedded. Pangabúhì nga minínyo. Married
life. Wedlock. (cf. mínyò).

_minurô_, A hamlet, a small village, a collection of but a few
houses. (cf. murô).

_mínus_, (Sp. menos) No good, poor, mean, defective, bad, not well
done or said, inferior, mediocre, below expectations, not up to the
mark or standard; to grow less, deteriorate, be bad. Nagmínus ang
pinatubás ko nga humáy sa karón nga túig. This year I had a poor crop
of rice. (cf. kulabús, kabús, maláin, kúlang).

_minúskula, minuskulá_, (Sp. minúscula) Small letter, lower-case
letter. (cf. mayúskula--capital letter).

_mínyò_, Married or wedded people, living in wedlock, joined in
matrimony; to cohabit, live together as husband and wife. Walâ pa
silá makasál, ápang nagamínyò na silá. They are not yet married,
nevertheless they are living together already as husband and
wife. (cf. magasawá, kasál, hilúngug).

_mirâ_, See mirâ-mirâ, which is more commonly used.

_mirâ-mirâ, mirâ-mírà_, An exudation from the eyes, rheum, a flow of
mucus from the eyes; to flow from the eyes (as mucus, etc.). (cf. múrì,
mútà).

_mirasól_, (Sp. mirasol) The sunflower.

_mirés-mirés_, Useless, good-for-nothing, worthless, of little or
no value, of no use, no good, of no value, base; small things,
trifles. (cf. gadóy, walâ sing--pulús,--águd,--ásoy,--átsoy;
pitsépítse, karintukáy).

_mirók_, (B) See milôk--eyelash.

_mirón_, (Sp. miron) An onlooker, spectator, bystander, gazer.

_mirón-mirón_, Dim. of mirón. Also: Interloper, bystander, especially
one watching a game of cards and looking over a person's shoulder to
see his hand, or the like.

_mísa_, (Sp. misa) Mass, the holy sacrifice of the Mass; to say
Mass. Mísa risáda (Sp. rezada) Low Mass. Mísa Mayór. High Mass. Sín-o
ang párì nga nagmísa kaína? Who is the priest that said Mass a short
while ago? Ang hálad sang Mísa. The sacrifice of the Mass.

_mísa de tres_, (Sp.) A solemn Mass in which the celebrant is assisted
by a deacon and subdeacon.


_misahán_, Altar; chapel, where Mass is said. (cf. halarán).

_misál_, (Sp. misal) Missal, Mass-book.

_mistério_, (Sp. misterio) Mystery. (cf. katingaláhan, katanhagáan).

_místiko, mistikó_, (Sp. místico) Mystical, mystic; spiritual.

_mistisísmo_, (Sp. misticismo) Mysticism.

_míswa_, A kind of Chinese vermicelli, but finer than sutánghon.

_misyón_, (Sp. mision) Mission.

_misyonéro_, (Sp. misionero) Missionary.

_mitád_, (Sp. mitad) Half, moiety; middle, centre. (cf. tungâ).

_míthì_, Indigenous, native, not foreign or exotic. (cf. tumándok).

_míting_, (English: meeting) Meeting, assembly, convention, caucus,
a gathering or assemblage of people for some social or political
purpose. (cf. tinipón-típon, katipúnan, katilíngban, hinubónhúbon).

_mítlang_, Utterance, pronunciation, enunciation; syllable; to utter,
pronounce, speak, say, emit, enunciate, give utterance to. Isá ka
mítlang. One syllable. Magmítlang ka sing pilá ka tinagâ. Imítlang
mo (mitlangón mo) ang pilá ka tinagâ. Pronounce (say) a few
words. Imítlang mo ang ímo nga katuyoán. Give utterance to your
thought, plan or intention. Mitlangí kamí sang ímo inugpaháyag. Speak
to us of what you have to tell (reveal). Ang mga katsílà índì
makamítlang sing maáyo sang tigbató nga "h". The Spaniards are unable
to pronounce well the letter "h". (cf. bungát, tikáb, púlong, silíng,
koón, dágil).

_mitolohía_, (Sp. mitologia) Mythology.

_mítra_, (Sp. mitra) Mitre; bishop; episcopal curia.

_mítsa_, (Sp. mecha) Fuse, match, match-cord, spark or flame used to
fire gunpowder or fuel.

_mítsis_, A kind of game at cards.

_mo_, Your, yours, thy, thine, of you, of yours (singular); by or
through you (thee). (cf. ímo, nímo and see ákon).

_móda_, (Sp. moda) Mode, style, fashion, form, cut, shape, custom,
manner, vogue. (cf. batásan, pamatásan, kinaanáran, úso, kinabatásan,
kostúmbre).

_módmod_, To crush, pulverize, grind, pound or bray (in a mortar),
crumble, powder; reduce to powder, comminute, triturate, break into
fine particles by pressure; to become crushed or broken into small
pieces. Modmorá ang karamélo, ang píghol, etc. Crush the caramel,
the lump of rice, etc. Namódmod ang biskótso tungúd sang lumpálúmpa
sang trak. The biscuits got crumbled owing to the jolting of the
truck. Minódmod nga tinápay, kalámay, bugás, etc. Crumbled bread,
powdered sugar, ground rice, etc. (cf. múdmud, bókbok, pódpod).

_mohón_, (Sp. mojón) Landmark, milestone, merestone, mearstone;
boundary-stone; concrete posts or landmarks, as used by surveyors,
or the like.

_mókmok_, To blame, lay the blame on, impute, charge with, incriminate,
censure, accuse, make responsible for, throw the guilt upon, find
fault with, inculpate. Ginmokmokán siá níla sang mga kalaínan nga
ginhímò sang ibán. He was made to answer for the wrong-doings of
others, he was blamed by them for the evil done by others. Indì ka
magmókmok sa íya sinâ. Don't lay the blame for that on him. Imókmok
inâ sa may kalabtánan sinâ. Lay the blame for it on those involved
in the affair. (cf. múkmuk id.).

_mólde_, (Sp. molde) Mould, pattern, form, block.

_molér_, (Sp. moler) To grind, pound, crush, mill, pulverize,
vex, molest, annoy, harass, bother, overwork. Nagmolér gid siá sa
ákon. He annoyed me very much. (cf. galíng; galít, pasáklaw, huól,
hiól, paugút).

_molokmókan_, Scape-goat. (cf. mókmok, tapalán).

_mómò_, Taciturn, silent, reticent, dumb, mum, uncommunicative,
mute, close, not given to talking, not very sociable, of few
words. (cf. komód).

_mômô_, To squeeze, push or press against, as one's head against a
wall or floor, etc. (cf. nônô, sôsô, núsnus, uríud, oróod).

_mómoy_, See múmuy--ugly, nasty, etc.

_mong_, (B) An exclamation often placed at the end of a sentence;
really, surely, certainly, indeed, believe me, etc. Indì akó magkádto
dídto, mong. I am not going there, really I am not. Dakô siá, mong. He
is a big fellow, sure enough.

_mónggo_, A kind of peas, much eaten in the Philippines.

_mónmon_, To cover, fill with alluvial matter. Ang dakô nga búhò dirâ
sa ubús sang bakólod namonmonán tungúd sang madámol nga ulán. The
large hole there at the foot of the hill was filled with alluvium
due to the heavy rain. (cf. láy-on, punô, támpok, táp-ok).

_móno_, (Sp. mono) Monkey, ape. (cf. amô).

_móno_, To say, make a statement, state, declare, manifest,
communicate, mention, utter, give out, make known, remark, drop a
word. Si Pédro nagmóno nga mapatíndog sing bág-o nga baláy. Peter said
that he was going to build a new house. Imóno sa íya ang kilidanón sang
digamohán. Tell him about the necessary kitchen repairs. Ginmóno níya
nga----. He gave out the statement that----. (cf. silíng, mítlang,
bungát).

_mónog_, (B) Thick, stout, strong; much, too much, excessive,
very. (cf. madámol; támà, lakás, lám-ag, dúro, masyádo).

_mónte_, (Sp. monte) Mountain, forest, wood, woodland; a game at
cards. Gindakúp silá sang polís, kay naghámpang sang mónte. They were
caught by the police, because they were playing monte.

_monuménto_, (Sp. monumento) Monument. (cf. batungdáan).

_monyéka_, (Sp. muñeca) Doll, manikin, puppet, dolly.

_móok_, To be deep, profound, heavy, sound, lethargic
(of sleep). Nagamóok ang íya katulúgon. He is sleeping
profoundly. Namoókan siá sang katulúgon. He was fast--, sound--,
dead--, asleep. (cf. hamóok).

_morádo_, A kind of banana. It is very savoury and can easily be
recognized by its brownish or reddish peel.

_morádo_, (Sp. morado) Violet, purple; brown, dark-red,
mulberry-coloured, claret-coloured.

_moréno_, (Sp. moreno) Brown, swarthy, dark, tawny, brunette.

_moréra_, (Sp. morera) White mulberry tree.

_moriskéta_, (Sp. morisqueta) Boiled rice. (cf. kán-on).

_móro_, (Sp. moro) Moor, Saracen, infidel, unbaptized, non-Christian,
Mohammedan native of Mindanao and adjacent islands.

_moromoníka_, Doll. See monyéka.

_moró-móro_, A stage-play often exhibited in the Philippines showing
fighting, etc., between Christians and Mohammedans.

_morô-morô_, To stammer, stutter, splutter, talk indistinctly through
fear, shyness, etc.

_moróna_, Shirt. See kamísa tsína, kamísa de tsíno id.

_móros_, See móro--Moor.

_moróso_, (Sp. moroso) Tardy, slow, late, behindhand, laggard, in
arrear, delinquent (in paying taxes, etc.).

_mortál_, (Sp. mortal) Mortal, deadly, deathly, grievous, fatal. Salâ
nga mortál. A mortal (grievous, deadly) sin. (cf. ikamatáy;
kalamátyan).

_mórto_, See múrto--a ghost, etc.

_moskitéro_, (Sp. mosquitero) Mosquito-net or--curtain or--bar.

_moskíto_, (Sp. mosquito) Mosquito, gnat. (cf. namók, lamók).

_moskobádo_, (Sp. muscovado) Unrefined sugar, muscovado.

_mostása_, (Sp. mostaza) Mustard, mustard-seed.

_motón_, (Sp. moton) Block, pulley. (cf. batakán).

_motór_, (Sp. motor) Motor; dynamo.


_moy_, Term of endearment for a pet monkey. (cf. amô).

_móymoy_, See moy.

_móymoy_, See múymuy--to treat well, etc.

_múà_, A kind of ghost or spirit believed in by the
superstitious. (cf. múwà id.).

_múad_, To increase, multiply, propagate, breed, teem, procreate,
have offspring. Nagmúad na gid iníng panimaláy. This family has
increased very much. (cf. búad, pamúad).

_múal_, To have one's mouth full or crammed with food, chew or speak
with difficulty on account of having one's mouth stuffed with food,
mutter, mumble, splutter.

_muál-múal_, Dim. and Freq. of múal. To utter indistinctly, splutter,
mumble.

_muási_, A kind of rice-cake mixed with sesame-seeds.

_múda_, To disparage, speak ill of, vilify, mock, scoff, insult,
affront. Dakô ang íla pagmúda sa íya. They vilified (mocked, insulted)
him very much. (cf. híkay, múlay, úmpit, ulígyat, uligâ).

_múda_, See móda--fashion, etc.

_múdlò_, To stare with greedy eyes, to gloat. See mulúdlò.

_muébles_, (Sp. mueble) Chattels, household goods, furniture, movables,
outfit, equipment. (cf. galamitón, kasangkápan, sángkap).

_muélye_, (Sp. muelle) Pier, landing-stage, quay, jetty, wharf, mole;
spring (of steel, rubber, etc.). (cf. pantalán).

_muérto_, (Sp. muerto) Dead, killed, deceased, departed, defunct;
lifeless; corpse; ghost, spectre. (cf. múrto, patáy, minatáy,
amalánhig).

_múging_, The rice-flower; pollen; to bloom or flower (of
rice). (cf. marô).

_mugís_, (H) See más-a id. Dílì nga mugís. Never, on no account.

_mugô_, (B) Short. See bugô, malíp-ot.

_múg-ot_, To exert oneself, do something with force or
violence. Nagmúg-ot siá sa paghákwat siníng bató. He put forth all his
strength in lifting this stone. It was all he could do to lift this
stone. Nagamúg-ot siá sa kaákig. He is violently angry. Ginmug-otán
níya ang aparadór sa paggíhit. He made a great effort to shift
the cupboard. Indì mo pagmug-otán ang ímo anák sang ákig. Don't be
furiously angry with your son. (cf. paningúhà, panikasúg, himúd-os).

_múgut_, To get angry, exasperated, provoked, riled, indignant, cross,
wax hot with anger. Nagamúgut na ang ginháwa ni Fuláno. N.N. is
waxing hot, is getting angry or exasperated. Nagamúgut siá
sa ákon. Ginamugútan (Ginamúgtan) níya akó. He is angry with
me. (cf. ugút, ákig, sáklaw).

_múhaw_, To enjoy a new taste or experience. (cf. hígmaw, pamág-o).

_muháw-múhaw_, See higmáwhígmaw. The Dim. and Freq. of hígmaw.

_múhay_, To be successful, do well; prosper, live long. Kabáy pa nga
magmúhay ka. May you live long. (cf. kaayohán; búhay, dúgay).

_muháy_, (B) To shun company, keep to oneself, separate from others,
wish to be alone, be by oneself, retire. Nagamuháy siá sa ibán. He
wishes to be left alone, he is keeping apart from the rest.

_muháy-muháy_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of muháy.

_múka_, To be full, crammed, stuffed. Kon nagamúka ang ímo bâbâ
índì ka maghámbal. Don't talk with a full mouth. (cf. punô, butâ,
bát-al, báknal).

_mukháyaw, muk-háyaw_, To recover slightly, mend, rally, get a little
better, improve. Nagmuk-háyaw na siá sa butí. He has now slightly
recovered from the smallpox. (cf. mulikáw).

_mukháyaw_, To lift or raise one's head. See tukháyaw, tukyáhaw.

_múklat_, (H) To open (the eyes). Muklatá ang ímo mga matá. Open
your eyes. Muklatí siá sang ímo mga matá. Look at him with open
eyes. Mamúklat gid kunína ang íla mga matá. After some time they will
have their eyes opened i.e. they will understand.

_múkmuk_, To blame for, etc. See mókmok id.


_múkrà_, (B) See múklat.

_múla_, (Sp. mula,--o) Mule, especially a she-mule; used also loosely
of a large horse.

_mulálong_, To inspect closely, scrutinize, observe well, scan, peer
at, look well at, fix--, rivet--, one's eyes--,--one's gaze--, upon
(on), look at carefully. Mulalóngi sing maáyo ang ginabása mo. Look
carefully at what you are reading. Ginmulalóngan níya ang laráwan. He
viewed the picture closely. (cf. himútad, tán-aw, bilíd, túluk).

_mulánghat_, To look or stare at, notice with astonishment, be
surprised to see, stare open-mouthed. (cf. pamalúng).

_múlay_, To criticize maliciously, run down, carp, cavil, disparage,
decry, belittle, traduce, underrate, speak ill of, find fault
with, slight, depreciate, speak depreciatingly of the doings of
others. Nagmúlay siá sa ákon--or--ginmúlay níya akó. He disparaged
me. He spoke ill of me. Indì mo pagmuláyon ang íya mga binuhátan. Don't
criticize his doings in a malicious way. (cf. híkay, támay).

_mulíg-ot_, To strive, be active, do one's best, make great
efforts. (cf. panikasúg, paningúhà, múg-ot).

_mulikáw_, To stir again, start to work, move about again (after an
illness, etc.) Nagmulikáw na ang masakít. The sick person is up and
about again. Sa isá ka simána, sa ákon bántà, magamulikáw liwán ang
masakít. Within a week, in my opinion, the sick person will be moving
about again, will be on his feet again. (cf. mukháyaw, murikáw).

_múlò_, To complain, show displeasure or discontent, lament, murmur,
find fault with, grumble. (cf. kósmod, kúmud, pasingít, híkay, múlay).

_múlta_, (Sp. multa) Fine, mulct, extra payment, extra charge,
pecuniary penalty; to fine, mulct, charge extra. Magmúlta ka sa íya
or multahí siá sing tátlo ka mángmang. Fine him three pesos. Magbáyad
ka lang sang múlta. Just pay the fine. (cf. tabís).

_mulúd-an_, The East, sunrise, rising of the sun, Orient. (cf. murá;
sidlangán).

_mulúdlò_, To stare at with goggling or greedy eyes, gloat, devour
with one's eyes. Nagamulúdlò ang íya mga matá sa kahákug. He is
staring about with greedy eyes. His eyes are starting from his
head. (cf. búdlò, múdlò, búslo).

_mululayón_, What is to--, should--, can--, be criticized, found
fault with, etc. (cf. múlay).

_mulumún-ag_, Fairly prosperous, doing pretty well, in comfortable
circumstances; to get along nicely, be rather well off. (cf. mún-ag,
manwáhà, kaayohán, tín-ad).

_mulunuhón_, Report, rumour, statement, information, news; to report,
inform, give out a statement or news. (cf. múno).

_mulútmut_, See mútmut. Walâ makamulútmut ang íya nga hándum. His
wish remained unfulfilled (literally:--was not without opposition--was
thwarted).

_múmho_, A crumb, remains or leavings of food, especially a wasted
grain of (cooked) rice. Ihátag na lang sa idô ang mga múmho nga
nabilín sa látok. Give the leavings remaining on the table to the
dog. (cf. míga).

_múmuy_, Very ugly, shabby, mean, nasty and wicked like a monkey or
even like an evil spirit. (cf. sárot).

_munâ_, To stay, tarry, loiter, lag, straggle, dawdle, remain a long
time; to rest, be at ease. (cf. mámnà, dúgay, lúsgò).

_mún-ag_, To prosper, go on well, be well off, be well-to-do, be
in good--, easy--, comfortable--, circumstances. (cf. kaayohán,
mulumún-ag, tín-ad, manwáhà, úswag, sányog).

_munáhan_, (B) Early-ripening, taking but a short time from planting to
harvesting, applied especially to a kind of small maize. (cf. hudyánan,
hugyánan--needing comparatively a long time to ripen).

_múndo_, A kind of banana.

_múndo_, (Sp. mundo) World, orb, globe, earth. (cf. kalibútan, dútà),

_múndo_, (Sp. mondo) Simple, timid, shy, bashful, unsophisticated;
fool, ass, rustic, boorish, uneducated. (cf. bunáyag, antolô, bukídnon,
manól, umánhon, kagúng, pákok, búngaw).


_mungâ_, A hen, broody hen.

_mungâ-múngà_, Dim. and Freq. of mungá. To act like a hen, to
take everything in sight, gobble up, eat very greedily, or the
like. (cf. kayába).

_múng-an_, A passive form (perhaps a contraction of manúng-an
from panungâ, tungâ) often used in the meaning: to be
hit--well,--full,--fairly,--right,--straight,--in the middle,--in
the centre,--with full force; to be affected--, feel--, very
much. Namúng-an gid ang bóla. The ball was hit fairly in the
centre. Kamí gid ang namúng-an siníng kalisúd. We were especially
hard hit by this calamity. Walâ siá mamúng-i. He was not affected
very much. He did not receive (feel) the full force of the blow
(but was only grazed, or the like). (cf. ígò, tungâ, támà, lakás).

_múng-ay_, To blossom, flower, bloom; bear fruit in abundance, be
prolific. (cf. pamukádkad, pamúskad, pamúnga, pagángpang).

_mungáyà_, See hamungáyà--to be fruitful, plentiful, prosperous, etc.

_múnggo_, See mónggo.

_munî-múnì_, Doll, dolly. (cf. borobónik, munyéka).

_munisipál_, (Sp. municipal) Municipal; borough, town (these last
used as adjectives). (cf. banwahánon, binánwa).

_munisípyo_, (Sp. municipio) Town, township, borough, burgh,
Municipality; town-council,--hall,--house. (cf. bánwa).

_múnmun_, See mónmon.

_múno_, See móno--to state, give out, etc.

_murá, murâ_, To rise, appear, come up, particularly said of the
sun. Nagamurá na ang ádlaw. The sun is rising. (cf. bútlak, subáng).

_múrì_, An inflammation of the eye with a more or less abundant
discharge of matter; to be affected with múrì. (cf. mirâ-mírà, mútà).

_murikáw_, See mulikáw--to wove about again, etc.

_muríon_, Pertaining to múrì, one affected with a mattery or mucous
flow from the eyes.

_murô_, A small village, hamlet. See minurô id.

_múrong_, (B) Dense, leafy, thick; to be or become dense or thick of
foliage. Nagamúrong ang mga sangá siníng káhoy. The branches of this
tree are very leafy. (cf. dábung, gápà).

_murót_, (B) To see, know of, understand, perceive. Indì akó makamurót
sang sulát, sang sermón, etc. I cannot read the letter. I know nothing
of the sermon, etc. Dílì mamurotán ang íla mga halambalánon. Their
conversation cannot be understood (overheard). (cf. hibaló, sáyod,
hántup, hangúp, áto; balintúnod).

_múrtik_, (B) Bat. (cf. koláknit, kolápnit, kololáknit).

_múrto_, (Sp. muerto) The soul or ghost of a dead person haunting a
house, spectre, wraith, spirit. See amamánhig, malánhig, maránhig id.

_murúd-an_, See mulúd-an--Sunrise, East.

_murúgmon_, A bird of prey. See amolúgmon.

_murasíngal_, To be or become dirty, soiled, etc. See
musíngal. Nadágdag ang unúd sa dálan kag nagmurusíngal sang balás. The
meat dropped on the road and was mingled (dirtied, stained, soiled)
with sand.

_musagáng_, Blood-stained, bloody, ensanguined, sanguinary, gory;
dirty, soiled, defiled, stained; to be or become blood-stained,
etc. Nagamusagáng sing dugô ang kamót sang manugíhaw. The hands of
the butcher are red with blood. (cf. maragáng).

_músduk_, (B) To pass away, expire, die, perish, succumb. Namúsduk
siá sa bilanggóan. He died in prison. Kon matámad ka magpangabúdlay
mamúsduk ka gíd sa ímo kaimolán. If you are too lazy to work you will
certainly die in your poverty. (cf. múy-od, húy-od, patáy, talíwan,
pangálpò).

_músika, musiká_, (Sp. música) Music. (cf. találay, tulálay, lánton,
lánglang).

_musikó, músiko_, (Sp. músico). Musician, bandsman, player,
instrumentalist. (cf. manulálay, manalálay).


_músin_, See the following músing.

_músing_, Soil, stain, muck, mire, dirt, filth, grime; to soil,
stain, begrime, befoul, bemire, dirty. Namúsing (namusíngan) siá sang
lúnang. He got muddy or mud-stained. Andam ka nga índì mo masalapáy
ang kólon, kay mamúsing (magakamúsing) ang ímo mga panápton. Be
careful not to come in contact with the kettle or your clothes will
get dirty. (cf. bulíng, búlit, hígkò, dágtà, musíngal).

_musíngal_, To soil, stain, etc. See músing. Nagamulusíngal gid lang
ang íya mga bibíg sang tilád. Her lips are stained with betelnut juice.

_músmus_, Ruin, bankruptcy, impoverishment; to ruin, impoverish,
bankrupt, beggar; to be impoverished, ruined, bankrupt, beggared,
reduced to indigence or misery, to become poor or miserable. Namúsmus
(nagkamúsmus) siá. He was ruined. He became poor (miserable). Ginmúsmus
siá sang Mahál nga Diós. God made him poor. God sent him poverty (as
a trial or punishment). Kon índì mo pagduláon ang ímo mga batásan nga
buhahâ mamúsmus ka gid sa olíhi. Unless you give up your extravagant
habits you will finally--be reduced to indigence,--be brought low,--be
ruined or bankrupt. (cf. ímol, púto, dungúl, lisúd).

_mútà_, Rheum (from the eyes). See múrì, mirâ-mirâ.

_mútad_, To look at intently, look well at, have a good look at,
observe, scan, make out, notice, distinguish, mark, note, fix--,
rivet--,--one's eyes--,--one's gaze--, upon. Walâ akó makamútad sang
duág sang íya báyò. I could not make out the colour of her dress. I
had no time or occasion to observe (examine) the colour of her
dress. Ginmutáran ko sing maáyo ang íya nga nawóng. I narrowly scanned
his features. (cf. mulálong; himútad which is more commonly used).

_mutáway, mutawáy_, Isolated, segregated, separated from the rest,
lonely; to be or become isolated, etc. (cf. hamutáway, lígwin, bulág).

_mútià_, Pearl; something precious, valuable, excellent, a gem,
a jewel, or the like. Ang mútià nga malahálon. The precious
pearl. Ang Mútià sang Sidlangán. The Pearl of the Orient or East
(The Philippines). Mútià siá sang mga babáe. She is a jewel (pearl)
among women. Mga mútià sang binaláybay. Gems of poetry. (mútyà id.).

_mútik_, To leave; remain; be left over. Walâ sing namútik sang
íya kwárta. There was nothing left of his money. All his money had
gone. (cf. turá, bilín, salín).

_mutík_, To hear, get to know, receive information. Walâ mamutikí
túbtub karón kon sín-o ang nagbúhat sinâ. Up till now it is not known
who did it. Kon mamutikán níya iní----. If he hears of it----. In case
he should receive news of it----. Suppose he should get to know of it
(this)----. (cf. matík).

_mútmut_, Free, untrammeled, one's own master, independent; to be
liberated, freed, to become free, or the like. Nagkamútmut (namútmut)
ang binilánggò. The prisoner was freed,--was set free,--was set at
liberty,--was set at large,--was let out. (cf. mútwas, bútwà, luás,
búhì, tibáwas, talímwas, bútwas).

_mutsátsa_, (Sp. muchacha) Maid-servant, maid, girl, girl-help,
female domestic, drudge, slavey. (cf. sologoón).

_mutsátso_, (Sp. muchacho) Servant, servitor, menial, help, attendant,
boy, page, waiter, valet, flunkey, slave. (cf. sologoón, búlig,
batâbátà, alagád).

_mútso_, (Sp. mucho) Much, a quantity, deal, sight, heaps of, heap,
number, considerable amount, plenty, galore, great deal, mass, lot
of, abundance, great number or quantity. (cf. madámò, dagáyà, dagásà,
bugánà, rakô).

_mútwas_, See mútmut. Nakamútwas siá sa kasábà. He came out of his
lawsuit scot-free. (cf. mútmut, tibáwas, luás).

_mútyà_, Pearl. See mútià.

_mutyáan_, Mother of pearl; full of pearls, having pearls; wizard,
sorcerer, one supposed to practise the black art and to be in league
with the devil.

_múwà_, See múà--A ghost or spirit. Daw múwà siá kadakô. She is as
tall or as big as a múwà (said of tall and stout women, the múwà
being supposed to be of very big proportions).

_múyaw, múy-aw_, Wonder, surprise, amazement, astonishment; to wonder,
be astonished or surprised, be astounded or thunder-struck. Namúy-aw
siá siní. He was astonished at it. (cf. tíngála, búlung).

_múymuy_, To treat well, lavish upon, bestow great care upon, tend,
look well after. Ginamuymuyán níya ang íya kabáyo sang labíng maáyo
nga pagsagúd. He takes very good care of his horse. Namúymuyán iníng
báka sing pílì nga hilamón. This cow was treated to choice grass,
was fed very well.

_múy-od_, (B) To perish, expire, die, depart this life, meet
one's death or end, pass away, succumb. Nagkáon siá sing lakás kag
namúy-od. He ate too much and met his death. Mamúy-od ka kon padayónon
mo ang ímo pagpagútum. You will die, if you continue going hungry
(said of one who pays no attention to meal-time, but works on till
exhausted with hunger and fatigue). (cf. húy-od, patáy).




N


_n_, The letter "n" in Visayan is pronounced as in English. If often
combines with a following "g" to represent a nasal sound that can only
be learned by hearing. A tilde over the "n" or over the "g" indicates
that they form together a double consonant having the said nasal
sound, e.g. nga, ngílo, ngí-ngi, ngóy-ngoy, ngurî-ngúrì, etc. There is
something of the same effect in the English words "singing, ringing,
swinging", but the "ng" of Visayan has a stronger nasalization.

_na_, In combination with a negative: Not any more, not any longer,
not again, never again. Indì ka na magbúhat sinâ. You shall not do
it any more. Dílì na siá matámbok. He is not fat any longer. Walâ
na siá magbálik dídto. He did not go back there again. He never
returned to that place. Walâ na silá sing humáy. They have no rice
any more. (cf. the following na).

_na_, Now, at last, already, at present, so soon. Manyága na kitá. Let
us now have dinner. Adlaw na, bángon kamó. It is already broad
day-light, get up. Tápus na? Finished so soon (already)? Tápus na. This
is the end of it. Finished. Ari na siá. He is now here. N.B. The na
in the Visayan language is much more used than the "now, already"
of English and may often be left out in translation without impairing
the sense. (cf. karón, don, ron, kár-on).

_na-_, A potential verbal prefix denoting the past tense passive and
corresponding to the future ma-. It can frequently be translated by
"got, was, became", e.g. nagútum siá. He was hungry. Nadakúp siá. He
got caught. Nabúdlay siá. He became weary (tired, exhausted). Na-
is often interchangeable with gin-, though the rule is that gin-
should be used, when the agent is expressly stated and na-, when the
agent is not determined, e.g. gingubâ sang bágyo ang ámon baláy. Our
house was destroyed by the hurricane. Nagubâ ang ámon baláy. Our
house was destroyed.

_na-_, A shortened form of nagka-, e.g. nahádluk (nagkahádluk) siá. He
was (became) afraid. Nadágdag (nagkadágdag) ang pínggan. The plate
fell down, etc.

_na_, (B) His, hers, its, etc. (cf. íya, níya, ána).

_nâ_, An exclamation: There you are! You see now! (cf. dan, tê, tî).

_naán, náan_, Now, at present. (cf. nián, niyán, karón, na).

_naátwan_, Understanding, intelligence, comprehension, inkling. Walâ
gid siá sing naátwan. He knows nothing about it. He hasn't an inkling
of it. (cf. áto, nabádwan, namasngaán).

_nabâ_, (B) To be or become low, of little height; to shorten,
lower. Nagnabâ ang pángpang sang subâ. The river-bank has become
low. Nanabaán akó siníng síya. This chair is too low for me. Utda ang
tiíl sang lamésa, agúd magnabâ. Cut the legs of the table so that it
may be low. (cf. nobô).

_nabádwan_, Understanding, inkling, etc. See naátwan,
namasngaán. (Nabádwan seems to be derived from the obsolete baló,
now always hibalô).

_nabáha_, (Sp. navaja) Razor. (cf. labáha).

_nábaw_, Shallowness, little depth; to be or become low, shallow
(of a river, or the like). Nagnábaw na ang túbig sang subâ. The water
of the river--has gone down,--is now quite shallow. Mahapús ang ámon
pagtabók sa subâ, kay nanabáwan kamí sang túbig. It was easy for us to
cross the river, because the water was shallow. (cf. nobô--to be low,
of little height; dálum--to be deep; táas--to be high).

_nábhag_, (B) For nahubág from hubág--to swell, bulge; break down,
cave in.

_nábsug_, (B) For nabusúg from busúg--satiated, etc.

_nag-_, A prefix denoting the past tense active (transitive and
intransitive), e.g. Nagsilíng siá sa ákon----. He told me----. Nagsulát
siá sing binaláybay. He wrote a poem. Sín-o ang nagbúhat sinâ? Who did
it? Who has done it (that)? Nagdálum ang búhò. The hole has become
deep. Nagláin ang íya ginháwa. She (has) swooned. She did not feel
well. Naghalín na siá. He has gone away. (cf. nanag--).

_naga-_, A prefix denoting the present tense active (transitive and
intransitive), e.g. Nagahámpang, nagabása, etc. siá. He is playing,
reading, etc. Nagahunâhúnà akó nga----. I think that----. Si nánay
nagahímos sang panyága. Mother is getting dinner ready. Nagapabugál
silá. They are proud. Nagahalín na silá. They are leaving
now. Nagadulúm na ang kalibútan. It is getting dark. Nagabahâ
ang subâ. The river is in flood. Daw sa nagabúg-at na ang íya
ginabátyag. It seems that his condition is becoming serious.

_nága_, A hardwood tree and the timber thereof. (cf. nára; the
Sp. narra is from this Philippine word).

_nagaka-_, A prefix denoting the present tense and used mostly with
intransitive verbs, e.g. Nagakalisúd siá. He is in trouble. Nagakalípay
siá. He is glad. Nagakasubô siá. He is sad. (The corresponding forms
for the future, imperative and past are "magaka-, magka-, and nagka-";
the infinitive is "pagka-").

_nagapa-_, A prefix composed of "naga- and pa-" and denoting the
present tense active with the added meaning of "pa", e.g.
a.) Nagapamanílà siá. He is going to Manila, is on his way to
Manila. Nagapabúkid siá. He is on his way to the mountains.
b.) Nagapabugál siá. He is proud, haughty, takes on airs. Nagapabungól
siá. He is deaf to admonitions, etc., he does not want to
listen. Nagapaugút siá. He is getting angry, exasperated.
c.) Nagapabúhat siá sing bág-o nga baláy. He is having a new house
built. Nagapatíndog siá sing halígi. He is putting up a post. The
corresponding forms for the infinitive, future and past are "pagpa-,
magapa-, nagpa-, and magpa-" for the imperative.

_nagapaka-_, A prefix denoting the present tense active with the
added meaning of "paka", e.g.
a.) Nagapakamaálam siá. He is assuming an air of learning,
he wants to appear learned. Nagapakabungól siá. He is feigning
deafness. Nagapakamanggaránon siá. He is pretending to be rich. He
tries to be taken for a rich man.
b.) Nagapakamaáyo siá siníng hágnà nga kasuguán. He approves this
law or ordinance. Nagapakamahál siá sang íya pagtoloóhan. He values
his faith. (The corresponding forms for the infinitive, future,
imperative and past are "pagpaka-, magapaka-, magpaka- and nagpaka-").

_nagapam-, nagapan-, nagapang-, nagapang-_, A prefix denoting the
present tense active frequentative. Changes that pan- undergoes are
determined by the following rules:
a.) nagapam- is used with verbs beginning with "m", "b" or
"p", e.g. nagapamalá (malá); nagapamakál (bakál); nagapamángkot
(pángkot). N.B. Verbs beginning with the letter "m" have the same
form for the Freq. and Caus., e.g. pamalá (malá). In such cases the
context has to decide the true meaning.
b.) nagapan- is used with verbs beginning with "d", "s" or "t",
e.g. nagapanámgo (dámgo); nagapanílhig (sílhig); nagapanístis (tístis).
c.) nagapang- is used with verbs beginning with "h", "l" or "y",
e.g. nagapanghunâhúnà (hunâhúnà); nagapanglángbas (lángbas);
nagapangyáwyaw (yáwyaw).
d.) nagapang- is used with verbs beginning with a vowel or "k",
e.g. nagapangámpò (ámpò); nagapangínit (ínit); nagapangúbug (úbug);
nagapangótkot (kótkot); nagapangisáykísay (kisáykísay).
N.B. The corresponding forms for the past, imperative and future
(nagpan-, magpan- and magapan-) are often shortened into nam-, nan-,
nang-, nang-; mam-, man-, mang-, mang-, e.g. nangáyò (nagpangáyò);
nangabúdlay (nagpangabúdlay); nanúmbung (nagpanúmbung); mamányos
(magapamányos); mangutána (magpangutána), etc. etc.

_nagáynay_, (B) Gentle, tender, soft, slow, careful, etc. See hínay,
inanáy, ananáy, alugáynay.

_nagka-_, See under nagaka-.

_nágnag_, (B) To clean, cleanse, bathe, lave, wash, disinfect (applied
to the treatment of a wound with an antiseptic liquid, especially with
warm water mixed with various ingredients of roots and herbs). Nagnagí
ang ímo pilás kag ugáling tambalán. Bathe or cleanse your wound first
with a warm liquid, and then put a dressing on it. Inágnag iníng túbig
nga inínit sa ímo pilás. Use this warm water to clean your wound with.

_nahanungúd_, Respecting, regarding, concerning, with regard to,
with reference to, in point (in consideration) of, as concerns, as
for, as to. Nahanungúd sinâ----. With regard to that----. Nahanungúd
(Sa nahanungúd) sang íya nga ginsilíng----. With reference to what he
said----. Walâ gid ikáw sing lábut nahanungúd sinâ. You have nothing
to do with it. Mind your own business. (cf. tungúd, nahatungúd).

_nahatungúd_, See nahanungúd id. Maáyo gid ang katarúngan nga íya
nga ginpaháyag nahatungúd sináng butáng, ápang----. His reasoning
with regard to that matter was very good, but----.

_nahauná_, First, the first, foremost, leading, beginning, initial,
incipient, inchoate, front. Sa nahauná----sa ikaduhá----. Firstly,
in the first place----secondly, in the second place----. Ang nahauná
nga butáng nga dápat buháton----. The first thing to be done----.

_nahót_, Any oblong or lengthy piece of any material, that is
comparatively slender for its length, as a pole, stick, bamboo,
rope, fibre, ribbon, candle, etc. Tátlo ka nahót nga kawáyan, káhoy,
písì, bohók, etc. Three pieces (lengths) of bamboo, wood, string,
hair, etc. Ang íya kasubô dáw nagapabúgras sang mga nahót sang íya
tagiposóon. Her sorrow almost breaks her heart-strings. (cf. bílog).

_naka-_, A prefix denoting the past tense active and corresponding to
the future maka-. Naka- is chiefly used instead of nag-, when an action
is either intransitive, problematic or potential, e.g. Nagtabók siá sa
subâ. He crossed the river. (A simple statement of fact). Nakatabók
siá sa subâ. He actually did cross or could cross the river (there
having been a doubt whether he would, or could, cross the river).

_nákar_, (Sp. nacar) Mother-of-pearl, nacre; pearl-colour;
rose-coloured.

_nakawáan_, A field, campus, public square or garden surrounded by
houses. (káwà--a large pan or cauldron).

_nakawâ-kawáan_, Dim. of nakawáan. A small yard or public square, etc.

_naki-_, A prefix denoting the past tense (nagpaki-) and corresponding
to máki-- for the future, e.g. nakibáis, nakibúlig, nakiló-oy,
nakidúmug, nakitábang siá. (cf. paki-).

_nakig-_, See naki-. Nakigáway, nakigsúay, nakígkasábà, nakigkítà
silá. (cf. pakig-).

_nákon_, (H) See ákon, ko.

_nakú_, A contraction of the Tagalog term iná (nánay) and ko. My
mother. Oh mother! Also used as an exclamation: Well! Why! By
Jove! Goodness gracious! For goodness' sake! or the like.

_nalaugón_, (H) Cloth or any other material suitable for garments,
or that is to be made into garments. (naúg; cf. kalabahón, balayoón,
etc.).

_nálmà_, For nalumâ from lumâ--to crush, etc.

_nam_--, Often stands for nagpam--. See under nagapam--.

_namaslután_, Use, utility, usefulness; knowledge, education. Táo
siá nga walâ sing namaslután. He is a worthless fellow. He knows
nothing. (cf. pulús, águd, ásoy, nabádwan, namasngaán).

_namasrután_, See namaslután.

_namátyan_, A bereaved family or household; the house or place where
a death has occurred. (cf. patáy, himatáyan).

_námì_, To be or become nice, agreeable, beautiful. Nagnámì ang íya
baláy, kay ginkaáyo níya. His house is now quite beautiful, for he
has had it done up. Nanamían akó sang íya bestído. I consider her
dress very nice. Kon mapísan ka paganamían ka gid sang báklon sa
ímo ni tátay nga delárgo. If you are diligent,--father will buy you
a beautiful pair of trousers,--you will see what a beautiful pair of
trousers father will buy for you. Katahúm siní nga hampángan; natingála
akó sang silíng mo nga walâ ka siní pagnamíi. How beautiful this toy
is; I am astonished to hear you say that you were not pleased with
it. Kon makítà mo ang laráwan ni Fuláno manamían ikáw sa walâ sing
duhádúha. When you see N.N.'s photo you will, I am sure, consider it
beautiful. (cf. tahúm, ányag, gayón, dálig, ámbong, ayóáyo).

_námit_, To be or become or make sweet, tasty, delectable, dainty,
savoury, delicious, exquisite, agreeable to the taste. Nagnámit na
iníng mga páhò. These mangoes have now become delicious. Nanamítan
akó siníng ságing. These bananas are nice, I like these bananas for
their exquisite taste. These bananas taste to me delightful. Namíta
ang paglútò sang panyága. Cook a tasty dinner.


_námò_, Noise, trouble, disturbance; trick, malice, craft, cunning,
deceit, duplicity, evil intention, mostly used with a negative. Walâ
sing námò iníng táo. This is a quiet, reticent man. This man
is--harmless,--guileless,--without malice. (cf. gáhud, gamó; dáyà,
límbong).

_námog_, (B) Dew. (cf. tún-og).

_namók_, Mosquito, gnat. (cf. lamók, hámlok).

_námon_, Genitive of kamí--we (the person addressed is excluded);
ours; by through, etc. us. Ang tubó námon. Ang ámon tubó. Our sugar
cane. Pagahimóon námon inâ. Amon inâ pagahimóon. We will (shall)
do that (it). Sa baláy námon. Sa ámon baláy. At our home. (cf. ámon;
ákon).

_namô-namô_, Dim. of námò. Si Fuláno walâ gid sing namônamô. N.N. is
a silent, taciturn, quiet, harmless man, or the like.

_nánà, nânâ_, Pus, discharge, matter, suppuration from boils, ulcers,
etc.; to be purulent, mattery, to gather, fester, ulcerate, form
pus. Nananáan ang íya hubág. His swelling is ulcerating. Naganánà
ang íya pilás. His wound is--gathering,--festering,--full of
pus. (cf. dágsang, dalâ).

_nánà_, An old woman, granny, mother. (cf. mámà--an old man).

_nanag-_, A prefix denoting the past tense active (nag-), but only
used when the agents are many, e.g. nanagtinubiganáy, nanaghinúgyaw,
nanagpinanagoáy, nanaglagsanáy, nanagdinayándáyan, nanaghinutikáy silá,
etc. They played the "water-game", they frolicked or made merry, they
played hide and seek, they ran races together, they roamed about,
they whispered to each other, etc. (túbig, húgyaw, tágò, lagás,
dayándáyan, hutík, etc.). (cf. nag-).

_nanám_, To be or become tasty, appetizing, savoury, applied especially
to all sorts of nuts and the like. Nananamán akó siníng mga lubí,
maní, kastányas, etc. These coconuts, peanuts, chestnuts, etc. taste
good to me. I like the taste of these coconuts, etc. (cf. námit, námì).

_nanarî-sárì, nanarí-sári_, (B) Various, divers, diversified,
diverse, different, assorted, all kinds of, all sort of, all manner
of, varied, heterogeneous, mixed. Ang mga búlak may nanarîsárì
nga duág kag kahumút. The flowers have all sorts of colours and
scent. (cf. sarîsárì, nanuháytúhay, tuháytúhay, laínláin).

_nánay_, Mother, mamma, mama, ma. Si nánay ko (ang ilóy ko). My
mother. Si nánay kag si tátay (ang amáy kag ang ilóy). Father and
mother.

_nanáy_, Mother! Mamma! Mama! Ma! Nanáy, karí ka dirí. Mother,
come here.

_nánda_, (B) Genitive of sánda. Of them, theirs; by them, through them,
etc. (cf. íla, níla).

_nangá_, A kind of thick rattan stick, rod, cane. Kon magbúhat ka sinâ
liwán, sàsaón gid nákon ang isá ka nangá sa ímo talúdtud (likód). If
you do that again, I shall give you a good caning. (cf. bilogón,
tagsáon, náwì).

_nangin-_, A verbal prefix. See mangin.

_nángkà_, The jack tree and jack fruit. (cf. lángkà, mángkà).

_nángking_, Nankeen, nankin, a kind of Chinese yarn and
cloth. (cf. lángking).

_náno_, What? What kind of? (cf. anó, anáno).

_nanuháy-túhay_, (B) Varied, divers, etc. (cf. tuháytúhay, laínláin,
nanarîsárì).

_nanurúgnan_, (B) Entrusted with, in charge of, burdened with the
responsibility for. Malisúd karón ang pagkabuhî sináng babáe nga bálo,
kay nanurúgnan pa siá sa íyang kabatáan. The life of that widow is
full of difficulties and she is burdened yet with the care of her
children. (cf. panúgon).

_napolitána_, See politána.

_napúlò_, Ten. Napúlò kag duhá. Napulogduhá. Napúlo'g
duhá. Twelve. Duhá ka púlò. Twenty.

_napúlo'g_, For napúlò kag, e.g. napúlo'g tátlo. Thirteen. Ang
ikanapúlo'g ápat. The fourteenth. Sa ikanapúlo'g limá (sa ikapúlo'g
limá) ka ádlaw sa búlan sa Máyo----. On the fifteenth of May----.

_nára_, (Sp. narra) A hardwood tree and its very valuable
timber. (cf. nága id.).


_naranhíta_, (Sp. naranja) A kind of small orange.

_nasi-_, See nasig-.

_nasig-_, A prefix indicating that an action is equally done
by a number of persons, together, in unison, all doing the same
thing. Nasig- (shortened from nagpasig-) stands for the past, masig-
for the future and pagpasig- for the infinitive. Nasigkaládlaw silá
nga tanán. They all of them laughed together. Nasigpalangítà silá
sing palamúgnan. They were all looking for work. Nasigalámot silá,
nasigkaláwat silá, etc. They all contributed, they all went to Holy
Communion, etc. (nasi- id.).

_nasimyénto_, (Sp. nacimiento) Birth, nativity.

_nasíngyan_, The "why" of a thing, reason, cause, motive, ground. Anó
man ang nasíngyan níya nga walâ na siá makakarí sa pagdúaw sa
ámon? What may be his reason for not visiting us any more? Why does
he not visit us any more?

_násnas_, Broad daylight, quite light, full day in the morning after
dawn; to be or become full day. Násnas na--or--naganásnas na ang
kaagáhon. Full morning daylight is now here--or--the morning is now
quite light.

_nasyón_, (Sp. nación) Nation, country; people, race. (cf. púngsud).

_nasyonál_, (Sp. nacional) National; native. (cf. tumándok).

_nasyonalísmo_, (Sp. nacionalismo) Nationalism, patriotism.

_nátnat_, To fray, ravel, fret, become frayed, ravelled, fretted,
to get loose or separate (of threads or fibres in cloth, etc.). Ang
ákon báyò nagakanátnat na sa kagabukón. My jacket is getting frayed
on account of rottenness. Sa kadaanón nagakanátnat ang íya hábul. On
account of being old his blanket is beginning to fray (ravel)
out. (cf. nútnut, tâtâ, sarabusáb, tingkarág).

_náton_, Genitive of kitá--we (the person addressed being included). Of
us, ours; by, through, etc. us. Ang talámnan náton. Ang áton
talámnan. Our field. Ginbúhat náton inâ. Aton ginbúhat inâ. That was
done by us. We did that (it). (cf. ákon).

_natúra_, (Sp. natura) Nature, quality.

_naturál_, (Sp. natural) Natural. Very frequently applied to children
born out of wedlock; also to a sore, disease or death not caused by
an accident.

_náug_, See panáug--to go down, descend, step down, come down,
go downstairs, leave the house, go away. Nanáug siá kaína lang. He
went down-stairs just a short while ago. He went away just a moment
ago. Panaúgi ang bátà dídto. Go down to the child there.

_naúg_, Clothes, garments, raiment, apparel, dress; mop, swab, rag;
to dress, wear garments, cloth, array, deck out. Maálam gid siá
magnaúg. She knows how to dress well. (cf. sapút, panápton, panapút).

_náwì_, A rod, twig, slip, strip, piece, as of rattan, split bamboo,
etc. (cf. nahót, bilogón, tagsáon, bílog).

_nawóng_, (H) Face, visage, countenance, physiognomy, phiz, front;
the title-page of a book. (cf. guyá, panawóng).

_nayá-náya_, Pleasant, pleasing, gentle, mild, cheerful, especially of
the expression of the face; to be or become pleasant, etc. Nagnayánáya
ang íya nawóng sang pagkabatî níya siní. When he heard this his face
lit up with pleasure. Nanayánayáhan akó sang íya guyá. I consider
his face quite pleasing or cheerful. His face impressed me with its
placidity or gentleness. (cf. alikáya).

_náyap_, To be or become wide, spacious, roomy, ample, extensive,
unobstructed, large, clear, plain, even. Nagnáyap na iníng lugár,
kay natapás ang mga káhoy. This place is now an extensive clearing,
because the trees have been cut down. Nanayápan akó sang íya umá. His
farm appeared to me to be very large (extensive). (cf. hanáyap,
hanáyak, hanáhay).

_nayók-náyok_, (B) Far, far away, very distant, a long way off,
remote; to be far away, etc. Ang Amérika nayók-náyok gid. America
is very far away. Yádtong búkid nayóknáyok sa Ilóngílong. That
mountain is a long way from Iloilo. Ang mga bánwa nga nanayóknáyok
sa amínhan----. The towns situated in the far North (far to the
North)----. (cf. manayóknáyok, layô, malayô).

_náyon_, Proximity or nearness to, direction towards, side, party; in
the direction of, towards, near, in the neighbourhood, neighbouring,
at the side of, on the way to. Diín náyon ang ímo baláy? In what
direction, where about is your home? Sa búkid náyon. Towards the
mountains, in the direction of or near the mountains. Ang íya
baláy dirí náyon sang simbáhan, ang ákon dídto náyon. His home
is on this side of the church, mine is on the other side. Anó nga
náyon ang íya nga ginahilayán? What side or party is he inclined to
(does he favour)? Diín dapít náyon ang ímong palangúmhan? Whereabout
(Whereabouts) is your farm? N.B. Dapít náyon is often used, but is
really a pleonasm, as both terms mean the same thing. (cf. dapít).

_nayón_, The female of the swine, sow. Iníng nayón nagbátà sing napúlò
ka idík (orók) sa íya dógmon. This sow farrowed--, littered--, had
a litter (farrow) of--, ten young ones. (cf. báboy, butakál, idík,
odók, orók, dúkan).

_nayóp-náyop_, Far away, etc. See nayóknáyok id.

_náypes_, (Sp. naipe) Playing-card. (cf. baráha).

_negár_, (Sp. negar) To deny, refuse, give the lie to, contradict,
gainsay. Ginnegár níya ang sinúgid ni Fuláno. He denied N.N.'s
story. Negahá yanáng mga butángbútang. Give the lie to those
slanders. (cf. himutíg).

_negosyánte_, (Sp. negociante) Business man, dealer, merchant, trader,
tradesman, storekeeper. (cf. komersyánte, pumalatíkang).

_negósyo_, (Sp. negocio) Business, trade, commerce, transaction,
deal, bargain. (cf. komérsyo, palatikángan, palangitán-an).

_néna_, (Sp. nena) A girl infant, darling, baby, girl (as a term of
endearment). (cf. akáy, índay, néning).

_nénè_, (Sp. nene) A boy infant, darling, baby, boy (as a term of
endearment). (cf. tútò, nónoy). Also: a darling baby-girl. (cf. néna).

_néning_, See néna, akáy, índay, as terms of endearment for young
girls.

_nerbiosidád_, (Sp. nerviosidad) Nervousness.

_nérbyos_, (Sp. nervio) Nerve, tendon; nerves, strength.

_nerbyosidád_, See nerbiosidád.

_nerbyóso_, (Sp. nervioso) Nervous, easily excited or upset, excitable,
neurotic, scrupulous.

_nga_, A conjunctive particle used in various ways:
a.) to connect adjectives and nouns, nouns and nouns, etc.,
e.g. mabúg-at nga lúlan. A heavy load. Sa manábaw nga subâ. In the
shallow river. Baláy nga bató. A stone building. Isá ka kúlon nga
kán-on. A kettle full of rice. Mga ságing nga tinanók. Boiled
bananas. Ang mga nagahuníhúni nga sirúmsirúm. The chirping
crickets. Isá ka lubí nga binukâ. A split coconut.
b.) to connect ideas or sentences, equivalent to: that, in order that,
if. Nakadumdúm akó nga----. I thought that----. Ang labíng maáyo nga
magkádto ka dídto sa súbung siní. It would be best, if you went there
at once. Indì mo pagkalímtan nga buás masúgud kitá magarádo. Don't
forget that tomorrow we begin ploughing.
c.) as relative pronoun. Ang táo nga naglubás kaína amó ang ákon
tíyò. The man who passed a while ago is my uncle. Amó iní ang bátà
nga mahúmok gid sing úlo. This is the boy who has a very bright
under-standing. Diín na ang tigíb nga gingámit ko kahápon? Where is
the chisel I used yesterday?
d.) as an introduction to an exclamation. Nga pagkalisúd sang pangabúhì
karón! Oh, how difficult living conditions are! Nga pagkabungúl siníng
bátà! Oh, the stubbornness (obstinacy) of this boy! How stubborn this
boy is!

_ngáa_, Why; wherefore, for what reason, cause or purpose; now,
how is that, let me see, tell me, or the like. Ngáa man nga ginhímò
mo inâ? Why did you do that? Ngáa balá nga gintúga sang Diós ang
kalibútan? Why did God create the world? Ngáa náton? How does it
concern us? Why do we say so? What have we to do with it? Ngáa,
isá gid ka anó ang mahátag níya sa ímo? Tell me, how much can he
give you? Ngáa man nga índì (walâ) ka magkádto dídto? Why don't you
(didn't you) go there? (cf. tungúd sa anó, bangúd sa anó, ándot).

_ngábil_, A lip. (cf. bibíg).

_ngábngab_, To cry or weep aloud, wail, lament, keen, howl, roar, bawl,
yell, squeal, squall, shout with pain. Nagngábngab siá, kay ginbúnal
ni tátay. He howled, because he got a whipping from father. Indì
ka magngábngab. Don't bawl. Ngabngabí ang ilóy mo kon ilubúng. Wail
(lament) for your mother, when she is being buried. (cf. ngarábngab,
gáab, hibî, tángís, tiyábaw).

_ngádlan_, For ngalánan from ngálan; hingádlan for hingalánan from
hingálan.

_ngalágngag_, Palate; taste. (cf. tángon, idilímdim, dímdim, lalím).

_ngálan_, (H) Name, patronymic, apellation, designation, cognomen; to
name, call. Sín-o ang ngálan mo? What is your name? Anó ang pagtawág
mo siní kon ímo ngádlan (ngalánan)? What would you call this, if you
gave it a name? What is this? N.B. hingálan is much more used instead
of the simple ngálan in the sense of: naming, calling, giving a name
to, pronouncing the name of. (cf. ngáran, binunyágan, apelyído).

_ngálan_, Noun. (cf. butáng; búhat--verb).

_ngalasalón_, Delirious or foolish talk, bosh, twaddle, nonsense;
to speak foolishly, incoherently, glibly, flippantly. (cf. ngásal).

_ngálngal_, To chatter, prattle, prate, talk glibly or flippantly,
gabble, gab, tattle, tittle, tittle-tattle, blab, let out secrets. Indì
ka magngálngal sináng mga butáng. Don't talk glibly about such
things. Ginngálngal níya ang mga sekréto ni Fuláno. He blabbed
out N.N.'s secrets. Ginngalngalán níya si Fuláno sing mga butáng
nga walâ sing naigoán. He talked a good deal to N.N. about silly
things. (cf. ngásal, hádak, búrà, etc.).

_ngangá_, To open one's mouth. Ingangá ang bábà mo. Open your
mouth. Ngangahá ang bábà mo kag padiwalá ang dílà. Open your mouth
and put out your tongue. Ngangahí ang manugbánsil, kay usisáon níya
ang ímo ngípon. Open your mouth for the dentist, for he is going to
examine your teeth.

_ngangaán_, The opening, mouth, vent, outlet, inlet of a tube, pipe,
canal or the like. (cf. ngangá).

_ngangahán_, See ngangaán.

_ngángò_, Foolish, fool, ass, stupid fellow. (cf. kólò, kalúndong,
búngaw, tampuháw, kolôkolô, etc.).

_ngánì_, Indeed; certainly, surely, really; therefore, hence,
ergo. (cf. gánì, búsà).

_ngarábngab_, See ngábngab.

_ngáran_, (B) See ngálan.

_ngarángal_, Nonsensical talk; to talk nonsense, etc. See ngálngal,
ngásal).

_ngaráwngaw_, (B) See ngáwngaw.

_ngásal_, To chatter, prattle, tittle-tattle, etc. See ngálngal,
hádak, búrà, etc. Tinák-an akó sang památì sang íya nga ginangásal. I
was bored listening to his prattle.

_ngásngas_, A loud, shrill, far-reaching sound; to cry out with a
loud voice (of persons and animals). (cf. sínggit, pugaás, turayáw).

_ngáwngaw_, To mew, meaw, miaw (of cats); to whine, sigh, moan, weep,
whimper, mewl, pule, cry aloud. (cf. ngábngab, tiyábaw).

_ngídlis_, Shock, consternation, terror, fright; to cause or give
a shock, frighten, terrify, strike with awe. Nangidlisán siá sang
pagkabatî níya kon anó ang nahanabô. He received a shock (He was
thunderstruck) when he heard what happened. (cf. bígne, sígne, kúgmat,
lísang, palanglígbus, makangingídlis).

_ngíl-ad_, To loathe, recoil, be sickened, nauseated or revolted,
abhor, feel like vomiting or have an aversion to, to detest, abominate,
hate, feel repugnance to. Nagakangíl-ad akó sa pagtán-aw sang líntà. I
hate to see (look upon) a leech. Dílì takús igkangíl-ad ang pagsagúd
sa mga masakít. One should not show one's repugnance in attending
on the sick. Ginangil-arán akó sang ípot sang kuríng. I feel like
vomiting at the sight of a cat's dirt. (cf. taká, súm-od, lóod).

_ngílin_, Affection for, attachment to; to cherish, wish to keep
or retain, value the possession and regret the loss of, to miss,
be unwilling to part with, be reluctant to give up, to grudge,
begrudge. Dílì nínyo pagkangínlan (pagkangilínan) ang kwárta sa
pagpatoón sa mga bátà. Don't grudge spending money for the education
of children. Nangílin (Nagkangílin) siá sang relóh nga nadúlà. He
highly valued the lost watch. He was quite upset by the loss of his
watch. (cf. hílak).

_ngílo_, (H) To be set on edge, have one's teeth set on edge. Nagngílo
ang ákon ngípon siníng maáslum nga búnga sang sámbag. My teeth were
set on edge by this sour tamarind. This sour tamarind has set my teeth
on edge. Nangilóhan akó sináng línghud nga páhò. My teeth were set on
edge by that green (unripe) mango. Ang búnga nga maáslum nagapangílo
sang ngípon. Sour fruit sets the teeth on edge. (cf. nílo).

_ngiló_, See ngílo.

_ngíngho_, (Sp. ajenjo) Worm wood; absinth; a kind of medicinal plant.

_ngíngì, ngîngî, ngî-ngî_, A spray of flowers, twig, extremity of
a branch, a small shoot; to pick a spray of blossoms, pluck flowers
together with a few leaves, break off a small branch or stem (with
its flowers). Ngingía ang adélpa. Pluck the rosebay flowers with some
leaves. Ngingíi akó sing pilá ka bukád sang tapulánga. Break off some
sprigs of the tapulánga for me. (cf. ípò, kutúl).

_ngípnan_, Having strong or fierce teeth; formidable, doughty, brave,
strong, mighty, powerful, fierce. (cf. ngípon).

_ngípon_, (H) Tooth. (cf. ónto).

_ngirir-óhan_, (B) Miserable, wretched, piteous, pitiful, an object
of pity or compassion. (cf. ngír-o; makalolóoy, kalalóy-an).

_ngirít_, To grin, show or bare the teeth. Indì ka magngirít. Don't
grin. Indì mo akó pagngiritán. Don't grin at me. Ginngiritán akó sang
idô. The dog bared its teeth at me. (cf. lángsì, rángsì, bangirít,
balangisí).

_ngír-o_, (B) To compassionate, pity, condole with, sympathize
with, have mercy, or take pity, on (upon). Mangír-o kaw kaná, kay
ngirir-óhan. (Malóoy ka sa íya, kay makalolóoy). Have pity on him,
for he is worthy of pity. (cf. lóoy).

_ngísi_, To grin slightly. (cf. balangisí, lángsì).

_ngisí-ngísi_, Dim. and Freq. of ngísi--to grin slightly.

_ngisí-ngisí_, A very young louse, a nit that is smaller even than a
"kayúmad". (cf. kúto, botól, lusâ).

_ngíslò_, (H) The gums (of the mouth). (cf. lásì).

_ngíthil_, To whine, whimper, mewl, pule, wail, utter plaintive
sounds with closed lips, as is often done by children, etc. Indì ka
magngíthil. Don't whine. Don't utter pettish, peevish complaints.

_ngítngit_, Sting, prick, heart-ache, compunction; to sting, prick,
be or become difficult to bear, troublous, hard. Nagngítngit ang
íya pangabúhì karón. Nangitngitán siá sang pangabúhì karón. He
is having a hard time of it now. His life is at present full of
hardships. (cf. lisúd, lapígot, ngótngot).

_ngitó-ngitó_, To be or become black, dark, etc. See
nitónitó. (cf. maitúm, itúm, ilúm, mailúm, mangitóngitó).

_ngódngod_, To moan, complain, weep, cry, whimper, whine,
sigh. (cf. ngíthil, ngóyngoy, ngábngab, gáab, bákhò, tángis, hibî,
panalabíton, panalambíton).

_ngóhit, ngóit_, To lisp, speak indistinctly, utter imperfectly,
articulate as a child. (cf. pihít, kúnlà, hát-on).

_ngólngol_, To suck the fingers, put a finger into one's
mouth. Ang bátà nagangólngol sang íya túdlò. The baby is sucking its
finger. Ipangólngol ang ímo túdlò sa bátà nga nagahibî. Give the crying
baby your finger to suck. Indì mo pagngolngolón ang ímo kamomóo. Don't
put your thumb into your mouth. (cf. lótgot, sópsop, súyup, yúpyup).

_ngolô-ngolô_, To speak with a timid, broken voice, to falter, stammer,
be bashful or nervous (of speech). Indì ka magngolôngolô. Don't
be afraid to speak out. Don't stammer. Don't speak haltingly
(falteringly). (cf. morômorô).

_ngoloyngóyon_, Sob, whine, plaintive voice, sigh; to sob, whine,
sigh. (cf. ngóyngoy).

_ngótngot_, Sting, prick, throbbing, compunction; to throb, beat,
trouble, sting, prick, perplex, gnaw at. Nagangótngot ang íya
hubág, ang íya tagiposóon, etc. His ulcer, his heart, etc. is
throbbing. Ginangotngotán siá sang íya konsyénsya. His conscience
is gnawing him, troubles or perplexes him. Ang íya nga ginhímò
nagapangótngot karón sang íya kalág. What he did fills his soul now
with remorse. (cf. ngítngit).

_ngóyngoy_, Sigh, groan, moan, cry; to sigh, moan, weep, cry;
to emit heart-stirring, plaintive or moving sounds (as a violin,
zithern, or the like). Nagangóyngoy ang biolín. The violin sends
forth its--heart-stirring sounds,--plaintive strains. (cf. tángis,
hibî, ngíthil, ngábngab, gáab, bákhò, písngò).

_ngúrab_, Murmur, grumble, muttering, complaint; to murmur, mutter,
grumble, complain, croak, growl, show discontent by speech. Indì ka
magngúrab. Don't grumble. Ginngurában níya akó. He murmured against
me. Ginngúrab níya ang íya kaákig. He gave vent to his anger by
uttering complaints. (N.B. "ngúrab" means to voice one's complaint
by saying what is one's grievance, "kósmod, ambohóng, ariwaróng"
mean to show one's discontent by manner, expression or gesture).

_ngurî-ngúrì, ngurî-ngurî_, A smile, simper, smirk; to smile,
simper, smirk, grin, sneer, fleer. Ginpamángkot ko siá, ápang siá íya
nagngurîngúrì lang nga walâ magsabát. I asked him, but he for his part
only grinned and did not answer. Ginngurîngurían (Ginngurîngurián) níya
akó. He smiled or grinned pleasantly at me. (cf. balangisí, lángsì).

_ngúrub_, A growl, snarl, as of an angry dog; to growl, snarl, grumble,
utter in a surly way. Indì ka magngúrub. Don't snarl. Don't be so
surly. Ginngurúban sang idô ang dumulúong. The dog growled at the
stranger. (cf. ngúrab).

_ngúsul_, (B) To repent, be penitent, be contrite or repentant, to rue,
feel compunction or remorse, to regret, be sorry for. Nagangúsul na siá
sang íya nga ginhímò. He is now sorry for what he did. (cf. hinúlsul,
núlsul).

_ngúynguy_, See ngóyngoy--sigh, groan, etc.

_ni_, (Sp. ni) Neither, nor, not even.

_ni_, The Genitive of the personal article "si". Si Pédro. Peter. Ni
Pédro. Peter's, of Peter. Ginbúhat iní ni Pédro. Peter did this. This
was done by Peter. This is Pedro's doing (work).

_nián_, Now, at present, the present moment, actual, instant, current,
for the time being, nonce. (cf. karón).

_nibél_, (Sp. nivel) Level, horizontal, spirit-level, water-level;
watermark; plummet.

_nídnid_, To be neat, trim, clean, tidy. (cf. hípid, hípig, tínlò).

_niébe_, (Sp. nieve) Snow.

_nígnig_, To trickle, dribble, flow out slowly or in a thin stream,
to exude, ooze out. Naganígnig iníng tuburán. This spring is only a
trickle. Ginanignigán ang íya páa sing nánà sa pilás. The pus from
the wound is trickling down his leg. Naganígnig ang íya mga lúnà. His
tears are flowing. (cf. nínig, ílig).

_nígo_, A small round basket, usually with a rattan rim; winnowing
basket.

_niháynihóy_, Movement, stir; to be quiet, say neither "yes" nor
"no". Walâ silá sing niháynihóy sa íla baláy. There is no movement
or stir at their house, all is quiet at their house. (cf. litóklitók).

_nikél_, (Sp. niquel) Nickel; to nickel, nickelize.

_nikeládo_, (Sp. niquelado) Nickel-plated, nickeled, nickelized.

_níla_, (H) Their, theirs; by or through them; silá níla, silá íla,
or silá sing íla----. They on their part----. (cf. íla and see ákon).

_nílo_, (B) To set the teeth on edge. See ngílo, ngiló.

_nímo_, (H) Your, yours (singular), thy, thine; by or through you,
by thee. (cf. ímo, mo and see ákon).

_ninahót_, Made up in pieces, divided in pieces, by the piece, applied
to objects that are rather long and comparatively slender. Nakabakál
akó sing kawáyan nga ninahót nga tagnapúlò ka dakô ang nahót. I
bought some bamboos by the piece at the rate of ten centavos per
piece. (nahót; cf. binílog).

_nínig_, See nígnig id.

_ninít_, To trickle, flow in a small stream, etc. See nígnig, nínig,
ílig.

_nínyo_, (Sp. niño) Child, baby, infant, babe, bairn, brat, kid,
little one, chit, little boy. Ang Sánto Nínyo. The Holy Child. The
Infant Jesus. (cf. bátà).

_nínyo_, Genitive of kamó--you (plural); yours; of, by, through,
etc. you (ye). (cf. ákon).

_nióg_, (B) Coconut palm, the nut, the meat of the nut. (cf. lubí).


_nióg-níog_, A kind of plant with roots that yield a very sticky juice,
much used as a glue in the making of musical instruments.

_nípà_, The nipa-palm and its leaves much used for thatching.

_nipáan_, A place abounding in nipa-palms; a man who possesses many
nipa-palms.

_nípay_, A kind of vine with down on its seed-pods. This down causes
great pain and annoyance, if brought in contact with one's skin;
to treat with nípay, blow or sprinkle nípay upon somebody as an
act of revenge or punishment. Nanipáyan siá. He was blown upon
(sprinkled) with nípay, received a dose of nípay. Ginnipáyan níya
si Fuláno (Nagnípay siá sa kay Fuláno). He gave N.N. a dose of
nípay. (cf. kulahós, which is still more painful than nípay).

_nípi_, (Perhaps from the Sp. naipe) The payment of a certain
portion of the winnings at cards for the use of the cards, light,
rooms, etc.; to pay for the use of rooms, cards, light, etc. with
a certain percentage of the winnings. Naganípi silá sang baráha sa
baláy ni Fuláno. They are paying for the use of the cards at N.N.'s
house. Kon malúyag kamó magsugál dirí sa ákon baláy, nipíhan nínyo
ang ákon baráha. If you wish to play at cards here in my house,
you must pay me for the use of my cards.

_nipihán_, A box or receptacle for the "nípi".

_nipís_, To be, become or make thin, to thin, reduce,
attenuate. Nipisón mo ang tápì. Make the board thin. Nanipisán akó
siníng hénero. This cloth is too thin (flimsy) for me. Utdon mo ang
tápì sa nanipisán. Cut the plank, where it is thin. Nagnipís siá,
kay nagmasakít. He became thin, for he was sick.

_nirág-nirág_, Quiet, silent, motionless; to be quiet,
etc. (cf. pahimúyong, hípus, pabánol, pabánok).

_nísnis_, To clean by rubbing, polish, burnish, brighten,
shine, make--bright,--shine, put a polish on. See hínis,
núsnus. Nisnisí--hínsi.

_nítò_, A kind of black rattan. It is much used for making hats
and wickerwork.

_nitó-nitó_, Black, dark, swarth, swarthy, dingy, murky, pitchy,
dusky, sable, ebon, sooty, sombre, jetty; to be or become black,
dark, etc., to blacken, darken. (cf. ngitóngitó, itúm, ilúm).

_níwang_, To be or become thin, lean, emaciated, meagre, gaunt, lank,
lanky, skinny, scrawny, scraggy, light, bony. Nagníwang siá dídto sa
lakás nga pagpangabúdlay. He got lean there on account of too much
work. Maganíwang ikáw, kon índì ka magkáon sing maáyo. You will get
thin, unless you eat well. (cf. hágpis, nipís, kanít).

_niyán_, Now, nowadays, at present. (cf. nián).

_no_, (Sp. no) No, not. In Visayan this "no" is often used in
the meaning of: isn't it--so?--true?--as I said? or as a sort of
exclamation: You don't say so! Indeed! Is it really so? Nagtámbong
ka gid dídto, no? You were there, isn't it so?

_nobedád_, (Sp. novedad) News, notice, latest information, any new
incident, happening or event worth recording. (cf. balítà).

_nobô_, (H) To be, make or get low or short, to shorten, lower. See
nabâ.

_nobína_, (Sp. novena) Novena, a religious devotion performed every
day for nine successive days.

_nobô_, (H) To be, make or get low or short, to shorten, lower. See
nabâ.

_nóbya_, (Sp. novia) Bride, betrothed, affianced, intended,
fiancee. (cf. kalasálon, katípan).

_nobyá-nóbya_, To be betrothed, be engaged--, pay one's
addresses--, make love--, to a girl, to woo (either seriously or
otherwise). Naganobyá-nóbya siá. He has a sweetheart. He is courting
(a girl). Indì ka magnobyánóbya kon walâ ka sing katuyoán nga
matárung. Don't make love to a girl, unless your motives are honest.

_nobyémbre_, (Sp. noviembre) The month of
November. (cf. pánglot-diótay).

_nóbyo_, Bridegroom, lover, intended, betrothed; to have a lover,
be engaged or betrothed. Naganobyohánay silá. They are engaged. They
are bride and bridegroom. (cf. kalasálon, katípan).

_nobyó-nóbyo_, To have an admirer, have a lover or sweetheart, to flirt
(of girls). Naganobyónóbyo siá. She has a lover.


_nombramyénto_, (Sp. nombramiento) Nomination, appointment.

_nombrár_, (Sp. nombrar) To nominate, appoint. Ginnombrár siá nga
(Hués) Hokóm. He was appointed judge. Walâ pa siá pagnombrahá. He
has not as yet been nominated or appointed.

_nómbre_, (Sp. nombre) Name, appellation; noun. (cf. ngálan, ngáran).

_nônô_, To press against, squeeze, crush. Ginnônô níya si Fuláno sa
díngding. He crushed N.N. against the wall. Inônô ang bábà sang kuríng
sa íya tái, agúd madúdlà magpamús-on dirí. Rub the cat's nose in her
dirt, that she may be afraid to make a mess here again. Nònoí ang
lamésa sang lapát kag hínsan mo sing maáyo. Press the cloth against
the table and rub well. (cf. oró-od, núsnus, núlnul).

_nónoy_, A term of endearment for a boy; darling boy. (cf. tútò, nénè).

_nonóy_, The vocative of nónoy.

_norólsol_, September. (cf. septiémbre).

_nórte_, (Sp. norte) North. (cf. amínhan).

_nóta_, (Sp. nota) Note, memorandum; musical note; mark, sign,
annotation. (cf. pát-in, tándà, timáan).

_notárya_, (Sp. notaria) A notary's office.

_notáryo_, (Sp. notario) Notary. Notáryo públiko. Public notary.

_notísya_, (Sp. noticia) Notice, news, tidings, information, bill,
placard, hearsay. May notísya nga nabáton gíkan sa----. News has
been received from----. Notísya lang ang ákon (ímo, íya, ámon, áton,
ínyo, íla). I (you, he, we, you, they)--just heard of it,--didn't
pay attention to it,--have nothing to do with it,--have no interest
or concern in it,--have nothing to gain or lose by it, or the
like. (cf. balítà, pahibaló, pasáyod).

_nués_, (Sp. nuez) Nut, especially a walnut.

_nulidád_, (Sp. nulidad) Nullity, voidness, invalidness, invalidity.

_núlnul_, To crush, smash, press, compress, squeeze (against something
hard). (cf. nônô, pusâ, lumâ, núsnus).

_núlo_, (Sp. nulo) Null, void, invalid, naught, a dead
letter. (cf. waláy pulús).

_núlsul_, See ngúsul, hinúlsul.

_nululsúlan_, What is to be repented; remorseful. (cf. núlsul).

_nulúsnus_, A mop, swab, scrub, scrubbing brush, dish-cloth,
dish-clout, cloth for rubbing or scouring. (núsnus).

_nulusnusán, nulusnúsan_, A board, a stone, etc. used for rubbing
things upon, knife-board. (núsnus).

_número_, (Sp. número) Number, tell, count, call, numeral, figure,
cipher. (cf. pilá, kapíd-an, kadamuón).

_nurúlsul_, See norólsol.

_núsnus_, To rub, mop, swab, scour, scrub a floor, etc. Nusnusí ang
panápton sing habón. Rub the clothes with soap. Ginnusnusán níla ang
salúg sing espérma. They rubbed the floor with tallow. Inúsnus sa
salúg iníng séra. Use this candle-wax for rubbing the floor with. Indì
ka magnúsnus (magkúsò) sang lalábhan sing (lám-ag) lakás, kay básì
magísì. Don't rub the wash too much, for it might be torn.

_nútnut_, To fray, ravel, fret. See nátnat, sâsâ, tâtâ. Nanútnut
(Nagkanútnut) na gid ang íya nga páyong. His umbrella is now all
frayed out.

_nyébe_, See niébe--snow.




O


_o_, The Visayans have a vowel that sounds sometimes like the Spanish
"o", sometimes like the Spanish "u", but in most cases it is not
satisfactorily represented by either "o" or "u". Consequently in many
words the two vowels are interchangeable--"sunúd, sunód, sonód, sonúd".
In this Dictionary if a word is not found under "o", it may be found
under "u", and vice versa.
When "o" or "u" is printed in italics it must be pronounced with
an abrupt sound that can be learned only by hearing, e.g. labô--to
slash, smite.

_ó_, (Sp. ó) Or. Táo inâ dirâ ó sápat? (Táo inâ dirâ ukón sápat)? Is
that over there a man or a beast? (cf. kon, okón, ukón).

_óba_, To undress, divest, etc. See úba.

_óbad_, The core of banana plants. (úbad id.).

_óban; obánon_, White hair; gray-haired. See úban; ubánon.

_obispádo_, (Sp. obispado) Bishopric, diocese, Episcopal See,
episcopate.

_obispílyo_, (Sp. obispillo) A false--, pretended--, sham--, fake--,
mock--, bishop.

_obíspo_, (Sp. obispo) Bishop, the Ordinary of a diocese; to be or
become a bishop. Nagobíspo siá. He became--, was--, bishop.

_obít_, The waist; to tuck in the end of a skirt, etc. See ubít.

_obligár_, (Sp. obligar) To oblige, make, force, drive, compel, coerce,
constrain. Obligahá siá sa pagpangabúdlay. Oblige him to work. Make
him work. Ginobligár níya akó sa pagkádto dídto. He compelled (forced)
me to go there. (cf. pílit, pírit).

_obligasyón_, (Sp. obligación) Obligation, duty,
liability. (cf. katungdánan, tulumánon).

_obó_, Cough; to cough, have a cold. Nagaobó siá nga daw may ánus. He
coughs as if he had consumption. Ginaobó siá kon ága. He coughs in the
morning, every morning. Andam ka, índì ka magpúngkò sa may hángin,
kay básì obohón ikáw. Be careful, don't sit in the draught, you may
catch a cold. May obó siá. He is coughing or has a cough. (cf. olóbhon,
oróbwon).

_ób-ob_, To drink without a drinking vessel in the manner of animals,
lap, suck up. Indì ka magób-ob súbung sang mga háyup. Don't drink like
an animal. Ginób-ob lang níya ang túbig sa bobón. He just lapped with
his tongue the water direct in the water-hole. Ob-obá lang ang túbig,
kay walâ kitá sing kalándus. Just put your mouth to the water and
drink, as we have no dipper. (cf. láklak).

_óbog_, To wade or walk in or through water, to paddle, without even
tucking up the trousers or taking off the boots, pass through water
without ferry or bridge, ford, plough--, plunge--, splash--, through,
as an automobile or other vehicle. Nagóbog lang kamí sa subâ. We just
waded through the river. Ginobógan lang sang áwto ang subâ. The auto
simply ploughed through the river.

_obóg_, A kind of fish.

_óbong_, Moon-ring, a nebulous circle around the moon. (cf. límbo).

_óbong_, A gratuitous addition in buying and selling large quantities,
a baker's dozen, over and above, thrown in, into the bargain, to the
good, for good measure, for luck, extra; to grant such an addition
or discount. Obóngan mo akó sing isá sa káda napúlò (sa tagnapúlò)
ka bílog nga maís. Grant me into the bargain one maize cob in every
ten. Nakabakál akó sa íya sing isá ka gatús ka pásong nga humáy kag
ginobóngan níya akó sing tagisá ka gántang. I bought from him one
hundred bushels of rice and he allowed me one ganta extra for every
bushel. Kamí nagabalígyà sa napát-ud gid nga bilí nga walâ sing ayô kag
walâ man sing óbong. We sell only at fixed prices without any haggling
and without anything thrown in. (cf. túbung, áman, támba, támban).

_óbra_, (Sp. obra) Work, labour, job, task; to work, fashion, turn out,
labour, make. Obra kamó. Go to work. Set to work. Anó ang ginaóbra
mo dirí? What are you doing (engaged in) here? Obrahá sing maáyo kon
anó ang ímo olobráhon. Do well whatever you have to do. (cf. búhat,
hímò, pangabúdlay, pangóbra, pamúgon).

_obréro_, (Sp. obrero) Workman, labourer, journeyman, navvy,
hand. (cf. mamumugón, hornaléro).

_obserbasyón_, (Sp. observación) Observation, remark,
note. (cf. pinanilágan, pinaniíran; talámdan).


_obserbatóryo_, (Sp. observatorio) Observatory,
weather-bureau. (cf. panilagán sang panahón).

_od_, (B) Look here! See! A term used to draw the attention of one,
to whom something is offered or to be given.

_ódlon_, (B) Wormy, full of worms. (cf. ulúron, úlud).

_ód-od_, (B) To have difficulty in evacuating as one suffering
from constipation. To sit or squat for a considerable space of
time. (cf. katín-kátin).

_odók_, A small pig, piglet. (cf. idík).

_ódok_, To call the small pigs together. Odóka ang mga idík. Call
the small pigs together. (cf. dúkan, dukána ang báboy).

_odók-odókon_, (B) Being at ease, at peace, not worried, not agitated,
tranquil, quiet, calm, peaceful, enjoying peace of mind. See ogkánan,
dalamúnon, darámnon, girámon, libútay, arabútay).

_odól-odól_, Lumpy, full of little nodes or lumps, not even, not
smooth. (cf. kodólkodól, bilógbilóg).

_ódong_, (B) To punch, hammer; cram, stuff full. (cf. búngbung).

_odót_, (B) Flattery, adulation, cajolery; to flatter, fool, wheedle,
cajole, soft-soap, blarney. Odotá siá. Flatter him. (cf. unís, utís).

_odót-odót_, Dim. and Freq. of odót.

_odóy-ódoy_, (B) To converse, chat, confabulate, confab, chin, talk
familiarly as intimate friends. Walâ na silá paginodóyódoy. They are
not on speaking terms any longer. (cf. panugíron, hambárò, sugilánon,
pakigpulóngpúlong, búgno, limóg).

_ódto_, Mid-day, noon, noon-day, noon-tide; zenith. Sa ódto ang
ádlaw----. At mid-day or when the sun is overhead, at its highest,
in the zenith----. (cf. ógto id.).

_ódyong, odyóng_, Trumpet, bugle, trump, horn. (cf. búdyong).

_ogád-ógad_, To practise well, repeat, go over again and
again. Ogádogára inâ. Practise it well. (cf. sulítsúlit, ugádúgad).

_ogáling_, (H) But, now, after a moment's time or reflection, anon,
before long, in a minute, afterwards, not just now, but----, not
in this way, but----. Karón ogáling magadúaw akó sa ínyo. After a
short time I will visit you, but not just now. Silhigán mo ánay ang
salúg kag ogáling lampasóhan mo. First sweep the floor and then scrub
it. Sán-o nímo tahión ang ákon báyò?--Buás ogáling, kay masákò pa akó
súbung siní. When will you make my dress?--To-morrow, for at present
I am very busy. (cf. gáring, ugáling).

_ogánot_, Small vein or artery; fibre. (cf. ugánot).

_ógbo_, A kind of game or pastime. See under kúbung.

_ógbos_, A shoot or sprout, a fresh young leaf or twig; to shoot,
sprout, put forth. Nagaógbos na (may ógbos na) iníng pitógo,
ságing, páhò, etc. This pitógo-palm, banana-plant, mango-tree,
etc. is--shooting,--sprouting,--putting forth new shoots. (cf. ógdo,
túgdo, salíngsing).

_ógdo_, (B) See ógbos.

_ógdok_, A kind of small eel. (cf. síli).

_óghay_, Thrumb, the warp-end, warp-rest, the fringe of threads by
which the warp is fastened to the loom and which has to be cut to
free the woven cloth.

_ógkan_, (B) To be or become tranquil, unmolested, quiet. Nagógkan na
ang íla pagpuyô dídto. Their life there is now quite tranquil. Indì
ka magógkan dídto, kay madámò pa ang ímo buluhatón dirí. You cannot
be at ease there, because you have much work here. (cf. libútay).

_ogkánan_, (B) See dalamúnon, girámon. (ógkan).

_ógkat_, To take up a corpse (of one drowned, found dead on the road
and the like). Ginógkat níla ang pinatáy kag gindalá sa íla baláy. They
took up the corpse of the murdered man and carried it to their house.

_ogót_, Anger, vexation, wrath, indignation, exasperation; to be or
get angry, vexed, exasperated, indignant, aggravated, riled, provoked,
put out. Nagaogót siá. He is getting angry. Ginaógtan níya akó. He
is angry with me. (cf. ákig).

_ogóy-ógoy_, To sing in a drowsy way, sing a lullaby, to hum a
melody. Nagaogóyógoy siá. He is humming a tune.


_ógpot_, To return, come back, arrive, reach, come to a place after
a more or less prolonged absence, return after a considerable
interval. Buás magaógpot siá gíkan sa Manílà. To-morrow he will
arrive from Manila. Ginbílin níya kamí sa isá ka baláy kag walâ níya
kamí pagogpotá kóndì sang masunúd nga ádlaw. He left us in a house
and--did not return (come back) to us till the following (next)
day,--returned to us only the following day. (cf. bálik, abút, sámput).

_ogrít_, Boasting, etc. See bugrít, agrót.

_ógsang_, To fall on one's back, etc. See úgsang, úsdang, ósgang.

_ógto_, Noon. See ódto.

_ógwad_, (B) To extend, prolong; postpone, procrastinate. (cf. úswag).

_ógwat_, To ask repeatedly, examine, cross-examine, hold an enquiry,
investigate several times, question again and again. Ginógwat sang
hukúm iníng sáksi. This witness was questioned by the judge several
times.

_ógyo_, (B) Derision, mockery, ridicule; to deride, scoff at, gibe,
sneer at, leer at, taunt, hold up to derision or ridicule, to ridicule,
mock, abuse with sarcastic or insulting terms, make a--laughing stock
of,--butt of,--mockery of. Ginógyo níla siá. They derided him. Indì
mo siá pagogyohón. Don't mock at him. (cf. ulígyat, uligâ).

_ohális_, (Sp. ojal) Button hole. (cf. wális).

_oháng_, Large, wide, deep; to become wide, to widen, deepen,
said of holes or breaches in a wall, dam, floor, etc. Nagoháng ang
búhò. The hole has become wide and deep. May oháng ang padér, ang
pántaw, etc. There is a large hole in the wall, in the floor of the
kitchen-balcony, etc.

_ohó_, An exclamation used to attract attention or express
surprise. See! Look! Behold! Ohó, nagabahâ ang subâ. Sure enough,
the river has risen. Ohó, nahúlug ang bátà sa bintánà. Good Heavens,
the child has fallen out of the window. Ohó, tan-awá. Look here! Ohó,
ikáw dirâ, hulatá akó ánay. Now then, you there, wait a little for me.

_óho_, (Sp. ojo) Eye; look out! Beware! (cf. ohó).

_ohón_, An exclamation mostly used when showing or handing someone else
things carried in the hand. Behold! Lo! Observe! Take notice! Ohón,
ári dirí ang sulát. Look, the letter is here. Ohón may ságing akó
nga manámit. Look here, what nice bananas I have got. Ohón, katahúm
siníng taknáan, (nadaligán) natahumán akó siní. See how beautiful
this watch is, I think it is a beauty. (cf. ohó).

_óhong_, A kind of mushroom; to remove a house, post and all, and
transfer it to another site. Ginóhong níla ang baláy ni Fuláno. They
removed N.N.'s house, posts and all, to another place. Ang ímo
baláy (lám-ag) támà kadakô nga daw sa índì maóhong, kóndì malígaw
lang. Your house is too large to remove in one load, but it can be
removed in parts, piecemeal (by transferring the roof, the post,
etc. separately). Ohónga lang nínyo ang íya baláy. Just take up and
transfer his house in one load. N.B. The second meaning seems to be
derived from the first, as in the operation called "óhong" a house
is taken up and removed just as an óhong--mushroom is taken from the
ground and carried away root and all.

_óhot_, Empty ears of rice, chaff, ears of rice after the grain has
been removed by threshing or treading. (cf. uháy--the full rice-ear
on the growing stalk in the field).

_okasyón_, (Sp. ocasión) Occasion, opportunity, chance,
convenience. (cf. kahigayónan).

_ókdom_, Gnashing, grinding (of teeth); to gnash or grind the teeth,
strike the teeth together in anger or pain. Anó ang ginaókdom
mo? Why are you gnashing your teeth? Nagaókdom siá sang íya ngípon
(Ginaókdom níya ang íya ngípon) sa kaákig. He is grinding his teeth
in anger. Paokdomá lang siá sang íya ngípon. Let him gnash his
teeth. (cf. doóm, domô, bágrot).

_óklab_, To separate from, detach, tear off things that are stuck
with glue, gum, paste, etc. Indì ka magóklab sang prankíyo. Don't
tear off the postage stamp. Oklabá ang kugán sang ímo katúl. Take
off the scab formed by your skin-disease "katúl". Oklabí akó sang
mga sílyo siníng mga sóbre. Take the stamps off these envelopes for me.

_óklò_, To hide or conceal oneself, sidestep, evade, to lower or hide
one's head, to bend down, dodge, to duck or drop the head suddenly,
so as to avoid a blow or escape observation. Nagóklò siá sang pagkakítà
níya sa ákon. He ducked his head when he saw me. Sang paglámpus sa íya
ni Fuláno walâ siá maígò, kay nagóklò siá. When N.N. struck at him he
was not hit, for he dodged (the blow). Indì ka lang magóklò sa pihák
sang bintánà, kay nakítà ko na ikáw kag índì ka na makapanágò. Don't
take cover below the window, for I have seen you and you cannot
hide. Okloí siá, agúd índì ka níya makítà. Duck your head, so that
he may not see you. (cf. sálup).

_oklô-óklò_, Dim. and Freq. of óklò. Also: to waver, vacillate;
to stammer, speak falteringly. Kon may túyò ka sa pagsákà sa sinâ
nga baláy, sákà, índì ka magoklôóklò. If you wish to enter that
house, enter it without wavering (don't waver or hesitate to enter
it). Kaayóha ang paghámbal (mo), índì ka magoklôóklò. Correct your
way of speaking, don't stammer.

_ókò_, Laughing for the first time, beginning to laugh (smile); to
begin to laugh or smile, to crow. Ang bátà nga nagasúgud magkádlaw
ginasilíng nga nagaókò (ginatawág nga ókò). A baby that begins to smile
is called "ókò". Ang bátà nagaókò na. The baby is beginning to smile.

_ókob_, To bite, hold fast or tight with the teeth. (cf. úkub; tángag,
tában, kagát).

_okóg-ókog_, Hurry; in a hurry; to hurry, rush off in a great hurry,
hasten away, tear--, dash--, make, off, make--haste,--a dash, go or
run away without preparation for a trip or journey. Sang pagkabatî
níya nga may súnug nagokógókog siá dídto. When he heard that there
was a fire, he hastened there at once. (cf. dahándáhan).

_ók-ok_, To strike deep, enter far, eat into, be far below the
surface, particularly applied to a wound or boil. Nagók-ok ang
íya hubág. Naok-okán siá sang íya hubág. His ulcer has struck deep
(is deep). Nagaók-ok ang hubág sa íya batíis. The ulcer is entering
(eating its way) deep into his calf. Metaphorically: Matámad siá
magpangabúdlay, ang lúyag lang níya amó ang pagók-ok sing tubâ. He
is too lazy to work. What he likes is soaking himself with palm-wine.

_ókol_, To take a baby on one's knees or into one's arms, to pet,
fondle, cuddle, play with (little children, etc.). Okol ka siníng
bátà--or--okóla iníng bátà. Take this baby on your knees.

_okól-ókol_, Dim. and Freq. of ókol. (cf. akúl-akúl).

_okólokól_, See akúl-akúl--coarse, rough, etc.

_okóm_, To manage, control, hold in, tame, subdue, make amenable, to
check, hold in check, discipline, make tractable. Indì akó makaokóm
siníng bátà nga sutíl. I cannot manage this naughty boy. (cf. otóm,
daúg).

_okón_, Or. (ó kon, ukón id.).

_ókon_, See hókon--to roll up, etc.

_okón-ókon_, See hokónhókon.

_ókot_, To be diligent, etc. See úkud.

_ókot_, One who repeats the same thing over and over again, a bore,
a chatterbox; foolish, silly. (cf. ulianón, ayopáka).

_okót_, (H) To reiterate, harp upon, keep harping upon, repeat over
and over again, keep drumming into one's ears the same thing, babble,
prate, chatter.

_okót_, Crease, wrinkle. See yokô, yokót.

_okóy_, To be quiet, make no stir. Mostly used with pa--. Nagapaokóy
gid lang siá. He just sits and does nothing. He is very quiet and
does not stir from his place.

_oktúbre_, (Sp. octubre) October. (cf. bagyóbágyo).

_okupasyón_, (Sp. ocupación) Occupation, work, duty, pursuit,
avocation, employment. (cf. palangitán-an, awát, buluhatón, palamúgnan,
palangakóan, kahimtángán, etc.).

_ólbo_, To rise to the surface, appear, stand forth, emerge, issue,
push up, show, come up, sprout, become visible. Nagólbo na ang
túbò sang lubí. The first sprout or shoot has now pushed up from
the coconut. Walâ pa magólbo ang túbò sang maís nga ginpánggas
ko sang may tátlo na ka ádlaw. The corn I planted three days ago
has not yet sprouted. Paolbohá ang pabílo sang kínke. Turn up the
lamp-wick. Tan-awá ang haló, nga nagaólbo dirâ sa bató. Look at the
iguana peeping out from among the stones there. Ginapaólbo níya
sing diótay ang íya tiíl sa idálum sang hábul. He lets his foot
stick out a little (peep out, show, be seen) from underneath the
blanket. (cf. gitíb, gimáw).

_óldog_, Trifler, fool, clown, impostor, fake.

_ólhot_, To appear, make one's appearance, pop out (up), shoot out
(up) suddenly, unexpectedly. Sa hinálì nagólhot sa masíot nga hilamón
ang isá ka mán-og nga dalítan. Suddenly there appeared from among
the dense grass a poisonous snake. Suddenly a poisonous snake made
its appearance, etc. (cf. tuáw, tuháw).

_olíba_, (Sp. oliva) Olive, olive-tree.

_olî-batâ, olîbatâ_, Childish, silly, in one's second
childhood. (cf. ulianón, urumánon, ayopáka).

_olíhi_, (H) Late, last, latest, behind, hind, hindmost, back,
after. Ang mga nagúna manginolíhi kag ang mga olíhi manginúna. The
first shall be last and the last shall be first. Humáy nga olíhi. Late
rice. Rice that is planted or harvested later than other kinds of
rice. Indì náton mahibaloán kon anó ang mahanabô sa olíhi. We cannot
know what will happen in the future, later on, in the time to come. Sa
olíhi nga mga ádlaw. In the latter days, in the future. (cf. hudyánan).

_olihí_, (H) To be late--, belated, tardy, overdue, come behind,
follow, bring up the rear, be behindhand or backward, be below the
standard. Walâ man siá magolihí sa ibán nga mga bumulúthò. He was
not below the standard of other students. Nagolihí siá magabút. He
came late, too late, after time, behind time.

_olikíd_, (H) To treat well, with care, etc. See olingíg, balikíd.

_olín_, The stern of a boat, poop. Metaphorically: Indì ka maghámbal
sinâ, kay básì olinán ikáw. Don't talk like that, for you may be worse
off yourself later on. Púngkò ka sa luyó siníng bátà nga but-ánan,
kay básì maolinán ka sang íya nga batásan. Sit down at the side of
this well-behaved boy, that you may--follow his example,--do as he
does. Índì ka magyúbit sa íya, kay básì olinán ikáw. Don't ridicule
him, for you may be ridiculed too in your turn.

_olínggan_, From olingíg.

_olingíg_, To treat with care and concern, cherish, handle
with consideration or respect, watch over tenderly. Ginolínggan
(ginolingigán) níya siá sing maáyo. He treated her with great
tenderness. (cf. hálung, balikíd).

_olípon_, (H) Slave; serf, vassal, helot, bondsman, villein, bondslave;
to enslave; be a slave. Ginolípon níya si Fuláno. He enslaved
N.N. Nagolípon siá. He became a slave. Olípon siá sang maláut nga
kaduyugán. He is a slave to evil or base inclinations. Indì maolípon
ang panghunâhúnà sang táo. The thoughts of a man cannot be brought
into servitude (by another). (ulípon, id.).

_olitáo_, A youth, stripling, a young man, a single or unmarried
man. (cf. dalága--a young lady, maiden).

_olo-, -olo-_, A diminutive particle that is either prefixed (to words
beginning with a vowel) or inserted (between the first consonant and
the first vowel of words beginning with a consonant), e.g. oloáslum
(áslum); oloánggid (ánggid): bolobúg-at (búg-at); dolodápya (dápya);
tolotámbok (támbok); nagtolotáwhay (táwhay), etc. etc.

_ólo_, Head, head-piece, pate, noddle, brain-box, brain-pan, sconce,
upper story, intellect; master, ruler, director, manager. Ginatágò
níya ang íya ólo, ápang ang íya íkog nagamurá. He hides his head,
but his tail appears. (Literally said of an iguana, but often applied
to people who try to hide their doings, but who are found out). Walâ
sing útbong kag walâ sing ólo. Neither head nor tail. Maáyo siá sing
ólo. He has a good head i.e. he is very intelligent. (cf. pangólo).

_oloasáwa_, (H) Concubine, mistress, paramour. (cf. alaasáwa, arasáwa).

_olób_, To spit out a liquid, eject, spew out. Iolób ang túbig. Spit
out the water. Indì mo pagolobán ang salúg sing túbig, kóndì magolób
ka sa bintánà. Don't spew out water on the floor, but out of the
window. (cf. bugá, lúad, dúplà, durâ). Also: to anoint the hair with
chewed coconut meat.

_olóbhon_, Coughing, a sore throat with coughing. An "olóbhon" is a
little worse than "ilighámon, irighámon". (cf. obó; oróbwon id.).

_olobráhon_, (H) What is to be done, work, duty, task. (cf. buluhatón,
óbra).

_olodóton_, One to be flattered or that is amenable to
flattery. (cf. odót, uluníson, ulutíson, hululanúon).


_ólog_, Praise; to praise, exalt; to flatter. (cf. saólog).

_ologán_, Praise, honour, preference; benefit. (cf. ólog; kaayóhan).

_ológ-ológ_, To flatter; jest, joke, talk playfully,
banter. (cf. lahógláhog, tiáwtíaw, langás).

_olóhan_, Brainy, clever, smart, sharp, intellectual, having great
mental ability. (cf. olohán).

_olohán_, The top or head of a table, bed, etc. (cf. ólo; uluhán id.).

_olók_, (B) To pain, smart, itch (of scratches, eruptive skin-diseases,
slight wounds, etc.). Nagaolók ang katúl ko--or--ginaolokán akó sang
katúl ko. My skin-disease "katúl" is smarting (itching).

_olók_, Tadpole. (cf. olóng).

_olokabá_, Shell, egg-shell. (cf. alokabá id.).

_ól-ol_, A kind of small bird.

_ól-ol_, To be or get stiff and painful, especially applied to
the joints of the body, but said also of the teeth and of the
conscience. Nagaól-ol ang mga lutalutahán sang íya láwas. The joints
of his body are getting stiff (are stiffening).

_ól-ol_, To gnaw, etc. See úl-ul, úd-ud.

_olóng_, Tadpole.

_olóng-ólong_, To wag or shake the head to and fro as a sign of
refusal, disapprobation or simple negation. (cf. lungôlúngò id.).

_olón-ólon_, The rice that in winnowing comes to lie between the full
grains and the chaff. (cf. amáyaw, umáyaw).

_oló-ólo_, To talk kindly to, win or gain over by kind admonition or
persuasion, to induce to do a thing, propitiate or prevail upon by
friendly reasoning. Oloolóhi siá. Try to win him by talking to him
in a kind way.

_olór_, (Sp. olor) Smell, odour, scent, aroma, perfume,
fragrance, exhalation, fume, redolence, stench, stink, effluvium
emanation. (cf. báhò, dapóg).

_ólpot_, To arrive, come to. See ógpot, óplot.

_olyo, ólyos_, (Sp. oleo, oleos) Oil. Santos Olyos. Holy
Oils. (cf. lána, súmpa).

_omál_, Blunt; dull, blunted, dulled, worn out, useless (of edged
tools, as a bolo, etc.). (cf. dangál, mahábul).

_ómal_, To be or become blunt, blunted, dull, dulled, worn out,
useless, said especially of edged tools. Nagómal na ang binángon. The
bolo--is worn out,--has lost its edge or keenness. (cf. hábul, dángal).

_ómol_, The fist; to strike, punch, cuff, buffet, box with the
fist. Omóli siá. Punch him. Inomólan níya akó. He struck me with the
fist. Ginturâturáan níya akó sang íya nga ómol (inómol). He shook
his fist at me.

_omól-ómol_, Dim. and Freq. of ómol. Also: to keep, or form a ball of,
within one's fist. Omolomóla ang kán-on. Press the rice into a ball
within your fist. Omólomóli akó sing bayébáye, kalámay, etc. Give me
a fistful of bayébáye, of sugar, etc.

_óm-om_, To put into the mouth, clean or rinse the mouth, chew
(betelnut, or the like), to let dissolve in the mouth. Om-omá ang
dólse nga bilóg. Dissolve the (sweet) candy in your mouth. Let the
sweet melt in your mouth. (cf. logónlógon).

_ómoy_, To swim, paddle, moving the hands as dogs move their forepaws
in swimming, to beat the water, splash along. (cf. kapáykápay,
kapákápa, langóy).

_omóy-ómoy_, Dim. and Freq. of ómoy and more used than the simple ómoy.

_-on_, A suffix very frequently used in Visayan to form:
1) adjectives, e.g. kibúlon, kíblon from kíbul; dugoón from
dugô, etc. maluyagón from lúyag; matinahúron from táhud,
etc. (cf. ma--,--in--).
2) nouns, e.g. kapisanón from písan; kalaparón from lápad,
etc. etc. N.B. The difference between the simple ka--forms and the
ka----on--forms lies in this that the former denote abstract nouns
and can be used also for the formation of an exclamatory superlative
that corresponds in meaning to the English "How----!", whilst the
latter denote nouns in the concrete or as applied to a particular
case, e.g. Kalápad siníng palangúmhan! How large this farm is! Ang
kalaparón siníng palangúmhan kapín sa tátlo ka ektárea. The size
(extent) of this farm is more than three hectares. (cf. ka--,--an).
3) the so-called (future) passive in--on. Generally speaking the
passive in--on is used with verbs that denote a direct action on
an object, an action that produces some change on, or modifies,
the object, e.g. búhat (to make); hímò (to do); hímos (to prepare,
get ready); dágdag (to drop, let fall); hákwat (to lift up); útud (to
sever); bíal (to split); gulút (to cut); támpà (to slap); súmbag (to
box); gísì (to tear); tábug (to drive away), etc. etc. (cf.--an, i--).
4) In connection with denominations of money--on adds the meaning:
of the value of, a coin (banknote, bill, etc.) of the value of,
e.g. diesón--a ten-centavo coin; pisitasón--a twenty-centavo piece;
pisosón--coin (note) of the value of a peso, etc.

_ondô-óndò_, To fondle, caress, play with, give cheer to, cause
to laugh. Ondôondoá ang bátà. Play with the baby. Make the baby
laugh. (cf. dálò, ókol, yonggôyónggò).

_ongî_, Hare-lipped, having a hare-lip. See sungî.

_óngì_, To be or become hare-lipped. (cf. súngì).

_ongô_, Deaf. See bungúl.

_óng-ong_, To sip, drink, swill, guzzle, absorb, imbibe (from an
oblong, rather narrow-necked vessel, as from a pasók, salúd, bottle,
etc.). Ong-ongá lang ang tubâ sa pasók, kay walâ kitá sing sukî. Just
drink the toddy direct from the bamboo-tube, as we have no cup.

_onóg_, (B) Burned, burned down. (cf. sunúg); empty (of holes in the
game of súngka).

_ónog_, To burn, burn down; to empty the holes in the súngka-game.

_ón-ón_, Illegitimate, adulterine, spurious, bastard, offspring
of adultery.

_ón-on_, To cook fish, meat, etc. in very little water mixed with
vinegar and various spices. The concoction (inon-onán) is usually
served with little or no sauce. On-oní ang ísdà. Cook the fish in
the ón-on way. Isdà nga inon-onán. A dish of highly seasoned fish.

_ónras_, (Sp. honras) Obsequies, last honours; to ring the bells for
a funeral, ring the (passing) bell, toll the bell. (cf. úndras).

_ónse_, (Sp. once) Eleven. Sa las ónse. At eleven o'clock.

_ónto_, Tooth. (cf. ngípon).

_óntoy_, (B) A term of endearment for boys or young men. (cf. nónoy,
tútò, nénè).

_operár_, (Sp. operar) To operate, perform a surgical
operation. Pagaoperahán siá sa buás. To-morrow he will undergo an
operation. Ginaoperahán siá sang íya nga apendisítis. He was operated
upon for appendicitis. (cf. búsbus).

_operasyón_, (Sp. operación) Operation.

_opinyón_, (Sp. opinión) Opinion, view, estimate. (cf. bántà,
hunâhúnà).

_opís_, The stalk of a banana-leaf; a small coin, farthing. (cf. upís).

_opisína_, (Sp. oficina) Office, bureau, laboratory,
workshop. (cf. sululátan, alagarán, palamúgnan).

_opisyál_, (Sp. oficial) Official.

_opísyo_, (Sp. oficio) Office, duty, work, calling. (cf. palangakóan,
palangitán-an, katungdánan, buluhatón).

_óplok_, To dodge, duck, try to avoid being seen or hit, to bend down
or sideways, hide one's head. (cf. óklò, íplok).

_óplot_, To come to, arrive at, reach, return to. (cf. ógpot, ólpot).

_opô_, A kind of large gourd or squash. (cf. tabágwang, tibiáyong,
kalubáy, kalabása).

_ópol_, To thwart, block, bar, cross, impede, hinder. (cf. bálag,
pamalábag).

_opól-opól_, Dim. and Freq. of ópol. Also: to follow in quick
succession, overlapping or interfering with each other. Nagaopólopól
gid lang ang ákon mga buluhatón. My jobs come one--on top of the
other,--after the other without pause. (cf. abútabút, abákabák).

_opóng_, See upóng--a handful, etc.

_opós_, See upús--the remnant after a fire, etc.

_ópyo_, (Sp. opio) Opium. (cf. apián, apyán).


_orá_, See urá--to annoy, molest, etc.

_oráb_, See uráb, uláb--to bite, etc.

_oradór_, (Sp. orador) Orator, public speaker,
preacher. (cf. mangwawáli, makigpulóngpúlong).

_órag_, Harlotry, prostitution, fornication, whoredom, lewdness,
unchastity. (cf. bígà, úlag, kaúlag).

_orágon_, (B) Harlot, prostitute, whore; lewd, unchaste. (cf. bigáon,
álpot, ulágon, maúlag, maulágon).

_orág-órag_, Dim. and Freq. of órag.

_orág-orág_, A kind of small shrimp. (cf. uráng, pasáyan).

_oráhol_, To ask insistently, keep asking, to bother, plague, molest
with repeated requests, to importune. Indì ka magoráhol sa kay tátay
nahanungúd sang ginaluyágan mo nga sapátos nga bág-o. Don't keep
asking father for the new boots you want. (cf. pagágà, patúsà).

_óras_, (Sp. hora) Hour; time. (cf. táknà; tión, panahón).

_orásan_, Watch, clock, time-piece, chronometer, dial. Orásan
nga dibólsa (Sp. de bolsa). A watch. Orásan nga sa díngding. A
clock. (cf. taknáan).

_orasón_, Hour. (cf. táknà, kaoráson, kaorasón).

_orasyón_, (Sp. oración) Prayer, orison, oration; Angelus,
Angelus-bell. (cf. pangamúyò, pangadî, palangadíon).

_orát-órat_, (B) To be determined to, make great efforts, wish, desire,
strive. Nagaorát-órat gid tána kang panahî, hay mangílin magsóhol sa
mananáhì. She is determined to do her own sewing, because she does not
like (is too stingy) to pay wages to a seamstress. Gintáw-an roláng
(ron lang) ni tátay na ti kwárta, hay nagorát-órat kang pangáyò. His
father finally gave him some money, because he so insistently
(repeatedly) asked for it. (cf. himúlat, paningúhà, panikasúg).

_oratóryo_, (Sp. oratorio) Oratory; oratorical, rhetorical.

_órden_, (Sp. orden) Orders; Holy Orders, Religious Order or
Congregation; to confer Holy Orders. Ang órden sa pagkapárì. Ordination
to the priesthood. Priestly orders. Ginordenán siá nga párì sang
halángdon nga obíspo nga si N.N. He was ordained a priest by the
Right Rev. Bishop N.N.

_ordinánsa_, (Sp. ordenanza) Ordinance, decree, law, especially a
municipal ordinance. (cf. sógò, pagbulút-an, ley).

_organísta_, (Sp. organista) Organist, a player on the organ.

_organó, órgano_, (Sp. órgano) Organ, medium, instrument; pipe-organ,
church-organ.

_origanó_, (Sp. orégano) Marjoram, an aromatic plant used in cookery
as a seasoning for meat, fish, etc.

_orihinál_, (Sp. original) Original.

_orkésta_, (Sp. orquesta) Orchestra.

_orkílya_, (Sp. horquilla) A hair-pin, a bifurcated or two-pronged
pin as often used by women to secure their hair with.

_ormigón_, (Sp. hormigón) Gravel. (cf. grábas, dakál-dákal,
dikál-dikál).

_órna_, (Sp. urna) Urn, casket, shrine, glass-case.

_órno_, (Sp. horno) Oven, furnace, kiln. Orno sa ápog. A
lime-kiln. Orno sa tinápay. A baker's oven. (cf. hórno id.).

_óro_, (Sp. oro) Gold. De óro. Made of gold, gold,
golden. (cf. buláwan).

_orób_, (B) To spit out a liquid. See olób.

_oróbwon_, (B) A sore throat with coughing. See olóbhon.

_oróg-oróg_, (B) Joking, jesting; to crack a joke, etc. See ológológ.

_oróg-orogán_, A jester, joker; flatterer,
wheedler. (cf. lahóglahogán).

_orók_, (H) A young pig, piggy, piglet. (cf. odók, idík).

_orók-ok_, Guffaw, loud laughter; to guffaw, etc. See arók-ok, arík-ik,
ótoy, talángkaw).

_oróng_, To wonder, look on in admiration, be surprised, astonished,
astounded, amazed, dumfounded, shocked, staggered, taken aback, to
get a shock. Naorongán akó sang pagkakítà ko sa íya, kay támà kalisúd
ang íya pagbátì. I was shocked (I got quite a shock) when I saw him,
for his illness is very serious. (cf. búlung, tingála).

_órong_, See ódong--to punch, etc.

_orongán_, The (wooden) shaft of a lance, spear, etc. (cf. unungán,
ulungán).

_oróod_, (B) To press--, squeeze--, push--, against, to crush,
crowd, jam, pin. Ioróod mo siá sa halígi. Jam (Pin) him against the
post. (cf. aróod, but oróod is more commonly used).

_orooráwa_, (B) Complaint, murmur, grumbling; to complain,
murmur, mutter, grumble, repine, croak, grouse, fret; to remark,
give expression to one's feeling. Indì ka magorooráwa. Don't
complain. (cf. kúmud, gúmud, gulumúron, etc.).

_Orópa_, (Sp. Europa) Europe.

_oróy-óroy_, To converse amicably, etc. See odóy-ódoy, urúy-úruy.

_oróy-óroy_, To be convulsed, to shake or agitate violently; to die
suddenly (after a short fit of violent convulsions, as after a great
shock, a heavy blow, after being struck by a bullet, run over by a
cart, or the like). Nagoróy-óroy lang siá kag napatáy. He made only
a few convulsive movements and died. (cf. tirî, pálak).

_ósad_, To jump, jump up and down, skip, dance. (cf. túmbò).

_osád-ósad_, Dim. and Freq. of ósad. (cf. tumbótúmbò, pusádpúsad).

_ósbong_, Evaporation, exhalation, emanation, odorous vapour;
to exhale, give off an odorous vapour. Nagaósbong ang dútà, kay
naulanán. The earth is exhaling a fragrant vapour, for it has been
moistened by the rain. Naosbongán akó sang báhò sang tiníg-ang. I
smelt the fragrant steam of the boiled (boiling) rice. (cf. alísngaw,
alísbong, sungáw).

_ósdang_, To fall on one's back, etc. See úsdang, ógsang, úgsang.

_ósgang_, See ósdang.

_osióso_, (Sp. ocioso) Idle, mischievous, good-for-nothing, curious,
inquisitive; an interloper, trespasser, one who has no business being
where he is. (cf. landólándo, tiógtióg, lagáwlágaw, haráyháray, sutíl).

_óskan_, (B) From osók--to annoy, molest, etc.

_oslibád_, (B) Stubborn, pig-headed, self-willed, ungovernable,
unruly, head strong, stiffnecked. (cf. batinggílan).

_oslít_, Joke, jest, a practical joke, a hoax; to fool, flatter;
joke, jest, be witty, hoax, play a practical joke. (cf. uslít id.).

_oslitán_, Full of fun, joker, jester, buffoon,
clown. (cf. lahoglahogán).

_oslitón_, See oslitán id.

_óslob_, An upper garment, a garment worn over another; to put
on an additional garment. Magóslob ka lang sang bág-o mo nga
delárgo--or--ióslob lang ang bág-o mo nga delárgo. Just put on your
new pair of trousers over the ones you have on. Ginoslobán níya ang
maitúm nga delárgo sing maputî. He put on a pair of white trousers
over the black ones.

_ósmod_, To sink down or lower, sink into the earth, give way under
a superimposed weight. Nagósmod ang isá ka halígi sang baláy. One
of the house-posts has sunk. Naosmorán kamí sing duhá ka halígi sang
ámon baláy. Two posts of our house have sunk. (cf. lúsud).

_ósngab_, To gnaw, nibble, bite or tear to pieces (with the
teeth). (cf. úsngab).

_ósngad_, To force air through the nose, as done by one who dislikes a
smell, to snort. Nagaósngad siá, kay dílì níya maíro ang báhò sináng
mga siápò. He is blowing through his nose, for he cannot stand the
smell of those crushed sugarcane stalks. Ginosngarán nákon ang báhò
sináng mga ísdà. The smell of that fish made me snort. (cf. úsngad,
púsnga).

_óso_, (Sp. uso) Style, fashion, usage, custom, mode, manner, anything
commonly used or in vogue. Markahí lang ang ákon báka sang óso. Just
mark my cow (ox) with the ordinary branding-iron.

_óso_, (Sp. oso) Bear, bruin. Oso blanko. Polar bear. (Oso nga maputî).

_ósok_, A post, stake, upright, vertical spar, especially a
bamboo-stake in the fish-trap called "punót"; to drive in, plant,
set up, ram in. Nagaósok karón ang mga manugpúnot. The men at the
fish-corral are setting up the stakes or posts. Osóki ang punót. Put
posts to the fish-trap.

_osók_, (B) To vex, trouble, annoy, molest, worry, pester, plague,
cause aversion; to be annoyed, etc. Nagakaosók akó sa íya. Ginaóskan
akó sa íya. He is a nuisance to me. I am annoyed with (at) him. He
is annoying (vexing, troubling) me a good deal. Indì ka magpaosók sa
íya. Don't molest him (cf. hiól, pahiól, lás-ay, palás-ay).

_óson_, To heap, or pile up, stones, sand, etc., make a heap (mound)
of stones, sand, etc. Osóna ang mga bató. Put the stones together in
a heap. (cf. túmpok).

_osón_, A heap of stones, sand, coconuts, etc.; a pile,
mound. (cf. tinúmpok, dulún).

_osón_, (Sp. ozono) Ozone.

_ós-os_, To get loose, slip down by degrees, fall down or sink down
slowly. (cf. lógho with the difference, that lógho supposes a rather
swift drop or sudden fall).

_ós-os_, Hernia, rupture. See lóslos.

_ospitál_, (Sp. hospital) Hospital, infirmary. (cf. bulúlngan).

_óstyas_, (Sp. hostia) Host, wafer. Ang Sántos nga óstyas. The Sacred
Host. Ostyas nga nakonsagrahán. A consecrated Host. (cf. pórmas).

_ótbong_, The top, summit, apex, tip, crest, crown (of a tree, bamboo,
etc.) (cf. púnta, tángkap).

_otís_, See utís, odót, unís--to fool, flatter, joke, etc.

_otitíd_, To take good care of, to attend to with concern, (utitíd
id.).

_ótok_, To laugh, to be tickled. Nagótok siá sa dakô nga kahám-ut. He
laughed with great glee. He was tickled to death. (cf. kádlaw,
halákhak, talángkaw).

_ótok_, Marrow; brain, cerebrum; intellect, cleverness.

_otókan_, Brainy, intellectual, clever, wise, sage, sapient, sagacious,
able, capable, keen, acute, judicious. (cf. maálam, maábtik, lísto).

_ótol_, A tick; a kind of blood-sucking vermin that is often found on
buffaloes and other cattle; a piece of slightly split or loose skin
near the root of a nail, a hangnail, agnail. May ótol ang karabáw. The
buffalo is infested with ticks. May ótol ang ákon túdlò. The skin at
the root of my fingernail is loose or split. (cf. dótol, dotóldótol).

_otól-ótol_, Agnail, hangnail. (cf. ótol, dotóldótol).

_otól-otól_, Dim. of ótol--a tick. (cf. dotóldotól).

_otóm_, To subdue, beat, triumph over, master, worst, defeat,
overthrow, to go one better, to get--, have--, gain--the--better
of,--best of,--upper hand,--ascendancy, to overpower, vanquish,
overcome. Indì siá makaotóm sa kay Fuláno. He cannot overcome N.N. Indì
mo siá maotóm sa siní nga bágay. You cannot beat him--at this,--in
this way. (cf. daúg, okóm, sákup, lútos).

_ótop_, To cut off the top or end, to top, lop. Otópi ang kawáyan. Gut
off (lop off) the tip or small end of the bamboo.

_otót_, Wind, fart; to break wind, fart.

_ót-ot_, To gnaw, nibble (as a rat or mouse.) Ginot-otán sang ilagâ
ang ákon báyò. My jacket has been gnawed (nibbled) at by mice. Inót-ot
sang ilagâ ang ákon hábul. The mouse nibbled at my blanket.

_ótoy_, (B) To laugh much and heartily. Ngáa man nga nagaótoy ka sang
kádlaw? Why do you laugh so much? (cf. arók-ok, arík-ik).

_otóy-ótoy_, Dim. and Freq. of ótoy. (cf. ótok, talángkaw).

_otsabádo_, (Sp. ochavado) Eight-sided, with eight sides, octagonal.

_ótso_, (Sp. ocho) Eight. Sa las ótso. At eight o'clock. (sa ikawaló
ka táknà id.).

_ótwas_, See útwas--to rise to the surface, etc.

_otwásan_, See utwásan--loophole, escape, etc.


_ówà_, Milk vomited or dribbled (by small children); to dribble or
vomit milk.

_owák_, The raven, crow. Magabukáy ánay ang owák kag----. The raven
will become white before----, i.e. never----.

_owák-ówak_, To caw; the cry of a crow.

_ówang_, Howl, yowl, a loud and long bark; to howl, yowl, yelp,
bark loud and long (of dogs). (cf. láhay, tághol).

_óway_, Grandmother, grandma, granny, granddam. (cf. úyang, bayí,
imáy, úlang, lóla, abuéla).

_owáy_, Rattan.

_óya_, Plentiful, abundant. See dagáyà, bugánà, dagásà.

_oyá_, Oho! hurrah! lo! why! an exclamation of joy and surprise.

_oyámpong_, A kind of shrub.

_óy-oy_, To laugh heartily. (cf. talángkaw, ótoy, ótok, halákhak,
arók-ok, arík-ik).




P


_p_, The letter "p" in Visayan is pronounced as in English.
In spelling foreign words in which "f" occurs the Visayans frequently
substitute "p" for "f", as they have no sound in their language
corresponding to the consonant "f", e.g. Pebréro (Febrero); punsyón
(función); púnda (funda), etc.
In words beginning with "p" preceded by the prefix "pan-" the "p"
of the root is dropped, and the "n" of the "pan-" is changed into
"m", e.g. pamúnò (pan-, púnò); pamángkot (pan-, pángkot), etc.

_pa_, Yet, still, besides, more, furthermore, also. Walâ pa (índì pa)
siá magabút. He has not (will not) arrived (arrive) yet. Sa súbung siní
índì pa akó makahalín. I cannot leave just at present. Sa ákon bántà
magaulán pa karón sa hápon. In my opinion it will still be raining (it
will rain again) this afternoon. May isá pa ka katarúngan----. There
is still another (one more) reason or argument. Isá pa. One
thing more. Maáyo pa (labíng maáyo pa) kon----. It were better
(It would be better still), if----. Kag índì pa kay amó inâ lámang,
kóndì----. And not only this, but----. This does not tell the whole
story, but----. Matáas pa ang búkid nga Napulák. The Napulák mountain
is higher (still). Malayô pa. It is far yet. (cf. angód, gihápon).

_pa_, To, towards, in the direction of. Pa Amérika. To America. Pa
Manílà. To Manila. Nagdáyon siá maglakát pa búkid. He continued his
march towards the mountain. Nagpailóngílong siá. He went to (in the
direction of) Iloilo. He has gone to Iloilo.

_pa_, With "kon diín", "kon sa diín", or the like, "pa" has the meaning
of "anywhere", "anywhere else". Ambót kon sa diín siá nagkádto, kon sa
umá ukón sa diín pa. I don't know where he has gone to, whether to his
farm or somewhere (anywhere) else. Ang íla kasál pagahiwáton dílì kon
sa diín pa, kóndì dirâ na gid lámang sa bánwa nga íla nataóhan. Their
marriage will take place not anywhere else, but in their native town.

_pa_, Papa, father, dad, daddy. (cf. papá, amáy, tátay, tay).

_pa-_, A very frequently used prefix with the following meanings:
1) Movement or direction towards, e.g. paidálum--downwards,
down; paibábaw--upward, up; nagpamanílà siá. He has gone to
Manila. Nagapabugál siá. He is on the road to pride, i.e. he is
getting proud, is haughty, overbearing. Nagapadayáw siá. He is
vain. Nagapabungúl siá. He is acting as if he were deaf, is stubborn,
disobedient, heedless, does not listen, etc.
2) Efficient cause, e.g. Sín-o ang nagpatíndog sang halígi? Who set up
the post? Ang isá ka alakáyo saráng makapakádlaw sa mga táo. A joker
can make people laugh. Ginpahalín níla ang matámad nga sologoón. They
discharged the lazy servant. Patalumá ang binángon. Sharpen the
bolo. Pinabálik níya ang sulát. He sent the letter back, etc.
3) Order or command (quite frequently to be performed by a third
person), e.g. Patáwga si Pédro (sa) kay Huán. Ipatawág si Huán
(sa) kay Pédro. Order (Get) Peter to call John. Padálhi akó sing
túbig. Send me some water. Get someone to bring me water. Palutói akó
sing panyága. Have dinner prepared for me. Order someone to cook the
dinner for me. Palutóa ang kosinéro sang panyága. Ipalútò ang panyága
sa kosinéro. Order the cook to get dinner ready. Ipaábat siá. Send
somebody--after him,--to call him here, etc.
4) Toleration or sufferance, e.g. Pahampangá lang dirâ ang mga
bátà. Just let the boys play there. Pabayái (Pabáy-i) lang silá. Leave
them alone. Let them do what they like. Pasakayá (Pasákya) siá sa ímo
salákyan. Give him a lift in your vehicle. Let him ride in your car
(carriage). Indì mo silá pagpasúgtan. Don't allow them to have their
will. Don't grant their request. Don't approve their proposal. Indì
ka magpabúang, magpadáyà, etc. Don't allow yourself to be fooled,
cheated, etc. Mapapuút pa akó ánay sang ulán kag ogáling mapadáyon
akó sang ákon panglakátan. I'll let the rain stop first (I am waiting
for the rain to stop) and then I shall continue the march, etc.
N.B. It should be borne in mind that the context alone can determine
the exact meaning of pa- (usually, for convenience' sake, called the
Causative). Hence in this dictionary when words with the prefix pa-
occur, the translation does not exclude meanings other than the
one given.

_páa_, The leg (from the knee upward), thigh; haunch (of a horse, stag,
etc.). Malábà siá sing páa. He has long legs. (cf. tiíl, kahíg--the
foot; pusupusuán, batíis, busugbusugán--the calf; túhud--the knee;
tikód, buúl--the heel).


_paabá_, Caus. of abá--to carry on the back, carry pickaback. Paábha
(paabahá) akó. Carry me on your back. Ginpaabá akó ni
Fuláno. N.N. carried me on his back. Kon índì ka malúyag magúbug sa
túbig magpaabá ka lang sa táo. If you don't like to wade through the
water, let yourself be carried (across)--on a man's back,--pickaback.

_paábat_, Caus. of ábat--to follow, go after. Paabáta si Pédro sa kay
Huán. Send Peter after John. Paabáti siá sang ímo sologoón. Send your
servant after him.

_paabáy_, Caus. of abáy--to join, etc. Paábya (Paabayá) siá sa
hámpang. Let him join in the game or play.

_paabíso_, Caus. of abíso--to notify, etc. Ipaabíso mo sa íya nga----
or--paabisóhi siá nga----. Send him notice that----.

_paabóyon_, (B) To please, oblige, let one have his will or way;
to ingratiate oneself with. (cf. abóyon).

_paabúng_, To intercept, catch, stop on the road, cross one's way,
waylay; try to win the favour of, woo, solicit. (cf. litâ, bánggà,
bángan).

_paabút_, To wait for, expect, await. Paabutá siá túbtub sa ikapúlò
ka táknà. Wait for him till ten o'clock. (pa, abút).

_paáda_, To hand over or divide provisionally amongst the heirs,
etc. See adááda. Paadáhi sing dútà ang ímo mga anák. Distribute
provisionally some land to your children.

_paadiós_, To take one's leave, say--, bid--, goodbye, bid (say) adieu
(goodbye). Nagpaadiós ka sa íla--or--ginpaadiosán mo silá? Have you
said goodbye to them? (pa, adiós; cf. paálam).

_paágaw_, Caus. of ágaw--to seize, etc. Also: To contend, compete,
scramble for. (pa, ágaw).

_paagáw_, Seedlings, especially of dágmay, planted first in wet soil
and then transferred to kaingín or other dry soil. (cf. pág-aw id.).

_paágay_, To shed, cause to flow (tears, etc.). Nagpaágay siá sing
mapaít nga mga lúhà. She shed bitter tears. Indì mo pagpaagáyon ang
íya mga lúhà. Don't make her cry. Ginpaagáyan níya sing madámò nga
mga lúhà ang íya anák nga napatáy. She shed many tears over her dead
child. (pa, ágay).

_paágday_, To be slow, perform slowly; cause to be slow, etc. Indì
mo pagpaagdayón ang ímo paglakát. Don't walk so slow, don't slow
down your walk. Ginsógò ko siá nga magdalî, tapát gánì nagpaágday. I
ordered him to be quick, but instead of it he dawdled. (pa, ágday).

_paágdom_, To darken, make as dark as the leaves of the
ágdom-shrub. Nagpaágdom siá sang íya guyá. His face darkened. Indì
mo pagpaagdomón ang ímo nawóng. Don't look so disagreeable. Don't
pull such a sour face. (pa, ágdom).

_paági_, Way, manner, method, mode, procedure, process, contrivance,
means, medium; to let pass, etc. Dílì maáyo ang íla paági sa
pagpatíndog siníng táytay. Their way of building this bridge is no
good. Paágyon (paagíhon) mo lang ang mga táo sa ímo dútà. Let the
people pass through your land. Sa siní ukón sádto nga paági----. In one
way or another, somehow or other, by some means or other, by hook or
by crook; anyway, at all events, in any case. Ipaági inâ sa hokóm. Let
it be brought before the judge. Let the judge decide it. (cf. pa, ági).

_paagísod_, To make or let follow in regular order. Paagisóda
(--óra) ang mga bátà sonô sa íla kataasón. Let the children follow
each other in line according to their size. Ginpaagísod níya silá
sa kúbay. He made them march in single file, follow one another,
as in a procession. (pa, agísod).

_paágsa_, To let fields on lease (for part or one half of the
produce). Ipaágsa sa íya ang ímo dútà--or--paagsahí siá sang ímo
dútà. Let him have your field on lease. Lease him your land. Paagsahá
siá. Grant him the lease of the land. (pa, ágsa).

_paákig_, (H) To anger, to make angry, etc. (pa, ákig).

_paalág-ag_, To make shy, timid, bashful, inspire little
confidence. Nagpaalág-ag siá sa ákon. He inspired me with little
confidence. He made me a little timid. He made me feel afraid of
him. (pa, alág-ag).

_paálam_, Caus. of álam. Also: to warn, tell beforehand, caution,
forewarn, premonish; to say goodbye, take one's leave, say farewell,
bid goodbye, bid adieu. Nagapaálam na akó sa ínyo. I am now saying
goodbye to you. Ang katapúsan nga paálam ni Rizál. The last farewell of
Rizal. Paálam na. Goodbye. Paalámi siá nga ang mga lampitáw nagaságap
sa íya. Warn him that the detectives are looking for him. Ginpaaláman
silá nga dáan sang katuyoán sang mga buyóng sa pagatí sang íla
nga minurô. They were warned beforehand of the intention of the
robbers to sack their village. Ipaálam sa íya nga----. Tell him
that----. Ginpaálam sa áton sang pangolohán nga ang bágyo magaági
dirí. We received a warning from the government that the typhoon
would pass over here. (cf. paáman, paadiós).

_paalangáy_, To please, humour, let one have his will or way, let
one do--as he pleases,--as he sees fit. Maálam gid siá magpaalangáy
sa kay Fuláno. He knows very well how to humour N.N. Ginapaalangayán
lang níla iníng bátà nga sutíl, kay bág-o lang nagáyo sa balatían. They
allow this naughty boy to do as he pleases, because he has only lately
recovered from an illness. (cf. pasugút).

_paálay, paaláy_, Caus. of álay. To tire, make stiff. Also: (especially
in (B): to worry, feel uneasy, be upset. Ang paglakát nagpaálay sang
ákon páa. The walk has made my legs stiff. Pagapaaláyon (pagapaalayón)
gid ang ímo láwas kon magpangabúdlay ka sa ínit. You will certainly
get tired and stiff, if you work in the heat of the sun. Ngáa nga
nagapaaláy ka gid túngud sinâ? Why do you worry about that? Why
does such a thing upset you? Anó ang ímo ginapaalayán (sang ímo
hunâhúnà)? What are you worrying about? What is it that makes you
feel so ill at ease?

_paálhom_, To cause to burn badly, etc. Caus. of álhom.

_paalíli_, To advance money at a high rate of interest, the loan to
be paid back in agricultural products. Paalilíha siá sing ápat ka
písos. Advance him four pesos. Ipaalíli lang sa íya iníng kwárta. Loan
him this money on the basis of an alíli contract. Ginpaalilíhan akó
níya sing isá ka gatús ka mángmang. He lent me one hundred pesos on
an alíli-contract. (pa, alíli).

_paalimbukád_, Caus. of alimbukád--to bubble, froth, etc.

_paalintabó_, Caus. of alintabó--to rise (of dust), etc.

_paalínton_, Transference, transfer, conveyance, communication,
tradition; to transfer, hand down, etc. (cf. alínton).

_paaliwános, paaliwanós_, Caus. of aliwános, aliwanós--to move about
freely, stir, etc.

_paaliwánsan_, A way out, resource, something to--rely upon,--fall
back upon,--turn to for help. Walâ na siá sing paaliwánsan. He has
now nowhere to go to for help. May paaliwánsan pa siá sa íya nga
kalisúd. There is yet a way out of his difficulty. (cf. aliwános,
paaliwános).

_paalób-ob_, To dip into water, etc. Caus. of alób-ob. Paalob-obá lang
ang ímo bayóng. Just dip your bamboo tube into the water and fill it.

_paalogán-gan_, Caus. of alogán-gan--to postpone, prolong,
procrastinate, etc. Nagapaalogán-gan siá sa pagpahumán sang íya
baláy. He is putting off the finishing of his house. He puts off
finishing his house.

_paáloy_, Caus. of áloy--to pretend to be sick, etc. Also: A
strike; to strike work, quit work, go on strike. May paáloy karón
sang mga mamumugón. There is at present a labour strike on. Indì
kamó magpaáloy. Don't go on strike. Don't quit work. Don't down
tools. (cf. wélga, Sp. huélga).

_paalúm_, To darken, make dark, blacken, tarnish, dull, make lose
whiteness or lustre, applied especially to a metal and to facial
expression. Ang túbig nagpaalúm sang íya síngsing, arítos, bórlas,
binángon, etc. His (Her) ring, ear-rings, tassels, bolo, etc. became
dark or lost their original (lustre) brightness through the action
of water. Indì ka magpaalúm sang ímo guyá. Don't look so black (sour,
cross). (cf. alúm, paitúm, pailóm).

_paalúm_, See paálhom.

_paalúm_, See paayón.

_paalumátay_, (H) To be, seem, pretend to be, dead with the limbs
relaxed. Sang paghákwat namón sa íya nagapaalumátay siá. When we
lifted him he was as if dead. Nagapaalumátay na ang masakít. The sick
person is now like one dead, lying listlessly and motionless. Indì
ka magpaalumátay. Don't pretend to be dead. Don't feign death.

_paálwak_, To spill, cause to spill, to slop. Indì mo pagpaalwakón
ang tubâ. Don't spill the tubâ. (pa, álwak; paályak id.).

_paályak_, See paálwak id.

_paályas_, To send flying off in all directions. Indì mo pagpaalyasón
ang humáy sa lusóng. Don't send the rice flying out of the mortar. (pa,
ályas).

_paamág_, To allure, entice, attract. Ang mga búlak nagapaamág sang
putyókan. Flowers attract bees. Ginpaamág níya si Fuláno sang íya ngga
kaúgdang kag maáyo nga batásan. She attracted N.N. by her modesty and
virtue. Paamagá si tútò sang kalan-ónon or ipaamág sa kay tútò ang
mga kalan-ónon. Gain the attachment of the little darling by giving
him some pastry. (pa, amág).

_paamagán_, Attraction, allurement, charm, bait, inducement; any
place that offers an attraction. (cf. ámag, amág).

_paámak_, Quick-burning material, kindling; also used as a
verb. Mangítà ka sing paámak nga idáig ko sa kaláyo. Look for some
kindling that I can use to light the fire with. Paamáki ang kaláyo. Get
some kindling for the fire. Put some kindling on the fire. (pa, ámak).

_paáman_, To prepare, make--, get--, ready; to warn, notify,
inform. Tungúd siní gánì ginapaáman ko sa tanán nga----. For this very
reason I am warning (giving notice to) everyone that----. Ginapaáman
níya nga dáan sa ákon nga----. He had informed me beforehand
that----. (pa, áman).

_paáman_, Caus. of áman--to super-add, throw in, give something
over and above what is due or agreed upon. To let--, make--, give
such an addition. Paamáni siá sing isá ka gántang. See to it that he
is given one ganta to the good, for good measure, into the bargain,
for luck. Ipaáman ko lang sa íya iníng isá ka búlig nga ságing. I'll
have this bunch of bananas thrown in for him. Nagapaáman pa gid siá
sing isá ka gántang. He is still asking for an additional ganta.

_paámba_, Caus. of ámba. To let, make, order to, sing. Paambahá
siá. Let her sing. Tell her to sing.

_paámbak_, Caus. of ámbak--to jump down.

_paámbas_, Caus. of ámbas. To make costly, expensive, dear.

_paámbaw_, (B) To exaggerate, boast, overstate, brag,
vaunt. Nagapaámbaw gid siá sang súgid. Ginapaambawán gid níya ang
súgid. He made the most of the story. He gave a highly coloured
account of the story. (cf. palabáw, palakás, wákal, hágak, etc.).

_paámbi_, To put, go, sit or stand in a place where the rain comes
in. Indì ka magpaámbi dirâ. Don't expose yourself there to the
rain. Don't let the rain drip on you. Indì mo pag-ipaámbi ang mga
galamitón. Don't place the furniture there where the rain comes
in. (pa, ámbi).

_paámbit_, To let share, share with, give a share or part to, make or
let participate in or partake of. Paambitón ko siá sináng mga páhò. I
will let him have some of those mangoes. Ipaámbit ko sa íya iníng
humáy. I am going to give him part of this rice. Paambitá akó sang
maáyo mo nga kapaláran. Let me share in your good fortune. Ginpaambitán
níya sa ákon ang íya kalípay. He let me share in his joy. He shared
his joy with me. (pa, ámbit).

_paamínhan_, Northward, to the north or towards the north; to go
north. Mapaamínhan siá. He will go northward. Nagpaamínhan siá. He
has gone north or in a northerly direction. (pa, amínhan).

_paámot_, To collect, cause or request to contribute; a collection,
contribution. Magbúhat kitá sing isá ka paámot. Let us get up
a collection. Paamóta silá sing tagnapúlò ka sentimós. Let them
contribute ten centavos each. Paamóti ang bág-o nga simbáhan. Try
to get contributions for the new church. Ginpaamótan níya sa íla ang
mga linggánay. He made them contribute towards the bells. (pa, ámot).

_paamúlya_, To move, shift one's quarters, go to, live at, transfer
one's abode to. Nagpaamúlya silá na sa umá. They have gone to
live at the farm. Sa isá ka simána magapaamúlya akó sa Négros nga
Nakatúndan. Next week I am going to move to West Negros. (pa, amúlya;
the simple "amúlya" is scarcely ever used).

_paánad_, To accustom to, make used to, break in to, inure, practise,
train. Paánda (Paanára) siá sa pagpangabúdlay. Accustom him to hard
work. Pinaánad níya ang íya ídò sa paglangóy. He trained his dog to
swim. (cf. pabuyó).


_paanád-ánad_, Dim. of paánad.

_paanák_, Caus. of anák. To beget, procreate, make pregnant; to get
another to be godfather or godmother at a christening, ask another
to be godparent; to act as a midwife, assist at childbirth. Paángka
(paánka, paanaká) si Fuláno sang imó bátà. Ipaanák mo ang ímo bátà
sa kay Fuláno. Get N.N. to be godfather to your child. Si Fulána amó
ang nagpaanák sa íya. N.N. assisted her at childbirth. (cf. panganák;
pakúgus, pakapút; pamábdus).

_paananáy_, To do slowly, gently, etc. Caus. of ananáy.

_paándam_, To forewarn, make beware or take care, put one on
one's guard, caution against danger, warn beforehand, inculcate
carefulness. Paandamá silá. Let them be careful. Tell them to be wary,
to be on their guard. (cf. ándam, paálam).

_páang_, Hot, sultry, close, stuffy, oppressive, warm, sweltry;
to be or get hot, etc. Nagpáang ang ímo baláy kútub nga ginilísan
mo ang atóp nga nípà sing (sang) sin. Your house is hot, since you
exchanged the nípà roof for one of galvanized iron. Napaángan akó
dirí siníng baláy. I am feeling hot here in this house. It strikes
me that this house is hot. (cf. gín-ot, bóhot, ínit).

_paáng-ang_, To lisp, babble, mumble, talk very indistinctly, as a baby
wishing to be fondled or played with, etc. Indì ka magpaáng-ang. Don't
mumble (lisp). (cf. áng-ang----to stammer, etc.).

_paáng-ang_, To wish to be petted, etc. See paánggà.

_paángay_, Caus. of ángay. To conform to harmonize or go with, accord
with, correspond to, be or make congruous. Magpaángay ka sa íya. Be
like him. Imitate him. Paangáya ang ímo delárgo sa ímo báyò. Make
your trousers go with your jacket.

_paánggà_, To allow oneself--, wish--, to be petted, fondled, caressed,
made a pet of. Paanggaí siá. Let him pet or fondle you. (cf. ánggà,
paáng-ang).

_paánggid_, To compare with, liken to, illustrate by a similitude
or simile, make or institute a comparison between. Ipaánggid, mo
ang isá sa isá. Compare the one with the other. Ang kabúhì sang táo
ginapaánggid sa umalági nga búlak. The life of man is like a passing
flower. (pa, ánggid).

_paáni_, To let harvest, order to harvest rice (with the rice-cutter
called kayóg). Ipaáni, sa íla iníng talámnan. Let them harvest this
field. Paánya silá. Order them to harvest rice. (pa, áni).

_paanó, paáno_, How. Paanó siá? How is he? Paanó ang pagtabók náton
siníng subâ? How are we going to cross this river. (pa, anó, ámpat,
ándot).

_paáno_, To give, hand over, put in possession of. Indì mo pagipaáno
sa íya ang áton dútà. Don't put him in possession of our land.

_paanóáno_, How. Dim. of paanó, paáno.

_paánod_, Caus. of ánod. Ipaánod--or--paanóra (paanóda) ang kawáyan
sa subâ. Float the bamboo down the river.

_paánok_, Caus. of ánok. Paanóka ang kamóti, lángkà, ságing, etc. Boil
the sweet potatoes, the jack-fruit the bananas, etc. soft.

_paápok_, Caus. of ápok--to fly off, etc. Also: to come to, land,
light, come to by chance, be driven to, settle down. (In the second
meaning cf. lásog, patúpling).

_paápol_, To thicken, to encrust, etc. Caus. of ápol.

_paarádo_, Caus. of arádo--to plough. Paaradóha siá sang ákon umá. Let
him (Tell him to) plough my field. (cf. padáro).

_paárag_, To make--, let--, order to--, select or choose (ripe fruit
from a tree, etc.). Paarága siá sing balátong. Let him pick only
(seek out and select the) ripe beans. (cf. árag, papílì).

_paárak_, To make a noise as of many voices, falling stones, etc.,
to volley, clatter, rattle, patter. Paaráka ang mga bató sa íya
baláy. Paaráki ang íya baláy sing mga bató. Make his house resound
with the noise of stones (thrown at it). (cf. árak, pabárak).

_paaráng_, To warm, make warm. Paaráng ka ánay dirí. Warm yourself
here. Magpaaráng ka sang ímo kamót sa kaláyo. Warm your hands at the
fire. (pa, aráng).

_paaráp-arápan_, Tranquillity, rest, pause, peace, quiet, cessation
from work or trouble. (cf. ipótan, pasingadtoán, kapahuwáyan).


_paaríng-ing_, To warm, warm up, heat, make warm. Paaring-ingí ang
maís. Heat (warm) the maize by placing it near, but not on, the
fire. (cf. arínging).

_paarúm_, (B) To darken, make dark, etc. See paalúm,
paágdom. Nagapaarúm siá sang íya guyá. He knits his brows. He is
scowling. Ginpaarúm sang ulán ang binángon. The rain blackened the
bolo. The rain took the sheen off the bolo.

_paarumátay_, (B) To pretend to be dead, etc. See paalumátay.

_paarús, paárus_, To reach, come to a--stop,--halt, cease to go on,
pull up at. Nakapaarús siá dídto sa káhoy. He came to a halt there
at the tree. Dídto na siá nakapaarús sa Négros. His journey came to
an end at Negros. He stopped when he came to Negros. (cf. paamúlya).

_páas_, To dispel, dissolve, scatter. See púas.

_paásik_, To splash, cause to splash or fly off. Paasíka ang
túbig. Make the water splash, spatter. Paasíki siá sing inágsap,
bató, etc. Send the splinters, stone-chips, etc. flying in his
direction. (pa, ásik).

_paáslum_, To sour, make sour, allow to go sour. Paaslumá ang
sópas. Make the soup sour, put some vinegar into the soup. Paaslumí
ang ísdà. Make the fish a little sour, give the fish a flavour of
vinegar. (pa, áslum).

_paasó_, To fumigate, fume, cause smoke, smoke, out, treat with
smoke, raise a smoke. Paasohá (Paáswa) ang kaláyo. Let the fire
smoke. Cause the fire to smoke. Paasohí (Paáswi) iníng hulút. Fumigate
this room. Treat this room with smoke. Ipaasó iníng mga dáhon sa
kaláyo. Put these leaves on the fire to raise a smoke. (cf. asó).

_paát_, Pause, interval, interstice, cessation, interruption, stop;
to cease, pause, etc. (cf. luát, liát, puút, langán).

_paatón-áton_, To work--, look out--, be concerned--, for ourselves
alone, be selfish. (cf. pailáíla, paiyáíya, pamiyómíyo).

_paatúbang_, To put in front of, confront with, hold before one's
eyes. Ginpaatubángan níya ang buyóng sang pusíl. He confronted the
robber with the rifle. He pointed the rifle at the robber. (pa,
atúbang).

_paáwas_, Cause to overflow. Ipaáwas ang túbig. Paawása ang túbig. Make
the water overflow. Paawási sing túbig ang ímong umá. Cause water
to flow over your field, irrigate your field. Also: Emissio seminis,
pollution (pa, áwas).

_paawasán_, Irrigation, contrivance to cause water to
overflow. Paawasán túbig--or--paawasán sang túbig. An irrigation
system. (paáwas).

_paáyaw_, To complete, make up, settle up, square accounts, pay the
remainder or balance, satisfy, make up what is lacking or needed still,
add what is--wanting,--short,--deficient. Paayáwa siá sang kakulángan
sang humáy, kwárta, kalámay, etc. Make it up to him for what is short
of the rice, money, sugar, etc. (cf. áyaw).

_paayáw-áyaw_, To do to one's heart's content, especially said of
eating, drinking, feasting, or the like. Makapaayáwáyaw na kitá sang
káon sang páhò, kay madámò ang lútò. We can now eat mangoes to our
heart's content, for there are many ripe ones. (cf. áyaw, paáyaw).

_paáyo_ (H) To make better, mend, repair, improve, heal; order to
make better, etc. Paayóha ang íya hubág. Try to heal his boil or to
relieve the pain of his boil. Paayóha ang pánday sang ímo látok. Get
the carpenter to repair your table. (cf. áyo).

_paayón, paáyon_, In the direction of; to go towards, make for; to
point or direct towards, aim at. Pinaayonán níya akó sang íya nga
lúthang. He pointed his rifle at me. (cf. áyon, pa).

_paayón-áyon_, To speak amicably to, treat well, make amenable, coax,
wheedle, ingratiate oneself with, treat with all kindness, bring round
by sweet talk. Paayónayóni siá, agúd íya ikáw bulígan. Speak nicely
to him, that he may help you. Coax him to help you. Pinaayónayónan
níya akó sa pagpahulám sa íya sing pílak. He spoke to me very suavely
in order to get me to lend him some money. (cf. lígay).

_pabaáng-báang_, To heat; warm oneself, especially by taking hot
liquids. Pabaángbaánga ang ímo solóksolók sa paginúm sing maínit nga
tsa--or--maginúm ka sing maínit nga tsa sa pagpabaángbáang sang ímo
solóksolók. Warm your stomach by drinking hot tea. Drink some hot
tea to warm your stomach. (cf. pa, baángbáang, painítínit).

_pabábà, pabába_, To be amenable to reason or admonitions, be
reasonable. Indì siá magpabábà. He will not listen to reason. You
cannot reason with him. (pa, bábà).

_pabágtì_, To publish, make public, make known, tell
everybody. Ginpabágtì níya ang tinágò níla nga kasugtánan. He made
known their secret agreement. Indì mo pagipabágtì ang nahanabô
dirí. Don't tell everybody of what has happened here. (cf. bágtì,
pabantálà, pabútyag, pabalahúbà, buyágyag).

_pabáhin_, Caus. of báhin--to divide, etc.

_pabákas_, To work hard, strive for the mastery, vie with, contend,
compete, make great efforts. Pabákas kitá kon sín-o makadángat
sing úna sa putókputokán sang búkid. Let us see which of us will
reach the summit of the mountain first. Nagpabákas silá kon sín-o
sa íla ang maúna makatápus. They tried which of them would finish
first. (cf. bákas, paindísíndis).

_pabakasáy_, Competition, contention, emulation, rivalry, trial of
skill or strength, outdoing each other or intriguing against each
other; to use every means to beat one's adversary or opponent,
etc. (cf. pabákas).

_pabalólon_, Caus. of balólon--to wind or roll up, etc. (cf. palolós).

_pabálon_, Caus. of bálon--to take provisions along, etc.

_pabángdan_, To attribute to, inculpate, impute, lay the guilt,
etc. upon someone else, accuse, denounce, make responsible;
blame. Indì ka magpabángdan sa ákon sang ímo sayúp. Don't blame me
for your mistake. Ginpabángdan níla sa manugbúlung ang kamatáyon sang
íla anák, kay, konó, gindapátan níya sing maláin nga bulúng. They
attributed the death of their child to the doctor, for, they said,
he applied a harmful prescription. (cf. bangúd, pabangúd).

_pabangúd_, To attribute, shift the blame on, impugn, incriminate,
tax or charge with, lay to one's door or charge, point an accusing
finger at, etc. See pabángdan. Indì ka magpabangúd sa ímo isigkatáo
sang ímo mga sayúp. Indì mo pagipabangúd sa ímo isigkatáo ang ímo
mga sayúp. Don't blame your neighbour for your own faults or mistakes.

_pabánok_, To be quiet, calm, tranquil, imperturbable, placid, serene,
make no resistance to scoldings or even beatings, to put up with, to
bear silently or patiently, ignore, pay no attention to. Bisán ánhon
mo siá nagapabánok lang (siá). Whatever you do to him or however you
treat him, he remains imperturbable. Magpabánok ka lang bisán ánhon
ka ni tátay mo. Just bear it in silence, whatever your father may do
to you. (pa, bánok, but the simple "bánok" is not used).

_pabánol_, See pabánok id. (cf. hípus, pabungúlbúngul, waláy pagsapák).

_pabantálà_, To circulate, give notice to, notify, propagate, publish,
spread abroad, give out, announce. Ipabantálà mo sa íla nga----. Make
known to them that----. Pabantalái ang minurô sang bág-o nga kasogoán
sang kasapulán-bánwa. Inform the village of the new order of the
Municipal Council. Pabantaláa si Hosé sang magaabút nga bágyo sa
búg-os nga bánwa. Let José give warning to the whole town of the
coming hurricane. (cf. pa, bantálà).

_pabará_, Caus. of bará--to run aground, etc. Also: to do--as one
pleases,--to one's heart's content, follow one's own inclination,
have one's own way. (cf. patúyang, pagusá, pagústo).

_pabárak_, Caus. of bárak--to clatter, patter, etc. See
paárak. (bárak--árak).

_pabáskug_, To strengthen, stiffen, make--strong,--stiff, confirm,
reinforce, brace, fortify, invigorate, refreshen, to raise
(one's voice, etc.). Pabaskugá ang ímo kabubút-on. Strengthen your
will. Ipabáskug sa labandéra ang ímo delárgo. Let the washerwoman
starch and iron your trousers. Ginpabáskug níla ang íla láwas,
kalág, etc, They refreshed (refreshened) themselves, fortified their
souls, etc. Pabaskugá ang ímo tíngug. Raise your voice, speak aloud
(louder). (cf. báskug).

_pabátà_, Caus. of bátà--to give birth to a child, etc. Also: to help
or assist at childbirth, at a lying-in, at an accouchement, said of a
midwife. Sín-o ang nagpabátà sa íya? Who was her midwife? Who assisted
her at her delivery? Pabatáa ánay ang ímo asáwa kag ugáling magkádto
ka sa Négros. First let your wife give birth and then afterwards go
to Negros. (cf. paanák).

_pabayâ, pabáyà_, To leave alone, leave, leave off, quit, abandon,
give the slip to, desert, forsake, throw up, give up, take no
concern or interest in, disregard, ignore, be heedless, of. Pabayái
lang silá. Just leave them alone. Simply let them do what they
like. Ginpabayáan--or--ginpabáy-an lang níla ang íla mga kabatáan sa
baláy. They left their children alone at home. Nagapabayâ lang silá
sang íla trabáho. They are quitting work. They are leaving their work
undone. They are throwing up their job. (pa, báyà).

_pabayó_, To make or let pound (rice, etc.). Magpabayó ka siníng
humáy--or--ipabayó mo iníng humáy sa manugbáyo. Have this rice pounded
by the professional rice pounder. Have the rice-pounder pound the
rice. (pa, bayó).

_pabáyò_, To provide a jacket, etc. (pa, báyò). Pabayói ang
bátà. Provide they boy with a jacket. Ipabáyò mo iníng hénero sa
bátà. Make the boy a jacket from this cloth. Mapabáyò (magapabáyò)
pa akó ánay sa ákon bátà. I am first going to dress my boy in a
jacket. (pa, báyò).

_pabelyón_, (Sp. pabellon) Tent, pavilion, a small summer-house,
kiosk, roofed in tent-like selling-booth or bandstand, etc.; a banner.

_pabendisyón_, To receive or go to receive the blessing after
child-birth. Nagapabendisyón karón ang asáwa ni Fuláno. N.N.'s wife
is now going to receive the blessing after childbirth. (pa, bendisyón).

_pabendíta_, To have, or get, something blessed. Nagpabendíta siá sang
íya bág-o nga medálya. She had her new medal blessed. Ginpabendíta níya
sa Párì ang íya nga koréa. She had her cord (belt, girdle, cincture)
blessed by the priest. Ipabendíta mo sa Párì ang ímo bág-o nga
baláy. Have your new house blessed by the priest. (pa, bendíta (Sp.).

_pabigóng_, To warp, bend, distort, contort, buckle, screw, deform,
crush, pull out of shape, wrench out of shape, turn or twist out of the
regular shape. Pabigongá ang kálò mo, agúd índì masiláwan sang ádlaw
ang ímo mga matá. Turn down the brim of your hat, so that your eyes
may not be dazzled by the sun. Sín-o ang nagpabigóng siníng sin? Who
has bent this sheet of zinc? Ginpabigóng sang ádlaw ang bág-o nga
tápì. The new plank was warped by the heat of the sun. (pa, bigóng).

_pabilî_, To price, set a price upon, charge, ask for, value at,
appraise the work of, fix the price of, quote a price, demand (so
much). Pilá ang pagpabilí mo sang ímo karabáw? What do you ask for your
buffalo? Kon índì mo siá pagpabilihán (pagpabílyan) sing mahál, báklon
ko. If you do not charge too much for it, I will buy it. (pa, bilí).

_pabílo_, (Sp. pabilo) Lamp-wick; wick of a candle. Paolbohá ang
pabílo. Pasálpa ang pabílo. Turn the wick up. Turn the wick down.

_pabísti_, Caus. of bíste. To dress, clothe, attire, deck out, garb,
array, trick out, bedight, bedizen, put a dress on somebody. Pabistihí
ang nóbya. Dress up (Deck out) the bride. Ipabísti sa íya iníng térno
nga mapulá. Dress her up in this red gown (suit).

_pabíyà, pabiyâ_, See pabáyà, pabayâ--to leave alone, quit, abandon,
relinquish, etc.

_pábo_, (Sp. pavo) Turkey (the bird).

_pabór_, (Sp. favor) Favour, help, service, support, assistance, act
of kindness, countenance, protection. Pabór ang hangín--or--may pabór
ang hángin. The wind is favourable. Nagpalayág silá sa pabór (sang)
nga hangín. They hoisted sail to a favourable (fair) wind. (cf. líhog,
maáyo, kaayóhan, ápin, búlig, tábang).

_paboríta_, (Sp. favorita) In some card-games a combination of cards
resulting in a stake being played for what is equal to a double
politána. May paboríta silá--or--nagapaboríta silá. They are playing
for a paboríta stake. (cf. politána, napolitána).

_paboróy-bóroy_, To deny the possession of, assert the lack of,
to say "I have none, I cannot, I am unable to, etc.". Indì mo akó
pagpaboróyboróyan, kay nahibaloán ko nga ikáw manggaránon. Don't tell
me that you cannot, for I know you are rich. Nagapaboróybóroy lang
siá, ápang madámò ang íya nga pílak. He acts as if he had no money,
but he has plenty.

_pábrika_, (Sp. fábrica) Factory, works, mill; fabrication,
fabric. (cf. galingán, dawdáwan).


_pahuás_, To put off till tomorrow; to postpone, procrastinate. Indì
mo pagpabuasán ang ímo mabúhat karón. Don't put off till tomorrow
what you can do to-day. (pa, buás).

_pabúdlay_, To tire, jade, exhaust, wear out, knock up, make tired,
fatigue. Pabudlayá siá. Make him tired. Tire him out. Ipabúdlay mo sa
íya iníng trabáho. Tire him with this task. Indì ka magpabúdlay sang
ímo karabáw sing lakás. Don't tire your buffalo overmuch. (pa, búdlay).

_pabudóng_, (B) To be shy, coy, timid, afraid, bashful, affect shyness
or coyness. Indì ka magpabudóng. Don't be shy. Don't pretend to be
coy. (cf. pa, budóng).

_pabugál_, Pride, haughtiness, overbearing, insolence; to be
proud, haughty, vain, stuck-up, arrogant, overweening, conceited,
bumptious, puffed up, pompous, pompose, ostentatious, pretentious,
supercilious, to vaunt, show off, boast. Indì ka magpabugál. Don't
be proud. Nagapabugál siá. He is getting proud, is showing off,
is giving himself airs. (pa, bugál).

_pabugál-búgal_, Dim. and Freq. of pabugál. To be a little proud, etc.

_pabúg-at_, To make heavy, increase the weight of, add to the weight
of, add to one's burden, to burden with, weigh down with, crush with,
load with. Indì ka magpabúg-at sang íya dalá. Don't add any more to
the weight of his burden. Pabug-atí siá. Give him a heavy load to
carry. Let him have a heavy load. (pa, búg-at).

_pabúgtoy_, To slacken, cause to be slow or remiss; to linger, tarry,
loiter; to be lazy, slack, remiss, careless or negligent. (pa, búgtoy).

_pabúhì_, Caus. of búhì. Iníng bántud ginapabuhían (ginapabúy-an)
níla sang íla mga háyup. They let their cattle graze at large on this
fenced-in plateau.

_pabuhî-búhì_, Dim. and Freq. of pabúhì. Nagapabuhîbúhì na gid lang
siá sa íya asáwa sang mga pasipála nga siá íya walá sing pagígnuk. He
now gives his wife full liberty to abuse him in vile language without
retaliating, without remonstrating.

_pabukál_, Cause. of bukál--to boil, etc. Pabukalá ang túbig. Bring
the water to the boil. Boil the water. See that the water is altogether
boiling. Pabukalí akó sing túbig. Boil some water for me.

_pabulá, pábula_, (Sp. fábula) Fable, story, yarn, fabrication,
invention, falsehood, lie, legend; to tell stories, lies,
falsehoods, to make up things. Ginapábula man lang níya ináng mga
butáng. Those things he is talking about are mere inventions (lies,
falsehoods). (cf. sugígsúgid, butíg, pasúni, patúga).

_pabulág_, Caus. of bulág--to separate, etc. Pabulagá silá. Cause
(order) them to separate. Dílì mo siá pagpabulagán sang íya
asáwa. Don't allow him to divorce his wife.

_pabúlag_, Caus. of búlag--to blind, make blind. Also: to overlook,
disregard, let pass, blink, wink at, connive at, take no notice of,
act as if blind, close (shut) one's eyes to.

_pabulág-búlag_, Dim. and Freq. of pabulág. Nagapabulágbúlag gid
lámang silá siníng mga butáng--or--ginapabulágbulágan gid lámang níla
iní nga mga butáng. They are paying no attention to these things,
do not take any notice of these things, are blind to these matters.

_pabulúng_, Caus. of bulúng--to doctor, give medicine, etc. Magpabulúng
ka sa maáyo nga manugbúlung. Go and see a good doctor. Call in
a good doctor. Ipabulúng mo siá sa kay Fuláno. Have him attended
(prescribed for, treated) by N.N. Pabúlnga siá sa kay Fuláno. Let
him try to cure N.N. Allow him to doctor N.N. Ang amó nga bulúlngan
ginpabúlngan ko man sa kay nánay ko. I had my mother also treated
(seen to) in that hospital.

_pabungúl_, To affect deafness, turn a deaf ear to, stop one's ears to,
be stubborn, unheeding, disobedient. Nagapabungúl gid lang siá sa tanán
nga mga pagláygay. He is deaf to all admonitions. (cf. pakabungúl).

_pabungúl-búngul_, Dim. and Freq. of pabungúl. Indì ka
magpabungúlbúngul sa maáyo nga mga láygay. Don't be deaf to good
advice. Ginapabungúlbungúlan lang níya ang íya katarúngan. He is deaf
to his reasoning, pays no attention to his argument, does not want
to listen to his remonstrance or the like.

_pabuní_, To publish, spread, make known, give out. (cf. pabútyag,
buyágyag, balahúbà, pahibaló, paháyag).


_pabútyag_, To disclose, make public, publish, divulge, reveal, tell,
let out, let into, break (a secret), betray. Indì mo pagipabútyag
iníng kasugtánan náton. Carefully guard the secret of this agreement
of ours. Don't make public this our agreement. Ginpabútyag níya ang
salâ nga tinágò ni Fuláno. He made known (revealed, divulged) N.N.'s
secret fault. Magpabútyag ka siní sa bánwa. Make this known in the
town. Napabutyagán na silá sang amó nga hitabô. The news of that event
has already reached them (has been spread amongst them). (cf. pa,
bútyag, pabágtì, pabantálà, pahibaló, pasáyod, pabalahúbà).

_pabuyágyag_, Caus. of buyágyag--to divulge, expose, etc.

_pabuyán-búyan_, To neglect, postpone, procrastinate, pay no attention
to, disregard. (cf. buyánbúyan, paliyánliyan, paluyánlúyan).

_pabúylog_, Caus. of búylog--to accompany, go with, come with;
sympathize with, etc.

_pabúyò_, To throw--, strike--, knock--, down, to floor, lay level
with the floor. Pinabúyò níya siá sa kalóg. He threw him into the
ditch. (cf. banál, túmba, pilák, lámba, tíklod, tulúd).

_pabuyó_, Caus. of buyó. To train, accustom to, inure, practise,
drill, cause to form a habit, etc.

_pabuyó-búyo_, Dim. and Freq. of pabuyó.

_padag-ánay_, To compete against each other, contend with, vie with,
strive with, try to outdo each other (one another). (cf. padáug,
padaúg).

_padágas_, Caus. of dágas--to pick, pluck (fruit with pole and hook,
etc.). Padagása si Hosé sang dúldul. Order José to gather the capsules
of the kapok tree with pole and hook. Padagási akó sing páhò. Get
me some mangoes picked (plucked) straight from the tree. Ipadágas sa
ákon ang mga páhò dídto sa tabók sang sapâ. Permit me to gather some
mangoes there on the other side of the brook. (padúgus from dúgus id.).

_padág-as_, To compete, contend with, vie with, strive with, exert
oneself much in order to outdo another. Padág-as (magpadág-as)
kitá kon sín-o ang maúna makatápus. Let us see who will finish
first. (cf. pabákas, paindísíndis, paunáúna).

_padág-ay_, To gratify another's wish, indulge another, let
another have his will, wink at, accommodate oneself to, spoil (a
child). Nagságsag ang íla anák, kay sang diótay pa siá íla ginpadagayán
sang tanán níya nga luyáglúyag. Their son turned out bad, because
when he was young they granted him everything he wished for,--they
let him have everything he wanted. (cf. pasugút, pagústo, patúyang,
pagusá, pasamíyang, pakaiyáníyan).

_padágay_, To show, exhibit, expose, etc. (pa, dágay). Also:
To think deeply or well, consider, ponder, exert one's mental
faculties. Padagáya ang ímo hunâhúnà. Think it over well. Turn it over
well in your mind. Padagáyi sing maáyo ang ímo palatikángan. Give
some serious thought to your business. Consider well the state of
your business. (cf. painóíno, tamúd, pamalándong, basóbáso, hunâhúnà).

_padág-pádag_, To kick or stamp (as a disappointed or angry child
often does). (cf. pudágpúdag, pundákpúndak).

_padagúndun_, To make plain wickerwork or weave cloth
without any special design; to perform quickly, expeditiously,
carelessly. Padagunduná lang ang paghabúl siníng háblon, ang paglála
siníng baníg, etc. Weave this cloth, this mat, etc. quite plain,
(without any particular design, figures, coloured stripes or the
like). Ginpadagúndun gid lang níla ang pagpatíndog sang baláy. They
built the house rather carelessly, (not paying much attention to plan,
style, etc.).

_pada-ítol_, To argue, dispute or quarrel about something that one of
the disputants has to perform and none of them likes to, to push to and
fro. Nagapadaítol silá kon sín-o sa íla ang magtíg-ang, ang mangáhoy,
etc.--or--ginapadaitólan níla ang pagtíg-ang, pangáhoy, etc. They
are disputing or quarrelling as to which of them should boil rice,
collect firewood, etc. (cf. sabtánay; tudlánay (sabát, tulúd), paítol).

_padák_, A lump, a small compact mass (of sugar, etc.; cf. parák
id.) Podporá iníng padák nga kalámay. Crumble this lump of sugar
to powder.

_padalá_, (H) Caus. of dalá. To send, transmit, despatch, forward,
remit. Ipadalá iní sa íya. Send him this. Padálhi akó sing sulát. Send
me a letter.


_padalágan_, Caus. of dalágan--to run. To trot, gallop (a horse,
meaning to cause to trot, gallop). Padalagána ang mga bátà. Make the
boys run, order them to run. Padalagáni si Fuláno sa kay Hosé. Order
José to run over to N.N.

_padalán_, To send one away or out on the road, i.e. to put off
by excuse, refuse, neglect, take no notice of. Nagpadalán siá sa
ákon. He put me off by excuses or pretexts. Indì ka magpadalán sang
ámon tábad. Don't neglect coming to our banquet. Kon magabút siá dirâ
sa pagsokót sang ákon útang sa íya (ipadalán) padalanán mo siá sa
pagsilíng nga----. When he comes here to demand payment of my debt
to him, send him away with the pretext that----. (cf. dálan, balíbad).

_padalás_, Caus. of dalás. To be hasty, impetuous, precipitate,
thoughtless; to make (cause to) run a horse, etc. Indì mo pagpadalasón
ang ímo nga hámbal, kóndì hunâhunáon mo ánay sing ángay. Don't talk
precipitately, but think first well (what you are going to say). Don't
talk hastily (rashly), but give a proper amount of thought to what
you want to say. Padalasá ang kabáyo. Make the horse run fast (faster).

_padalasâ_, Caus. of dalasâ--to run against, collide with.

_padaláwat_, (H) To sell rice, maize, beans, peas, etc. Ipadaláwat
mo sa ákon ang duhá ka pásong sang ímo humáy. Sell me two
bushels of your rice. Padalawáta siá sang ímo humáy. Sell him
your rice. Let him buy your rice. Padalawáti ang pinatubás mo nga
humáy sing limá ka pásong. Sell five bushels of the rice you have
harvested. (cf. daláwat--to buy (rice, etc.).

_padalî_, Caus. of dalî--to be quick, etc. To hurry another,
hasten another, hustle (i.e. speed up work), urge to go faster,
quicken, cause another to be quick, animate, expedite. Padaliá
siá. Hurry him up. Tell him to make haste. Hasten him on. Urge him
on faster. Ginpadalî níla ang pagkaáyo sang íla baláy, kay malapít
na lang ang tingúlan. They hastened the work (made a quick job of)
repairing their house, because the rainy season was near.

_padalúndun_, To take or carry along, push on, move; wash down
(food), distribute (blood through the veins, etc.). Ang mga
ilímnon nagapadalúndun sang áton ginakáon--or--ang áton ginakáon
ginapadalundunán sang mga ilímnon. Beverages wash down (carry along)
the food we take. Ipadalúndun sa kán-on iníng báso nga bíno. Wash
down the rice with this glass of wine.

_padámol_, Caus. of dámol--thick, etc. To thicken, make
thick. Ginapadámol níya ang padér. He ordered the wall to be made
thick. He had the wall made thicker. Padamóla ang bibínka. Make the
bibinca-cake thick. Cook thick bibinca-cakes.

_padánag, padán-ag_, To make clear, bright, light up,
illuminate. (cf. pasánag). (dánag--sánag).

_padánas_, To drag, pull, trail, etc. See pagúyud. (dánas--gúyud).

_padándan_, Caus. of dándan--to weave plain cloth, etc. Also: to
cross-examine, heckle, ask many questions in quick succession. Indì
ka magpadándan sa ákon. Don't ply me with (ask me) so many questions.

_padangól_, To smoke a big cigar, to fill the mouth with a big cigar,
or the like. Abáw, nagapadangól siá. Look, she has crammed a big cigar
into her mouth. Indì ka magpadangól sa atubángan sang mga bisíta. Don't
smoke such big cigars in the presence of visitors. (cf. padungál).

_padánlug_, To make slippery. Padanlugá ang dálan. Make the
road slippery. Padanlogí ang tinóla sing tagábang. Make the
side-dish slippery, i.e. easy to swallow, by putting in some
tagábang-leaves. (pa, dánlug).

_padánò_, To tell stories, spread untrue tales or reports. Sín-o ang
nagpadánò sang amó nga mga butáng? Who spread such tales? Indì mo
pag-ipadánò ang súbung sinâ nga mga pábula. Don't repeat such tales
or fables. Also: to backbite, detract, calumniate, slander.

_padápat_, To apply, cause to apply or put on, etc. Ipadápat sa íya
iníng bulúng. Apply this lotion to him. Padapáta ang ganháan. Have
the door closed. Pinadapátan níla ang íya hubág sing bulúng. They
had a sedative put on (applied to) his boil. (pa, dápat).

_padáplà_, To roast meat (of an animal just killed). Magpadáplà kitá
ánay sing kárne siníng naíhaw nga báka. Let us roast some meat of
this cow that has just been slaughtered. Ginpakán-an níla sa ákon ang
íla pinadáplà. They let me partake of their roast meat. They gave me
some of their roast meat to eat. Padaplaí man kamí. Roast some meat
for us too. (cf. bóog, íhaw, súgba, sílab, ílab).

_padáplang_, Caus. of dáplang--to splutter.

_padáro_, Caus. of dáro--to plough. Padaróha siá siníng talámnan. Order
him to plough this field.

_pádas_, Vertebra, spine, chine, backbone, spinal column (of cows,
pigs, etc.; cf. páras id.).

_padás_, Sharp, cutting, sarcastic, satirical, cynical, ironic,
acrimonious, sardonic, withering, trenchant, incisive (of speech),
rough-spoken, having a sharp tongue; to be or become rough-spoken,
etc. Padás siá sing hámbal. He is rough-spoken. Nagpapadás siá sang
íya panabát. His answer was cutting (sharp). He answered roughly. He
retorted sarcastically. Mahínay siá sing hámbal sádto, ápang karón
nagpadás na. Formerly he was gentle of speech, but now he has become
quite churlish. (cf. parás).

_padasô-dasô_, Recklessness, thoughtlessness, carelessness; careless,
reckless, thoughtless; to do carelessly, etc. Sa padasôdasô nga
paági. In a careless (reckless) way. (cf. dasô).

_padasón_, Caus. of dasón--to follow, etc. Padasoná si Hosé sa kay
Pédro. Padasoní si Pédro sa kay Hosé. Let José follow Peter. Order José
to follow Peter. Ipadasón ko sa íya ang íya sologoón. I shall order
his servant to follow him. I'll send his servant after him. Ang beláda
pinadasonán (pinadásnan) níla sing isá ka maáyo nga panihápon. After
the play they served a good supper. They followed up the play with
a good supper. (cf. padáson, pasunúd).

_padáson_, To follow or do in a regular order or succession. Padasóna
ang ímo mga buluhatón. Perform your duties in a regular and
orderly manner. Padasónon mo ang mga bátà. Line the children up in
order (according to size, by grades or the like). Ang mga soldádo
nagapadáson. The soldiers are lined up in order (according to their
size, etc.).

_padaúg_, Caus. of daúg--to win, overcome. Also: to surrender, yield,
give in, submit, be humble, cede, capitulate.

_padáug_, To compete, try to outdo or subdue, contend, vie with,
strive with. Nagapadag-ánay silá. They are competing with each other,
trying to outdo one another.

_padáus_, To remonstrate, argue, try to overcome, quarrel, bicker and
bite, to urge, incite against, overwhelm with. Nagapadausáy silá. They
are arguing (remonstrating) with each other. Indì kamó magpadáus. Don't
quarrel. Pinadaúsan akó níya sang idô. He set his dog on me. Ipadáus
mo ang idô sa báboy. Send the dog after the pig. Ginapadaúsan lang
akó níya sing hámbal, bisán walâ sing katarúngan. He abused me in
strong language, though he had no reason for it. (cf. padag-ánay,
sabtánay, país-is).

_padáut_, Caus. of dáut--to injure.

_padawô_, Caus. of dawô--to receive, etc. Also: transfer, transmission,
tradition; traditional, transmitted, handed (handing) down (to
posterity).

_padáyà_, Caus. of dáyà--to cheat.

_padayáw_, To be vain, ostentatious, to show off. Nagapadayáw siá. She
is vain, likes to show off. (pa, dayáw).

_padáyon_, To continue, keep on, keep going, keep at it, keep up,
keep on foot, hold out, persist, carry on, stick to, prolong, cause
to continue, remain or stay. Padayóna ang ímo hámbal. Continue your
speech. Padayóni ang ákon baláy siníng mga bisíta. Let these visitors
stay at my home. Ipadáyon ko sa ímo ang ákon dútà kon magkasugtánay
kitá sa nahanungúd sang hinákay. I will continue to let you have
my field on lease, if we can agree upon the rent (payment for the
lease). (pa, dáyon).

_padér_, (Sp. pared) Stone wall, masonry (of stones, bricks, tiles,
cement, or the like).

_pádià_, Nickname, teasing by calling out another's nickname; to tease,
bait, badger. Padiaí siá túbtub nga magákig. Tease him till he gets
angry. (cf. bánsag).

_padías_, To incite, urge, instigate, set on (a dog, etc.). Indì
ka magpadías sa íya sang ímo idô. Don't set your dog on
him. (cf. país-is).

_padíhut_, Contrivance, machination, means, scheme, plan,
artifice; to contrive, look out for, find ways and means, manage,
take steps to accomplish, to bring about. Padihúti sing maáyo ang
ímo nga katuyoán. Try hard to find ways and means of carrying out
(accomplishing) your plan (intention, scheme). (cf. díhut, padihútan,
pandahútan).

_padihútan_, Contrivance, means, machination, resources, instrument,
artifice, scheme. (cf. padíhut, pahitôhítò, patúga).

_padimát_, Caus. of dimát--to attract, draw, allure, etc.

_padíngkì_, A kind of bread made from maize.

_pádios_, To slip out of, glide out, escape. Nakapádios ang báso sa
ákon kamót. The glass slipped out of my hand. Gindakúp ko ang manók,
ápang nakapádios siá liwát sa ákon kamót. I caught the chicken, but
it escaped again from my grasp. Andam ka, agúd índì makapádios ang
líbro nga ginabása mo. Take care not to let the book you are reading
slip out of your hand. (cf. palús, pádlus).

_pádis_, (Sp. par, pares) Even; pair. Pádis ukón lúnes? Odd or
even? (Sp. pares ó nones?) Isá ka pádis nga sinélas. A pair of chinese
slippers. (cf. páris id.).

_padiwál_, To put forth, put out, hang or stick out, particularly
said of the tongue. Padiwalá (Ipadiwál) ang dílà mo. Put out your
tongue. Indì ka magpadiwál, kay maláw-ay. Don't put out your tongue,
for it is unbecoming. (pa, diwál).

_pádlus_, To slip out of, escape from a grasp, free oneself from a
grip and the like. Ginpúgus níya akó nga walâ na akó makapádlus sa
hugút níya nga mga bútkon. He hugged me so tight that I could not
escape from his clinch. (cf. palús, pádios).

_padóg-pádog_, To put one's best foot forward, walk fast, step briskly,
step out, stride along, make haste, hurry, take long strides. Anó ang
ginapadógpádog mo? Why are you stepping out so briskly? Nagapadógpádog
siá pakádto sa simbáhan, kay narimáti (napúrut) na ang linggánay. He
is walking fast on his way to church, for the bells have stopped
ringing. (The simple pádog is scarcely ever used).

_padokót_, To make stick, glue on, paste on, cause to adhere, attach
with glue, paste, etc. Ipadokót (padókta) iníng talámdan sa ganháan
sang baláy. Paste this notice on the door of the house, on the house
door. (pa, dokót).

_padóng_, The cock's comb, the caruncle, crest or comb of a
cock. (cf. paróng, pirahón, apirahón).

_padorós_, To turn up one's eyes, so as to show the white of the
eyes. Nagapadorós siá sang íya mga matá. He is turning up his
eyes. Indì mo pagpadorosón ang ímo mga matá. Don't turn up your
eyes. Padorosí siá sang ímo mga matá sa pagpáhug sa íya. Turn up your
eyes at him, in order to intimidate him or make him afraid. Nagpadorós
lang siá sang íya mga matá kag nabúgtò ang íya ginháwa. He just turned
up his eyes and breathed his last. (pa, dorós).

_padóros_, An addition of one or more rooms to a house with
corresponding extension of the roof, an extension, a lean-to. Also
used as a verb. Padorósi ang ímo baláy sing duhá ka padóros magtímbang
sa toó kag sa walá. Add two wings to your house, one to the right
and one to the left. Ang kalabánan sang mga padóros siníng bánwa
naátpan sing lángkob. Most of the lean-tos in this town are roofed
with split bamboo.

_pádpad_, To husk, shell, shuck (corn, beans, etc.). Padpará ang maís,
kadiós, etc. Shell the corn, the cadios-peas, etc. (cf. kokót).

_pádre_, (Sp. padre) Father, Reverend Father, Priest. Maáyong
ága, pádre. Good morning, Father. Si Pádre Felipe----. Father
Philip----. Ang Pádre Kura. The Parish Priest.

_padríno_, (Sp. padrino) Godfather. (cf. panínoy; madrína,
manínay--godmother).

_padúgang_, To increase, augment, add to. Padugánga lang siá sing
písos. Just make him pay one peso more. Nagapadúgang siá sang íya
útang. He is increasing his debt. Ginpadúgang pa gid ang íya nga
kalisúd sang kamatáyon sang íya hinigúgma nga anák. His troubles were
added to by the death of his beloved child. (pa, dúgang).

_padúgay_, (H) To prolong one's stay, stay on, make a long stay,
stop long, tarry, linger, remain on, let remain or cause to stay a
long time. Nagpadúgay siá sang íya pagpuyô dídto. He prolonged his
stay there. He stayed there for a long time. Padugáya ang ímo bátà sa
koléhyo. Let your child stay at college for a long time. Pinadugáyan
níla iníng buluthóan sa íla nga anák. They let their child remain a
long time at this school. Indì ka magpadúgay sang ímo paglúntad dirâ sa
íla baláy. Don't stay (stop) long at their house. (pa, dúgay, pabúhay).

_padúgì_, Contrivance, means, way, machination, etc.; to contrive,
etc. (See padihútan, pahitôhítò, rikobíkos, etc.).

_padúgi_, To set with thorns, fence in with thorns or briars
(cf. dúgi).

_padúlong_, Towards, in the direction of; to go towards or in
the direction of. Nagkádto siá padúlong sa búkid. Nagpadúlong siá
sa búkid. He went in the direction of the mountains (towards the
mountains). (pa, dúlong).

_padulóng_, To approach, come near, draw near, come
towards. Nagapadulóng na siá dirí. He is approaching, is coming here,
is coming this way. (cf. palapít, pakarí).

_padúl-ong_, To send, transmit, have transported or conveyed, despatch,
forward, remit, order to take, bring, carry, ship. Ipadúl-ong
mo iníng maléta nákon sa Ilóngílong. Send this handbag of mine
to Iloilo. Padul-ongí akó dirí sing yélo. Send some ice to me
here. Padul-ongá siá sang ákon pinutús sa baláy. Let him take my parcel
to the house. Ipadúl-ong ko sa ímo ang tátlo ka sáko nga kalámay sa
Manílà. I am going to forward three sacks of sugar to Manila through
you. (pa, dúl-ong).

_padulóy_, To be heedless, stubborn, act as if one were deaf, be
deaf to, be unruly, untractable. (cf. paganót, pabungúl, batinggílan,
dìmanínggol).

_padúlug_, Caus. of dúlug--to stop.

_padulúg_, Caus. of dulúg--to join side to side, put down parallel
to, etc.

_padungál_, See padangól--to cram a big cigar into the mouth.

_padúnggan_, From padungúg--to honour, etc.

_padungúg_, To honour, give honour to, revere, venerate,
esteem, appreciate, reverence, bestow honour upon, respect,
exalt, extol. Ginapadúnggan náton ang mga Sántos. We venerate the
Saints. Pinadúnggan níya si Fuláno sing dakô. He treated N.N. with
great honour. He honoured N.N. greatly. Walâ gid silá magpadungúg sa
íya. They showed no respect for him at all. (cf. dungúg).

_padúsngal_, Caus. of dúsngal--to wound, lacerate, etc.

_padúyà_, A dish made of rice-flour mixed with sugar and shreds of
coconut. Also used as a verb. Kon makahíl-ob kamó sang ákon talámnan
pagapaduyáan ko kamó. When you finish planting rice in my fields
I will treat you to a dish of padúyà. Nakakáon kamí sing padúyà sa
baláy ni Fuláno. We ate some padúyà at N.N.'s house.

_pádya_, Gift, prize, premium; to give a prize, etc. Ang magadaúg
pagapadyahán sing limá ka mángmang. He who wins shall receive a prize
of five pesos. (cf. dúlut, bugáy, hátag, regálo, prémyo).

_pádyà_, Nickname; to tease, etc. See pádià id.

_pag-_, A prefix used to form:
a.) The infinitive. Mahapús ang pagpatíndog sing bág-o nga baláy,
kon may kwárta lang ikáw. It is easy to erect a new house, if only
you have the money. Ginapílit akó sa pagkádto dídto. I must go
there. Laín ang pagsógò kag laín ang pagtúman. To order and to obey
are different things.
b.) The negative. Indì mo pagbuháton inâ. Don't do that. Walâ níya
pagbuháta inâ. He did not do that. Walâ níya pagtón-i ang leksyón. He
did not learn the lesson. Indì mo pag-ihátag sa íya iníng páhò nga
línghod. Don't give him this unripe mango. Walâ silá pagsúay. They
never quarrel, etc.
c.) Verbal nouns. Ang pagsálig sa Diós. Trust or confidence in God. Ang
pagtóo, pagláum kag paghigúgma. Faith, hope and charity. Ang pagkádto
kag pagkarí. The journey to and fro, the round or return trip, etc.
d.) The imperative. Pagtíndog na kag paglakát. Arise (Stand up)
and walk. (cf. mag--).

_paga-_, A prefix used to form:
a.) The passive future tense, e.g. Pagabuháton ko iní. I will (shall)
do this. I am going to do it. Pagahulatón ko gid siá. I will certainly
wait for him. Pagasulatán ko siá sa buás. Tomorrow I am going to
write him. Pagaitúnghol ko sa íya iníng sulát sa madalî nga saráng
mahímò. I'll hand him this letter as soon as possible.
b.) The negative present tense of the passive voice, e.g. Ngáa man
nga walâ nínyo pagasilhigí ang balatonán? Why are you not sweeping the
reception room? Walâ níla pagasókla ang dútà. They are not measuring
(surveying) the land. Walâ ko pagaibalígyà ang bág-o nga pinatubás
ko nga kalámay. I am not selling my new sugar crop. (cf. maga--the
corresponding counterpart for the active voice).

_pagá_, To spread and dry corn or other cereals on a platform
above the hearth or over a fire. Pagahá ang maís. Dry the corn
over the fire. Pagahí akó siníng maís, agúd magugá. Spread this
corn (on a "pagahán") over a fire for me that it may become quite
dry. (cf. pagahán--the flooring or platform used for artificially
drying corn, etc.).

_pagaás_, To shout, call aloud, yell, cry for, call out for, to give
a--shout,--call,--yell. Nagapagaás siá sa kay nánay. He is calling
aloud for mother. Pagaasí si tátay mo. Give a loud call (Call aloud)
for your father (to come). Anó ang ginapagaás mo? Why are you shouting
or yelling so much? (cf. sínggit, turayáw, pugaás).

_pagábut_, Caus. of gábut--to root out, weed out, pull up by the
roots. Ipagábut iníng mga tanúm sa mga hornál. Have these weeds rooted
out by the workmen. Pagabúti akó sing sábud, kay ákon ipatánum. Get
me some rice-seedlings pulled up, for I am going to have them
planted. Pagabúta ang mga bátà sang baríri sa plása. Let the boys weed
out the bariri-grass on the public square. Dílì mo pagpagabúton ang
mga bátà siníng mga tanúm kay may pulús pa. Don't permit (allow) these
plants to be uprooted by the boys, for they are still of some use.

_pagadór_, (Sp. pagador) Payer, paymaster, one who
pays. (cf. manugbáyad).

_pagâgâ_, To importune, ask insistently, press, urge, keep asking,
pester, beg hard. Indì ka magpagâgâ kay tátay sing bág-o nga
báyò. Don't keep asking Father for a new jacket. Ginpagàgaán níya
si nánay sing arítos nga buláwan. She insistently asked mother for
golden earrings. (cf. patúsà).

_pagahán_, A brasier or open pan for burning coals, incense, etc. It
is often used for fumigating (to disinfect by smoke) living quarters
or persons; the flooring or platform for artificially drying corn,
rice, etc. (cf. pagá).

_pagamó_, To make or cause trouble or a disturbance, to raise
a--turmoil,--riot,--mutiny, to incite, instigate (trouble, etc.). Indì
ka magpagamó. Don't make trouble. Ginpagamohán níya ang kalípay sa
baláy ni Fuláno. He caused a disturbance during the entertainment at
N.N.'s house. (pa, gamó).

_pagánda_, To entice, allure, attract; to deceive, cheat. Pagandahá
siá. Allure him. Lure him on. Attract him. Pagandahá siá siníng
síngsing--or--ipagánda mo sa íya iníng síngsing, agúd íya báklon. Show
this ring to advantage, in order that he may buy it. (cf. pagánya,
pagányat).

_pagáng_, Coral, coral reef. (cf. kapagángan).

_pagángpang_, To cluster, to be close together, form bunches or
clusters (said of flowers, foliage, etc.).

_paganót_, To offer resistance, be stubborn, refractory, unruly,
obstinate, untractable, make opposition to. Indì ka magpaganót kon
sogóon ka ni tátay. Don't be stubborn, when father tells you to do
something. (pa, ganót; the simple ganót is seldom used).

_pagánya_, To entice, allure, attract, bewitch; to cheat,
deceive. Paganyahá siá. Entice (allure, cheat) him. (cf. pagánda,
pagányat).

_pagányat_, See pagánda, pagánya.

_pagápus_, Caus. cf gápus--to fetter, bind, shackle, tie. Kon magbátok
siá ipagápus mo siá sa polís. If he resists have him bound by the
police.

_pagárbo_, To show off, be stuck-up, be ostentatious, assume airs,
be proud or haughty, be pretentious or presumptuous. (cf. gárbo).

_pagátpat_, A kind of tree.

_pág-aw_, Dágmay seedlings planted in wet ground to be transplanted
later on to dry soil. (cf. paagáw id.).

_pagáw_, Weak, feeble; to weaken, fail, be or become weak, particularly
said of the voice. Nagpagáw na ang íya tíngug, kay mabáskog ang íya
diskúrso. His voice weakened or failed (has become weak), for he
delivered his discourse with great exertion. (cf. harawaháw, paragáw).

_pagáwad_, Caus. of gáwad--to get at a price, etc.


_pagáypay_, Separate, disjoined, broken up in pieces; to be or become
broken up, etc. Pagáypay na ang píghol nga kán-on, ang bilóg nga
kalámay, etc. The lump of rice has been broken up, the compact mass
of sugar has crumbled, etc.

_págba_, To heat, burn, bake (as clay in making earthenware); to burn
various kinds of shells to make lime for betel-nut chewing. Nagapágba
silá. They are making lime for betel-nut chewing. Ginpágba níla ang mga
olokabá sang tamburúkò. They made lime of the tamburuco-shell. Pagbahí
áko sing banág. Make me some lime of the banág-shell.

_págbo_, Rafter, a large roof-beam, a principal.

_pagbulút-an_, Order, law, command, will, regulation. Ang hágnà
sang bág-o nga pagbulút-an----. The project or scope of the new
law----. Madámò nga mga tinugyanán nagabalábag, agúd iníng pagbulút-an
índì mapakamaáyo. Many representatives are making opposition, in
order that this law may not be approved. (buút). (cf. ley, kasogoán).

_pági_, A fish with a long bony tail, a kind of skate.

_pagíhit_, Caus. of gíhit--to move, etc. Ginpagíhit níya akó sang
síya. He ordered me to move the chair. Pagihíti akó sang lamésa
dirí. Get somebody to shift the table here for my convenience.

_pagimáw_, To look out stealthily, etc. See under gimáw.

_pagirím_, Caus. of girím--to protrude a little, etc.

_pagitíb_, Caus. of gitíb--to project, etc. (cf. pagimáw, pagirím).

_pagiyán_, Caus. of giyán--desire, craving for.

_pagka-_, A prefix used like pag--, but with the difference that
pagka--is more used with intransitive verbs, e.g. sang pagkadúlà sang
íya pányo----. When her handkerchief was lost----. But: sang pagdúlà
níya sang íya pányo----. When she lost her handkerchief----. pagka-
is also frequently employed in the formation of abstract nouns,
e.g. pagkalisúd, pagkasádya, pagkagayón, pagkataohánon, etc.--distress,
cheerfulnes, beauty, human nature, etc.

_pagkabutáng_, Property, wealth, assets, material
possessions. (butáng).

_pagkabut-ánan_, Prudence, circumspection, docility,
tractability. (cf. buót, but-ánan).

_pagkadilìmakinabudláyon_, Aversion to work, laziness. (cf. búdlay).

_pagkadilìmapinasapayanón_, Indifference, carelessness, heedlessness,
(cf. pagkawalaymapinasapayanón, pagkadilìmasinapakón).

_pagkadilìmasinapakón_, Heedlessness, indifference. (sapák).

_pagkadìmasinaláypon_, Infallibility. (sayúp).

_pagkadìmatinagubalúson_, Ingratitude, unthankfulness. (cf. bálus).

_pagkamatinimótimóhon_, Saving, economy, livelihood. (cf. timó).

_pagkasampáton_, Accomplishments, attainment, culture, refinement,
education, experience. (cf. sámpat, sampáton).

_pagkataohánon_, Human nature. (táo--man).

_pagkawaláypasapayán_, Indifferentism, indifference, carelessless,
unconcern, apathy. (cf. sapayán).

_pagkawaláysapák_, Heedlessness, etc. See pagkadilìmasinapakón.

_pagkawaláytinón-an_, Ignorance, want of knowledge, state of being
ignorant. (cf. toón, tinón-an).

_págkit_, To mark, sign, line with a pencil, pen, or the like, list,
enlist, check, tick off. Ipágkit ang íya ngálan sa kwadérno. Mark
down his name in the composition-book. Pagkití ang ngálan nga
ginatawág. Mark down the name that is being called out. Pagkití sing
lápis ang íya ngálan. Write down his name with a pencil (in pencil).

_pagkítan_, Paper; list, index, anything to be marked or written
upon. (págkit).

_págkot_, To stick, or adhere to, be viscous, viscid, glutinous,
clammy, sticky; to paste or glue, stick with paste or glue. (cf. pilít,
dokót, ragkót).

_pág-on_, To make or get strong, firm, solid, to strengthen, reinforce,
brace, stiffen. Pag-oná ang baláy mo. Strengthen your house. Nagpág-on
siá sang íya baláy. He made his house strong. Nagpág-on na ang íya
baláy, kay ginkaáyo sang pánday. His house is now strong for it was
repaired by the carpenter. Ginpág-on nilá ang íla nga kabubút-on. They
made up their minds firmly. Napag-onán akó siníng baláy. This house
seems strong to me. (cf. líg-on).

_págpag_, Dishevelled, disarranged, ruffled, rumpled, in disorder;
to be dishevelled, etc. Págpag ang bohók níya--or--nagapágpag ang
bohók níya. Her hair is dishevelled. Indì ka magpapágpag sang bohók
nímo. Don't rumple your hair. (cf. búkag, bukágkag, burungáyngay,
parágpag).

_págrus_, Strong, muscular; to do with force or strength; to be or
become strong, firm, robust. (cf. bákud, purús, hámrus).

_págsi_, To be quick, nimble, blithe, swift, move with a sudden jerk,
etc. See líksi.

_págsik_, See págsi id.

_págsiw_, See págsyu--a dish of meat, etc.

_pagsogók_, A bamboo mouse-trap.

_pagsolóndan_, What is to be or should be followed, rule of conduct,
regulation, maxim, standard or guide of life, example. (cf. sunúd).

_págsuk_, To thrust, drive hard down, ram in. (cf. búgsok, púgsak,
búgsak, púsdak).

_págsyu_, A dish of meat prepared with vinegar, salt and various
spices, a sort of ragout.

_pagtolón-an_, Doctrine, dogma, teaching, principles of action,
authoritative views or declarations, teaching, instruction, direction,
exposition. (cf. toón).

_pagtoloóhan_, Creed, belief, article of Faith, that which is to be
believed. Bantayán nínyo ang bánwa, agúd nga dílì pagsalakáyon sang
pagtoloóhan nga butíg. Watch over your town, lest false doctrine
should find an entrance. (cf. tóo).

_págtung_, To scorch, burn, heat. (cf. bagáng, ínit, págba).

_pagtúod_, An upright, straight post, vertical beam or spar in a
partition. Also used as a verb. Pagtuódi ang ímo baláy kag dingdingán
mo. Put uprights to your house and make the partition walls.

_pagubâ_, To let, make, or cause to, destroy, break down, pull down,
etc. Pagúb-a (Pagubaá) na lang ang ímo baláy. Have your house pulled
down. Pagubaá lang ang pánday sang ímo baláy--or--ipagubâ na lang
sa pánday ang ímo baláy. Let the carpenter break (pull) down your
house. (pa, gubâ).

_págung_, A leafy branch or stalk, frond. (cf. páklang).

_pagúnting_, To have, let, or order, the hair to be cut; to
have, let, or order anything to be cut by means of a pair of
scissors. Paguntingá si Hosé sang ákon bohók. Order José to cut my
hair. Let José cut my hair. Mapagúnting pa áko ánay. I will have my
hair cut first. Ipagúnting ko sa ímo ang bohók siníng bátà. I want
you to cut this boy's hair. Paguntingí sa íya iníng hénero. Let him
cut off a piece of this cloth with the scissors. (pa, gúnting).

_pagúnum_, To darken, obscure. Ang mga gál-um nagapagúnum sang
lángit. The clouds are darkening the sky. (pa, gúnum).

_pagurâ_, To let one do as one pleases; to let another eat, drink
etc. as much as he likes. Paguraí silá sing laúya. Let them eat as
much boiled meat as they like.

_pagusá_, To have one's will, do to one's heart's content, do as
one pleases. Nagapagusá gid lang siá sa paghingúyang sing madámò nga
pílak. He wastes much money on whims and fancies. Nagpagusá silá sa
pagpíntas sa táo nga íla nadakúp. They tortured the man they caught
till their cruelty was sated. They wreaked their anger on the man
they caught. (cf. patúyang, pasamíyang).

_pagusáb_, See pagusá.

_pagusáb_, To make worse, exert an evil influence upon, especially
applied to various foods that make skin-diseases worse. Ang ísdà nga
hurô nagpagusáb sang íya katúl. The rotten fish made his skin-disease
"katúl" worse.

_pagúspus_, To beat, strike, belabour (with many blows in quick
succession); to pour down heavily (of drenching rain). (cf. pókpok,
bókbok; tarítári).


_pagústo_, To do one's own will, consult one's own pleasure or
wishes, do what one likes, put no restraint on oneself. Pagústo lang
kamó. Just do as you like. You are perfectly at liberty to do what
you please. Indì mo silá pagpagustohán. Don't allow them to have
their own way. (pa, gústo).

_págut_, Great anger, rage, frenzy, fury, wrath, towering passion;
to rave, be angry, furious, wild. Nagamátamát na siá sang págut. He
gradually--waxed very hot,--became furious. Nagapágut siá. He is
furious. He is in a tearing rage. Ginpagútan níya akó. He was furiously
angry with me. Indì ka magpágut. Don't get wild or angry. Don't
bluster. (cf. múgut, síngkal, ákig).

_pagútput_, A puff, hiss, the sound produced by the escaping of
condensed air or steam; to expel air or steam with a dull noise,
to puff, hiss; to break wind. (cf. pútput, utút).

_paguyá_, Look, gaze, mien; to look, gaze. (cf. guyá, pauyahón,
pamatá).

_paguyá_, To show the face or best side of a thing, to display to
advantage, put the best or nicest (wares, fruits, etc.) in the front
or top-row.

_paguyá-gúya_, Diversion, holiday; display; to have a good time,
go in search of pleasure or amusement, to divert oneself. Diín
ka makádto?--A, makádto akó sa pagpaguyágúya. A, nagapaguyágúya
lang akó. Where are you going to?--Oh, I am just looking for
some diversion. I am just going to see if there is any fun going
on. (cf. guyáguya).

_pagúyguy_, Caus. of gúyguy--to drag, haul, etc.

_pagúyud_, Caus. of gúyud. To let--, make--, order to--, haul or
drag along, etc. Paguyúra ang karabáw sang kawáyan. Let the buffalo
pull the bamboo. Paguyúra na lang akó sang kon pilá ka paggúyud ang
kinahánglan mo pa túbtub nga maúbus pagdalá dirí sa ímo baláy ang
duhá ka gatús ka nahót nga kawáyan. Let me now haul in as many hauls
as you may need yet to complete the job of bringing here to your
house the two hundred pieces of bamboo. Hóo, ipagúyud ko sa ímo, kon
magkasugtánay kitá sa nahanungúd sang sóhol nga ibáyad ko sa ímo. Yes,
I will get you to haul in (the bamboo), if we can come to an agreement
about how much I have to pay you for the freightage. Sa tápus ang
tágsa ka paggúyud papahuáya ang karabáw kay índì siá mapagúyud sing
lángkoy. After each haul give the buffalo a rest, because it cannot
be made to haul continuously (without a break).

_pagwâ_, To let or order to go off, remove, send away, turn out, cast
out; expel, eject, evict, drive out, throw out, put on the stage,
produce, show, give a performance. Pagwaá ang idô sa simbáhan. Drive
the dog out of the church. Ginpagwá sang párì ang mga bátà nga nagahibî
sa sulúd sang simbáhan. The priest sent the children out that were
crying in church. Pagwaí akó sing tátlo ka nahót nga tabákò. Put out
three cigars for me. Ipagwâ ang tinágò mo nga álì nga tabákò. Bring out
your hidden best cigars. Buás magapagwâ silá sang bág-o nga talan-áwon
nga sinulát ni Fuláno. To-morrow they will stage the new play written
by N.N. (pa, gwâ).

_páha_, (Sp. faja) Girdle, belt, sash, band, bandage; to wear or
use a belt, etc. Nagapáha siá. He wears a belt. Ginpáha níya ang
ákon páha. He wore my belt. Pahái (paháhi) ang bátà. Put a belt
on the boy. Ipáha lang iníng lúbid. Just use this string for a
belt. (cf. wágkos, wáklos).

_pahábok_, To loosen up earth, etc., cause to expand or swell; to
hill (a plant). Pahabóka ang dútà. Loosen up the earth. Pahabóka ang
talóng. Pahabóki ang talóng sing dútà. Loosen up the soil around
the eggplants. Ipahábok akó sang balókhan sang báboy. Blow up the
pig's bladder for me. Be kind enough to inflate the pig's bladder
for me. Ginpahábok níya sa ákon iníng dútà. He ordered me to loosen
up this ground. (pa, hábok).

_pahábug_, (B) Caus. of hábug--to throw away, thrust, fling or hurl
away. Ipahábug iníng ságbot sa subâ. Have this rubbish thrown into
the river. (cf. pilák, habóy).

_pahádluk_, To frighten, scare, intimidate, horrify, overawe, make
afraid, alarm, dismay, affright, terrify, terrorize, cow, daunt, raise
apprehensions, inspire or excite fear, put in fear. Pahadluká ang
bátà. Make the child afraid. Ipahádluk sa íya ang idô, ang inpiérno,
etc. Frighten him with the dog, with hell, etc. Ginpahádluk níya ang
bátà, agúd maghípus. He intimidated the child to make it quiet. (pa,
hádluk).

_pahagán-hágan_, To make easier, assuage, mitigate, alleviate, soothe,
allay, comfort, soften, palliate, relieve, moderate. Pahagánhagána
ang íya nga kalisúd. Assuage her grief. Console her in her
distress. Ipahagánhágan sa íya nga kasubô iníng maáyo nga
balítà. Soothe her sorrow with this good news. Ang bulúng nga gindápat
sang médiko nagpahagánhágan sang íya sakít. The remedy applied by
the doctor eased (lessened) her pain. (pa, hagánhágan).

_pahágyon_, Caus. of hágyon--to swing the arms, etc.

_pahágyon-mítlang_, (A modern term)
Consonant. (cf. maáthag-mítlang--vowel).

_pahák_, A piece, tear, rent, rip, split, crack, chink, fissure;
torn, rent, fissured, broken, ripped, sundered, split, burst, riven,
cracked. (cf. páhak).

_páhak_, To tear, rend, sunder, rip, split, burst, rive, crack. Napáhak
ang ákon delárgo. My trousers were torn. Ginpáhak níya ang íya
patádyong. She tore her skirt. Paháka lang iníng dáan nga tabungós,
kay bularán ko sing humáy. Rip open this old tabungós-basket, for I
will use it to spread and dry rice upon.

_pahála_, To urge on, to quicken, etc. Pahaláha si Hosé sang
karabáw. Tell José to make the buffalo go quicker (by shouting
"halá" to the buffalo) in order to make him walk fast). (pa, hála),
(cf. padalî).

_pahálab_, (H) To let graze, feed, browse, crop the grass, to pasture,
etc. Pahalába ang mga karnéro. Drive the sheep to pasture. Pasture
the sheep. Ipahálab iníng hilamón sa mga kánding. Let the goats feed
on this grass. Pahálbi iníng talámnan sang mga báka. Let the cattle
graze in this field.

_pahalandumánan_, Memorial, commemoration. (cf. palanumdumánan).

_pahaláy_, Caus. of haláy--to put (clothes, etc.) on a line, etc.

_pahaláy-hálay_, To lie down lazily or comfortably without sleeping,
stretch one's limbs, rest in a recumbent or half-reclining position,
recline comfortably in a chair or on the floor, etc. Nagpahaláyhálay
siá sa salúg sang paláyas sang íya baláy. He was lying comfortably
on the floor of his balcony. (cf. haláy).

_pahalín_, To send off (away), dismiss discharge, expel, eject, turn
out, evict, oust, sack, give the sack to, to fire, remove, order to go
away. Pahaliná silá. Send them off, turn them out, make them go away,
order them to leave. Ginpahalín níya ang matámad nga sologoón. He
sent away (sacked, fired) the lazy servant. Pahaliní siá sang íya mga
maláut nga kaupdánan. Remove from him bad companions. Ang kuymibánwa
nga nagpalítug sing isá ka gatús ka mángmang pinahalín na sa íya
palángakoán. The Municipal Treasurer that had embezzled the sum of
one hundred pesos was dismissed from office. (cf. halín, pahilayô,
paíway, pagwâ).

_pahálin_, Caus. of hálin--to shift, remove to another site, etc.

_pahálmok_, To soften, make pliable or supple. Pahalmokí ang
tabákò. Soften the tobacco-leaves. Ipahálmok sa tabákò iníng mga dáhon
sang lúmboy. Use these lumboy-leaves to make the tobacco soft. (pa,
hálmok).

_pahalóphop_, To let or order to cook only a small quantity of
rice. Pahalophopá ang diótay nga bugás. Have the small measure of
rice cooked. Pahalophopí akó sing bugás. Let a little rice be cooked
for me. Nagpahalóphop siá sing isá ka púdyot nga bugás nga maputî sa
masakít. He had a little white rice boiled for the sick person. (pa,
halóphop).

_pahámak_, To slight, belittle, ignore, think but little about,
care little for, disregard, take no notice of, not to heed. Indì mo
pagpahamákan ang ímo dungúg, ang mga sógò sang Dios, etc. Don't be
careless of (ignore or neglect) your reputation, the commandments
of God, etc. Ginpahamákan gid níya ang maáyo nga mga láygay sang íya
ginikánan. He disregarded (spurned) the good advice of his parent. (pa,
hámak).

_pahámbog_, To boast, brag, vaunt. Ang hámbog nagapahámbog. The
braggart boasts. Indì ka magpahámbog. Don't boast. (pa, hámbog).

_pahámtang_, To put or place, put in order, arrange well, assign a
place for, set in, or reduce to, order. Pahamtangá ang mga síya sa
sálas. Arrange the chairs in the reception-room. Ginpahámtang sang
Diós ang táo sa kalibútan. God placed man in the world. Pahamtangí
siá sing pagkáon. Have some food placed before him. (pa, hámtang).

_pahamúot_, To please, content, delight, gratify, satisfy, gain one's
good will, give or afford pleasure, be pleasing to, give satisfaction,
make a good impression. Ang walâ sing pagtóo índì makapahamúot sa
Diós. Those without Faith cannot please God. Ipahamúot mo sa Diós ang
ímo mga buluhatón sa pagdalá sa gihápon sing maáyo nga katuyoán. Make
your work pleasing to God by constantly forming a good intention. Sa
walâ sing pagtóo índì mahímo ang pagpahamúot sa Diós. Without Faith
it is impossible to please God. (cf. hamúot).

_pahamút_, To scent, perfume, cause to smell agreeably. Pahamutí
ang ákon pányò. Scent my handkerchief. Put some perfume on my
handkerchief. Also noun: Perfume, scent. Butangán mo sing pahamút ang
ákon mga panápton sa baúl. Put some scent on my clothes in the trunk.

_pahanáy-hánay_, To be at rest, be at ease; be lazy or indolent. Ang
íya lúyag amó gid lang ang pagpatáwhay kag pagpahanáyhánay. What he
likes--is peace and comfort,--is tranquillity and ease. (cf. pahúway).

_pahángin_, To hang out, put, dry or air in the wind, to
winnow. Pahangíni ang linínas nga humáy. Winnow the trodden
rice. Pinahangínan na ang ímo humáy? Has your rice been winnowed
yet? Sán-o kamó mapahángin sang ínyo humáy? When are you going to
winnow your rice? (pa, hángin).

_pahangín_, To wish, desire, long for, hanker after. Nagapahangín
siá nga masáot, matábad, makigáway, etc. He wishes to dance, longs
to be present at the banquet, is anxious for a fight, etc. (hángin).

_pahangín-hángin_, To take the air, walk or travel in the open, go
out for a breath of fresh air. Mapahangínhángin, kitá. Let us take
the air. Nagapahangínhángin siá sang íya láwas sa áwto. He is taking
an airing by a ride in the auto. Pahangínhangíni ang bátà. Take the
baby out into the open air. (pa, hangínhángin).

_pahangúp_, Caus. of hangúp--to understand, comprehend, etc. Buút níya
ipahangúp sa ákon nga (ang)----. He wants me to believe, to understand,
to take it that----.

_pahánhan_, To let a meal settle, to take a little rest after a
meal. Pahánhaná ang pinanyága mo kag ugáling dayónon mo ang ímo
paglakát. Allow your dinner to settle and then continue your walk. (pa,
hánhan).

_pahanónot_, To be elastic, stretchable, extensible, ductile, be
capable of being drawn out, to admit of being stretched without
breaking. Ang lástiko nagapahanónot. An elastic band can be
stretched. Also used metaphorically: Iníng sologoón maáyo, kay
nagapahanónot gid lang siá sa tanán nga isógò mo sa íya. This is a
good servant, for he is willing to do everything you order him.

_pahántup_, Caus. of hántup--to grasp, perceive, etc. (cf. pahangúp).

_pahanúgut_, Permission, leave, sanction, permit, liberty,
license, authority, authorization, warrant; to allow, permit,
let, license, authorize sanction, suffer, leave one free to, give
(grant)--permission,--leave. Ang walâ sing pahanúgut índì makasulúd
dirâ. Without permission one cannot enter there. May pahanúgut na
akó sa----. I have now a permit to----. I am now allowed (authorized)
to----. Pahanugúti (pahanúgti) siá sa pagdúaw sa íya tíyo. Allow him
(Grant him leave) to visit his uncle. Ipahanúgut na lang sa íya ang íya
ginapangáyò. Grant him his petition (request). (cf. túgut, hanúgut).

_pahanúmdum_, Caus. of hanúmdum. To remind, put in mind, bring
to mind, jog the memory, make remember, cause to remember or to
recollect. Iníng tabô nagapahanúmdum sa áton nga----. This event
reminds us that----. Ipahanúmdum mo sa íya nga----. Let him bear in
mind that----. Draw his attention to the fact that----. Ginapahanúmdum
ko sa ínyo ang ginasilíng sang madámò nga----. I remind you of what
is said by many that----. Pahanumdumá siá sinâ. Let him remember
(think of) that. (cf. dúmdum).

_pahanúngdan_, From pahanungúd. Also: Attributes, relations,
connections, merits, desert, things that refer or pertain
to. (cf. palahanúngdan, kalabtánan).

_pahanungúd_, To attribute, refer to, put down to, ascribe to, assign
as a cause or motive. Ipahanungúd mo lang sa tubâ ang íya nga agrót,
kay nakainúm siá sing lakás. Simply attribute his nonsensical talk
to the tubâ, for he has drunk too much. (tungúd). (cf. pabangúd).

_pahásò_, Caus. of hásò--to trick, fool, etc. Also: to allow oneself
to be fooled, be amenable to flattery, etc.


_páhat_, Share, division, part, lot, portion, allotment; to divide,
share, partition, allot, portion out. Pilá ang páhat mo sa humáy
nga ímo inágsa? What is your share of the rice you produced on your
leasehold? Isá ka anó ang páhat mo siníng mga ísdà? What is your
share of this fish? How much of this fish falls to you (to your share)?

_pahát-páhat_, Dim. and Freq. of páhat--to share, divide. Pahatpaháton
nínyo sing matárung ang kinabudláyan kag ang kasaplidánan. Make a
fair division of your work and profit.

_pahaúlì_, To return, give back, reimburse, restore, compensate, make
restitution; recuperate, recover. Magpahaúlì ka sa íya sang kináwat
mo--or--ipahaúlì mo sa íya ang kináwat mo. Give back to him what you
stole from him. Mapaliwálíwa siá buás pakádto sa búkid sa pagpahaúlì
sang íya láwas. To-morrow he is going on a vacation to the mountains
to recuperate his strength. (cf. úlì).

_paháum_, Caus. of háom--to shut, close. Also: to combine, join,
accompany (a song on the piano, or the like). Pahaúma si Hosé sang
gangháan. Ipaháum sa kay Hosé ang gangháan. Let José close the door.

_paháwà_, Causative of háwà--to make room, etc. Pahawáa ang mga
táo. Let the people make way. Order the people to make room. Tell
the people to get out of the way.

_pahawát-hawát_, To shock, stun, cause consternation or
trembling. (cf. hawáthawát).

_paháway_, Causative of háway. To show, etc. Pahawáyi akó sang prémyo
nga ímo nabáton--or--ipaháway sa ákon ang prémyo nga ímo nabáton. Show
me the prize you received. Ginpaháway níya ang matahúm nga mga pínggan
kag báso sang ádlaw nga piésta. He brought forth his beautiful
plates and glasses on the feast-day. Nagapaháway na ang bátà. The
baby is showing off, holding forth, i.e. is making its first essays
(at standing, walking, etc.).

_paháyag_, Announcement, manifestation, manifesto,
declaration, statement, notice, report, information; to show,
make clear, expose, indicate, point out, enlighten another,
make--see,--evident,--manifest,--apparent, demonstrate, reveal,
disclose, manifest, exhibit, declare. Ipaháyag mo sa ákon ang ímo
katarúngan. Pahayági akó sang ímo katarúngan. Explain to me your
reason. Let me hear your argument. May igapaháyag akó sa ímo. I must
tell you something. Kon may paháyag ikáw ipaháyag sa ámon. If you have
to give out a statement, let us know. (cf. háyag, hayág, pahibaló,
pangásoy, panáysay, pakítà).

_páhi_, (Sp. paje) Page, valet, cabin-boy. (cf. sologoón, batâbátà).

_páhì_, A kind of black shrimp, river-lobster. (cf. pasáyan, lokón).

_pahíbag_, To cause a quarrel, egg on, set on, instigate, provoke,
let or incite to quarrel or fight. Indì mo pagpahibágon ang mga
kabáyo. Don't allow the horses to fight. Don't incite the horses to
fight. (paúpas id.).

_pahibaló, pahíbalo_, (H) Notice, announcement, information, statement,
news, report, advice; to tell, make known, inform, announce, acquaint
with, impart, apprize, advise, notify, intimate, bring or send
word. Ipahibaló mo sa íya nga--. Inform him that--. Pahibaloá siá sang
pagabút dirí sang íya amáy. Make known to him (let him know of, tell
him of) the arrival here of his father. Nalipatán ko ang pagpahibaló
sa ímo sinâ (Nalipatán ko ikáw sa pagpahibaló sinâ). I forgot to tell
you that. (cf. hibaló, pasáyod, paabíso, paháyag, paálam).

_páhid_, To wipe, clean--, dry--, dust--, with a cloth, remove dust,
etc. by gentle rubbing; to efface, obliterate. Pahíri ang látok. Wipe
the table. Ipáhid sa látok iníng naúg. Use this cloth to wipe the
table with. (cf. pánas).

_pahídlaw_, Caus. of hídlaw. Also used sarcastically in the meaning:
How naughty, bad, mischievous or the like. Pahídlaw siníng bátà! Oh,
what a naughty boy! What a nuisance this boy is!

_pahídlì_, See pahídlaw in its sarcastic meaning.

_pahigál_, To be in heat, under sexual excitement, lustful, to rut,
said of female animals and also applied to women of evil repute. Iníng
kabáyo nagapahigál. This mare is in heat. (pa, higál).

_pahilabút_, To meddle in, interfere, take part in, butt in, thrust
oneself in, intrude, interpose, put one's finger in the pie, poke
one's nose in. Put one's oar in. Indì mo pagpahilábtan yanáng mga
butáng. Don't meddle in those things. Nagpahilabút galî siá sa
amó nga kasábà? Did he indeed take part in that lawsuit? (pa, hi,
lábut). (cf. pasilabút).

_pahilayô_ To remove to a far distance, put far away. See palayô.

_pahilít_, To withdraw, retire, go aside, go to the edge or rim or
outer side of, be of retired habits, lead a retired life; to put
aside, etc. Pahilít ka--or--magpahilít ka. Step aside. Withdraw to
the side. Stand aside. Nagpahilít siá sa búkid. He withdrew to the
mountains. Ipahilít mo ang síya. Put the chair away. (pa, hilít).

_pahilóng-hilóng_, To snooze, fall asleep, take forty winks, slumber;
let another take a short nap. Sa tápus ang panyága nagapahilónghilóng
siá. After dinner he usually takes a short nap. Papahilónghilongá
siá. Let him snooze a little.

_pahílot_, To let massage, go to a massagist, to have kneaded, rubbed,
slapped, pressed, stroked. Mapahílot akó sa manughilót tungúd sang
ákon síkmat. I will go to see the massagist about my rheumatism in
the back. Pahilóta ang médiko sang ímo balî nga batíis. Let the doctor
massage your broken leg. Ipahílot mo sa manugbúlung ang ímo bátà nga
masakít. Let your sick child be massaged by the doctor. (pa, hílot).

_pahílum, pahilúm_, Caus. of hílum, hilúm--to guess,
etc. (cf. pasát-um, pamáy-om, palágpat).

_pahimánsag_, Caus. of himánsag--to solemnize, celebrate, keep,
hold (a memorial service or memorial day, etc.), to praise, honour,
exalt. Pahimansagá (ipahimánsag) ang handumánan sa kay Risál. Celebrate
the memorial day in honour of Rizal. Solemnize the Rizal memorial
day. (cf. bánsag).

_pahimatayón_, The waning moon, the last quarter of the moon;
the end of the last quarter of the moon, the last phase of the
moon. (cf. patáy; latî--new moon; himatayón).

_pahimúnong_, To be or become quiet, still, noiseless, motionless,
keep still. Pahimúnong or magpahimúnong kamó. Be quiet. Don't move or
stir or make a noise. Papahimunónga ang mga bátà. Make the children
keep quiet. (pa, himúnong).

_pahimúyong_, See pahimúnong. Pahimuyónga--pahimunónga.

_pahínà_, Caus. of hínà. To lessen, make scarce, decrease, cause to
fall off (sales, income, etc.).

_pahína_, To live, get a living, work for a living. Anó ang
íya nga pahína? What does he live by? How does he earn his
livelihood? (cf. pangítà).

_pahinákaw_, To impute--, charge with--, theft, call one a
thief. (cf. tákaw).

_pahiróng-hiróng_, To snooze, etc. See
pahilónghilóng. (cf. patulúgtulúg).

_pahítò_, Ways, means, contrivance; to find ways and means, to
contrive, make efforts or take steps to accomplish. Nagapahítò pa
siá, agúd makakítà sing mga galastóhon sa íya baláy. He is still
trying to get the wherewithal to pay for his house. Pahitóa na gid
ang pagpatíndog sang ímo bág-o nga baláy. Make serious efforts now
to build your new house. (cf. padíhut).

_pahitô-hítò_, Dim. and Freq. of pahíto. Ways, means,
contrivance, efforts, machinations, dealings, transaction, artful
design. (cf. padihútan).

_pahíya, pahiyá-híya_, Drudgery hard work, occupation; to keep busy,
give much to do, bother, molest, pester. (cf. híya).

_páhò_, (H) The mango-tree and its fruit. (cf. mángga).

_pahóan_, (H) Full of mangoes. Lugar nga pahóan. A place where mangoes
grow in abundance. Táo nga pahóan. One rich in mangoes, possessing
many mango trees.

_pahóng-pahóng_, Regard, formality, consideration; to be formal,
polite, considerate. (cf. pamahóngpahóng).

_pahúay_, To rest, take a rest, rest oneself, repose, pause, enjoy a
lull,--a respite. Nagapahúay na silá. They are now taking a rest. They
are resting (themselves). Magpahúay silá sa paghidáit. May they rest
in peace. Papahuáya ang kabáyo. Give the horse a rest. (pahúway id.).

_pahubás_, To dry up water, to evaporate, vaporize i.e. to cause
to evaporate. Ang hángin nagapahubás sang túbig. The wind dries up
water. Pinahúbsan sang tingádlaw ang ámon áwang. Our well was dried
up by the hot weather. Pahúbsi ang tiníg-ang. Let the water of the
boiling rice evaporate. Pahúbsa ang túbig. Evaporate the water. Let
the water boil all away. (pa, hubás).

_pahubúg_, To make drunk, intoxicate, inebriate, fuddle. Indì
mo siá pagpahúgbon. Don't make him drunk. Mga ilímnon nga
nagapahubúg. Alcoholic drinks, intoxicating beverages, strong
drinks. (pa, hubúg).

_pahubút_, To make draw, draw with an effort, puff; to quicken,
accelerate. Nagapahubút siá sang íya nga tabákò. He's puffing at his
cigar. Pahubutá ang ímo tabákò, agúd índì mapatáy. Pull at your cigar,
lest it should go out. (cf. pakórbot).

_páhug_, To intimidate, inculcate fear, inspire with fear, menace,
scare, threaten, alarm, startle, strike fear in, put in fear,
frighten. Pahúga siá. Intimidate (menace) him. Ipáhug sa íya ang
bastón. Threaten him with the stick. Ginpáhug níya ang mga bátà sa
pagsilíng sa íla nga hanóton silá kon índì silá magpahimóyong. He made
the children afraid by telling them that they would get a whipping,
if they did not keep quiet. (cf. pahádluk).

_pahugáw_, To let off steam, to let steam or odours escape from
a closed receptacle. Pahugawá ang tiníg-ang. Let the steam of the
boiling rice escape. (pa, hugáw). (cf. pahungáw, pasungáw id.).

_pahúgaw_, To lessen the pressure of, ease, mitigate, allay, comfort,
moderate, assuage, alleviate. Pahugáwa ang íya kasákit. Allay
his grief. Ipahúgaw sa íya kasubô ang mga nagakasarîsárì nga
kalingáwlingáwan. Ease her sorrow by various distractions or
diversions. (pa, húgaw).

_pahúgnà_, To stop, or prevent, a hen from brooding. Pahugnaá iníng
mungá. Don't allow this hen to brood. Ginapahúgnà ang mga mungâ sa
(kon) tingádlaw. Hens are prevented from breeding (by taking their
eggs away) during the dry season. (cf. húgnà).

_pahulám_, (H) To loan, lend, advance, accommodate with, let
borrow. Pahulamá akó sing kwárta--or--ipahulám sa ákon ang ímo
kwárta. Lend me your money. Grant me a loan of money. Pahulamá siá
sing kwárta. Let him have--a loan,--some money on loan,--borrow some
money of you. (pa, hulám).

_pahulás_, To make easy, facilitate, render easy. Ginpahulás sang ulán
ang pagarádo. The rain made ploughing easy, less difficult, lessened
the labour of ploughing. Pahulasá ang pagági sang kángga. Make the
passage for the cart easy. Ang isá ka maáyo nga kapulóngan nagapahulás
sang pagtoón sang (dumulúong) luásnon nga hámbal. A good dictionary
makes the study of a foreign language easy. (cf. pahapús, pa, hulás).

_pahúlas_, Caus. of húlas. Pahulása ang mga bátà sing humáy. Order
the boys to dry rice (over the fire).

_pahulasán_, Place where--, apparatus in which--, a thing is heated or
warmed or evaporated; kettle, cauldron, boiler. Pahulasán-túbig. Steam
boiler. (cf. húlas).

_pahumbíya_, See pasumpíya.

_pahunán_, Capital, stock, assets.

_pahunánan_, Capitalist; stockholder.

_pahunáy_, (B) To take breath, to take a rest in order to get back
one's breath, take a breathing spell, said of one out of breath or
completely exhausted or dead-beat. Nagapahunáy siá sang íya ginháwa. He
is getting back his breath.

_pahuwá-húwa_, To fill the mouth (as with a big cigar); to smoke big
cigars. (cf. padangól, padungál).

_pahúway_, See pahúay--to rest, etc.

_pahúyab_, To disperse, scatter, cause to run or scamper off, stampede,
to speed, cause to run swiftly, drive with great velocity. Pahuyába
ang mga bátà. Drive the boys away. Ginpahúyab níya ang mga kabáyo. He
stampeded the horses. Pahuyába ang butí sa ímo bátà sa pagpakáon
sa íya sing linágà nga mónggo nga walâ sing asín. Try to cure your
child's smallpox by feeding it on boiled monggo with salt. Kumulúb ang
trak, kay ginpahúyab sing lakás sang tsóper. The truck turned turtle,
because the chauffeur drove it too fast. (pa, húyab).

_paibábaw_, Upwards, towards what is above, above, up above, on high,
up aloft; to lift--, hoist--, raise--, upraise--, elevate--, uplift--,
heave--, put--, something higher or above something else. (pa, ibábaw).


_paibabáw_, To wish to be above others, be arrogant, proud, haughty,
overbearing, overweening, supercilious, contemptuous, insolent,
impertinent. Buút siá magpaibabáw. He is arrogant. He wishes (wants) to
be exalted above others. (cf. paibábaw, palabáw, pabugál; paidalúm--to
be lowly, etc.).

_paíban_, Caus. of íban--to diminish, etc.

_paibók_, (B) To scarcely stir, to sit still, to look about
quietly. Nagapaibók gid lang siá sa báid. He sits in the corner without
stirring. He looks quietly on. (cf. pahimúyong, pabánok, hípus).

_paíbok_, Caus. of íbok--to root (of pigs); to stir, etc.

_paíbug_, Caus. of íbug--to covet, etc.

_paíbwal_, Caus. of íbwal--to shoot up (of a flame, etc.).

_paidálum_, Downwards, down, below, under, underneath, beneath,
towards a lower or deeper place; to lower, depress, degrade, let down,
put down, go to a lower place. (cf. idálum).

_paidalúm_, To submit, be lowly, be humble, yield, defer to, be
subservient. (cf. pakitidalúm).

_paígò_, To fit, join or adapt well, to suit; conform, make agreeable
to. Paigóa ang isá ka tápì sa isá. Join the boards well, one to the
other. Ginpaígò níya ang íya pangabúhì sa mga batásan dídto sádto
nga lugár. He conformed his manner of living to the customs of that
place. (pa, ígò).

_paigô-ígò_, Dim. and Freq. of ígò.

_paígod_, To shift or push along. Paigóra ang síya. Move the
chair. Ipaígod ang síya dídto. Push the chair over there. (pa, ígod).

_páihud_, A kind of tree and its timber much used in
housebuilding. (páyhud id.).

_paíkit_, To bring or put close together, close up, make compact,
lessen the space between, pack, put nearer each other, squeeze
together. (pa, íkit).

_paíklip_, See paíplok--to duck, dodge, etc.

_paílà_, To charm, captivate, allure, entice, attract, fascinate,
enchant, draw attention; to flirt, play the coquette. (pa, ílà).

_pailâ-ílà_, Dim. and Freq. of paílà. Ang ibán nga mga dalága
nagapailâ-ílà gid sa tanán nga pagtinipóntípon. Some girls play the
coquette at every gathering.

_pailá-íla_, To be selfish, look out for themselves alone. (cf. íla).

_pailáwod_, (H) To go down river, etc. (cf. iláwod).

_pailawód_, (H) See pailáwod with the difference that pailáwod supposes
a greater distance than pailawód. (cf. ilawód).

_pailayá_, (H) See pailáya with the difference that pailáya supposes
a greater distance than pailayá. (cf. ilayá, iláya).

_pailáya_, (H) To go away from the sea or coastline,
to go--inland,--up-stream,--into the interior,--up-river; in the
direction away from the sea. Nagpailáya siá. He went inland or towards
the mountains. Diín ang baláy mo?--Pailáya or sa iláya. Where do you
live?--In the direction of the mountains, inland. (pa, iláya).

_paílig_, To let or make flow. Pailíga ang túbig. Make or let the
water flow. Pailígi sing túbig ang ákon umá. Irrigate my land,
let the water overflow (flow over) my land, flood my land. Water my
field. (cf. ílig).

_pailíg_, A kind of fish-trap used in rivers, fish-weir,
fish-garth. (cf. pasubâ; punút--a large fish-corral).

_paílis_, To change, substitute, change for another, put in the
place of, replace, make room for somebody else, to let or make
change. Ginpaílis sang manugdumála si Fuláno sa kay Hosé. The manager
replaced José by N.N. Mapaílis, konó, iníng polís. This policeman,
it is rumoured, will let somebody else take his place. Ginpaíslan or
pinaíslan sang mga punoán ang sanitáryo sa kay Fuláno. The authorities
put N.N. in the place of the sanitary inspector. (pa, ílis).

_pailóm_, To blacken, darken, etc. Caus. of ilóm. (cf. paitúm, paalúm).

_paílub_, To bear patiently or humbly, to brook, suffer, stand,
undergo, endure. Pailúba ang mga kalisúd, ang ímo balatían, etc. Bear
difficulties, your illness, etc., patiently. Ginpaílub níya ang tanán
sa dakô nga pagkamapainubúson. He bore everything very humbly. He
bore it all with great humility. Pailúbi siá. Have patience with
him. Bear with him. (cf. ílub, batás, ántus, íro).

_paíma_, (B) To excite a desire or longing for, attract, allure,
entice, captivate, whet the appetite, cause a liking for. (pa, íma).

_paimá-íma_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of paíma.

_paimá-imá_, (B) To show, let be seen, wear, display, expose to
view, exhibit, sport (new clothes, jewels, etc. with the intention
of exciting admiration, etc.); (cf. paimáíma).

_paín_, What has been segregated, separated or detached; separate,
set apart, put on one side, put aside. Isá ka paín sang humáy. A
quantity of rice taken from (set apart from) a common heap. (cf. páin).

_páin_, Separation, isolation, privacy, segregation, aside. Hambalán mo
siá sa páin or sing páin. Talk to him privately, speak to him when he
is alone or when the conversation cannot be overheard by others. Take
him aside and speak to him.

_páin_, To separate, isolate, keep apart, take--, set--, aside (on one
side), segregate, select, put or set apart. Paínon mo ang mga kabatáan
sa mga pamatán-on. Separate the children from the grown-ups. Ginpáin
níya ang bínhì sa humáy nga baláyhon. He separated the seed-grain
from the rice that is to be pounded. Paíni akó sing napúlò ka bílog
nga maáyo nga páhò. Set me apart ten nice mangoes. Ang mga punoán
dápat magpapáin sang mga laláki kag babáye sa mga buluthóan. The
authorities should order that boys and girls are kept apart in the
schools. (cf. bulág, bulahín).

_paindís-índis_, To compete, contest, contend for, vie with, strive for
with somebody else; competition, contest, race, match. Nagapaindísíndis
silá sa pagdalágan, sa paglúmpat, sa paglangóy, etc. They are having
a contest in running, jumping, swimming, etc. Paindísindisá silá sa
pagpangítà sing madámò nga mga umalamót. Let them vie with each other
in finding many contributors or subscribers. Ipaindísíndis sa íla ang
pagbúhat sing isá ka matahúm nga baláybay. Let them compete for the
making of a beautiful poem. Let them see which of them can compose the
most beautiful poem. Ang makadaúg sa paindísíndis magabáton sing isá
ka isulúlat nga buláwan. The winner in the competition will receive
a golden pen. (pa, indísíndis).

_paingás-íngas_, To show a desire or liking for, betray eagerness for,
to be full of hope or longing, to stand by with wishful (wistful)
eyes in the hope of receiving an invitation, gift, etc. Sang
paghágad ko kay Hosé nga magupúd sa ákon pakádto sa Ilóngílong
nagapaingás-íngas si Pédro. When I invited José to go with (accompany)
me to Iloilo, Pedro stood by with longing eyes (expecting an invitation
too). (cf. pahangín).

_paingít_, To be bad-tempered, querulous, morose, complaining,
discontented, sulky, fretful, ill-humoured, cross, petulant,
peevish. Dáyon gid lang siá nagapaingít. He is always complaining or
discontented. (pasingít id.).

_paíngod_, Caus. of íngod. To
let--move--,--approach--,--draw--,--sit--;--stand--, near--, to--,
at--the side of, etc. Indì ka magpaíngod sa íya. Don't let him go
near you.

_paínit_, To heat, make hot, warm, warm up. Painíta ang túbig. Make
the water hot. Heat (warm) the water. (pa, ínit).

_painít-inít, painít-ínit_, Dim. and Freq. of paínit.

_painóíno_, To deliberate, think over, ponder, consider, meditate upon,
weigh, reflect, cogitate, reason out, ratiocinate; ratiocination,
consideration, thought, mind. Painóinóha sing maáyo ang ímo mga
buluhatón. Ponder well what you have to do. Amó inâ ang hunâhúnà
nga nagalabáy sa ákon painóíno. That was the thought that crossed my
mind, that came into my head. Painóinóhon ko pa inâ karón sa gáb-i
kag buás ugáling sábton ko ikáw. I will think over that to-night
and to-morrow I will let you have my answer. Ang íya painóíno walâ
mahámtang sing nagakaígò. He is out of his mind. He is not quite
normal, not quite right in his senses. (cf. panúmdum, pamalándong,
basóbáso, panghunâhúnà).

_painúm_, To give to drink. Paímna siá. Give him a drink. Paímni sa
íya iníng bíno. Let him have a drink of this wine. Ipainúm sa íya
iníng gátas. Make him drink this milk. (pa, inúm).


_paipí-ip, paipíip_, To squeeze--, jam--, press--, crush--, crowd--,
pack--, together, to compress, make compact. Paipi-ípa (paipiípa)
silá. Squeeze them together. Make them stand (sit, etc.) close
together. (cf. ipí-ip).

_paipít_, Caus. of ipít--to press, squeeze, jam, etc.

_paíplok_, To dodge, avoid, stoop down, hide, step aside, withdraw
one's head quickly, etc. so as to be partly or wholly concealed
from view. Paiploká ang ólo mo. Paíplok ka. Hide your head. Stoop
down. Paiploká siá. Make him stand aside, withdraw his head, stoop
down or the like. (cf. íplok).

_pairám_, (B) To put in an appearance, let oneself be seen, to present
oneself, show oneself, go in person, mostly with the intention of
getting noticed, receiving a favour, invitation, etc. Magpairám ka
sa íya--or--pairamí siá. Present yourself before him.

_pairám-irám_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of pairám. (cf. paingás-íngas).

_pairás_, To talk, act or display ostentatiously, show off, parade,
flourish, make a bad impression on bystanders by overbearing manners,
etc. Nagapairás siá. He is talking or acting in an overbearing
manner. Ginpairás níya ang íya diótay nga tinón-an. He showed off his
little learning. Ginpairasán níya kamí sang íya bág-o nga bísti. She
proudly displayed before us her new dress. Indì ka magpairás sa ámon
sang ímo tinagalóg nga hámbal. Don't make a display before us of your
Tagalog way of talking. (pa, írás).

_pairáud, pairáwod_, (B) See pailáwod, pailawód--to go down river.

_pairáya_, (B) See pailáya, pailayá--to go up river.

_paisá-isá_, To arrange one by one, singly. Paisáisahá silá sa
pagpalapít sa ákon. Let them come to me one by one. (pa, isáisá).

_paisá-ísa_, To do one thing after another, to do or try in turn,
successively one after another. Paisaisáha iníng mga bulúng. Try
these remedies one at time--or--one after another. Paisáisáhi sing
bulúng ang ímo hubág. Put one remedy at a time on your swelling.

_paísip_, To make count out, let count, enumerate, number, check,
reckon, calculate, tell off, compute. Magpaísip ka sa íya sing isá ka
gatús ka bílog nga maís. Let him count one hundred maize-cobs. Paisípa
siá liwán. Let him count once more or over again. Paisípi siá sing
kalím-an ka páhò. Let fifty mangoes be counted out to him. Ipaísip sa
ilá ang kawáyan sa walâ pa ang paggúyud. Let them count the bamboos
before hauling them. (pa, ísip).

_país-is_, To set on--, incite--, urge--, a dog, etc. See
ís-is. Ipaís-is sa íya ang idô. Let him set on the dog. Indì nínyo
pais-isón ang idô, kay nagapalangágat. Don't set on the dog, because
he bites. Pais-isí siá sang idô. Set the dog on him. Walâ siá kúntà
sing túyò sa pagbátò kay Fuláno, ápang ginpaís-is (pinaís-is) siá
sang íya upúd. He had no intention (inclination) to oppose N.N.,
but his companion urged him (to do so).

_paísug_, To make brave, encourage, embolden, animate, inspirit,
cheer, hearten, rally, put upon one's mettle, inspire valour, excite
to bravery or exertions of strength. Paisúga siá. Urge (Cheer) him
on. Encourage him. Ginpaísug sang íla mga punoán ang mga mangangawáy
sa pagtámpad sing matútum sa íla mga kaáway. The soldiers were
stimulated by their officers to meet the enemy unflinchingly. Ipaísug
sa íla ang mga dulumdúmon nga binúhat sang íla katigulángan. Inspire
them with bravery by telling them of the memorable deeds of their
ancestors. Ang maláin nga pagbílang sa íya sang íya agálon kag ang
tanán nga binatás níya nagpaísug sa íya sa olíhi sa pagpalágyo sing
tágò. The bad treatment he received from his master and all he had
suffered nerved him at last to run away in secret. (pa, ísug).

_pa-ít_, Bitterness; pain, grief; to be or become bitter; harsh, acrid,
biting, pungent, sharp, unpalatable; be hard to bear, cruel, poignant,
painful, trying, severe, grievous, distressing. Nagpa-ít iníng ísdà
sa lakás nga asín. This fish has been made to taste like brine on
account of using too much salt. Napa-itán akó siníng serbésa. This
beer tastes bitter to me, is too bitter for me. Mapa-itán ka gid sang
ímo kahimtángan kon----. You will have a hard time of it, if----. Your
condition will be a trying one, if----.

_paitál-ítal_, To keep in suspense, leave in doubt, make apprehensive,
put in a dangerous position. Ginapaitálítal pa siá sa gihápon, kay
walâ pa masáyri ang památbat sang hokóm. He is being kept in suspense,
for the decision of the judge is not known as yet. (pa, itálítal).

_paítol_, (B) See padaítol--to argue, dispute, etc.

_paitós_, Caus. of itós--to burn, scorch. Also: to stir up, excite,
incite, encourage, embolden.

_paitúm_, To blacken, darken, make black or dark. Nagpaitúm siá sang
íya guyá. He blackened his face (with soot, burned cork, etc.). His
face darkened (with anger). Paitumá ang mga sapín nga mapulá. Blacken
the brown (red) boots. (cf. itúm, paalúm, pailóm).

_paíway_, To drive off, repel, repulse, send flying, put to flight,
scatter, dispel, scare away, used especially in prayer for release
from troubles, difficulties and evils of all kinds. Ipaíway, oh Ginóo,
sa ámon ang tanán nga mga kalalát-an kag kapipít-an. Drive from us,
oh Lord, all evils and sufferings.

_paiyá-íya_, To be egoistic, selfcentred, look out for oneself, not
to concern oneself about others, be selfish, keep to oneself, have
nothing to do with or have no concern for anybody else, be independent,
live only for oneself. Ang mga pumulúyò siníng báryò nagapaiyáíya gid
lang. The inhabitants of this village are unsocial, individualistic
i.e. each family cares only for itself without asking from, or giving
to, others any assistance or service. (cf. íya, pamiyómíyo).

_pakâ_, Frog, toad. (cf. pánkà).

_paka-_, A prefix meaning:
a.) To pretend, feign, make a show or false appearance of, assume
the airs of what the root implies, e.g. Indì ka magpakamanunúon,
kon dílì ka manunúon nga matúod. Don't pretend to be a teacher,
unless you really are a teacher. Nagpakapárì siá, ápang nasápwan sa
madalî nga dílì siá párì galî. He pretended to be a priest, but it
was soon found out that he was not a priest at all.
b.) To imagine, consider, think, hold something to be what the
stem of the word indicates, e.g. Ginpakamaáyo níla ang amó nga
pagbulút-an. They considered that to be a good law, they approved
that law. Ang tanán nga nagapakasáyod (nagapakasayód) sinâ----. All
those that think that they know the facts in that case----.
c.) To do or experience "really" what the root implies, e.g. Ang mga
nagpakabatî sa íya----. Those that (actually) heard him----. Ang mga
nagpakatiláw sang amó nga pagkáon nagasilíng nga----. Those that have
(actually) tasted that food say that----. Ang mga nagpakatámbong,
nagpakadáyaw, etc. Those that were present, applauded, etc. Ang
Anák sang Diós nagpakatáo. The Son of God became (really, truly,
verily) man.
N.B. It should be borne in mind that there are terms, as
e.g. pakalisúd, etc., in which the "ka-" belongs to the stem and their
meaning is consequently determined by the prefix pa-, not by paka-.

_pakáb-ang_, To entrap, ensnare, involve, entangle.

_pakábit_, To hang up, let hang, suspend. Ipakábit ang kínke sa
písì. Let the lamp be hung up by a string. Pakabíta ang kínke sa
písì. Hang the lamp up by a string. (pa, kábit).

_pakábit_, Appendage, pendant. Pakábit sang kolíntas. The pendant of
a necklace.

_pakabungúl_, To pretend to be deaf, pretend not to hear, feign
deafness, be heedless, stubborn and disobedient, to be deaf--, turn
a deaf ear--, to admonitions, orders, etc. (cf. pabungúl).

_pák-ad_, An abrasion, contusion, bruise, gravel-rash; to abrade,
bruise, contuse, take the skin off. Napák-ad (Nagkapák-ad) ang pánit
sang ákon bútkon. The skin of my arm got scraped off. Andam ka,
agúd índì makasúnggò ang ímo tiíl kag mapák-ad (magkapák-ad). Look
out, lest your foot should knock against something hard and be
bruised. (cf. balíkas, lísgis, bákris, gádras; hánog).

_pakádlaw_, Caus. of kádlaw--to laugh. To excite laughter, set one
laughing, raise a laugh, have one laughing. Ginpakádlaw níya akó. He
made me laugh. Pakadlawá ang bátà. Make the baby laugh. Ipakádlaw sa
íya iníng bág-o nga lahóg. Make him laugh by telling him this new joke.

_pakádto_, (H) To go, make for, head for, proceed to, go in the
direction of something rather far away. Sa pagpakádto kag pagpakarí
(sa pagpakádto-pakarí) ang hinákay índì magkúlang sa isá ka gatús
ka mángmang. The return ticket will not be less than one hundred
pesos. Diín kitá pakádto siní? Where shall we go or came to? What will
be the outcome or upshot, if we go on--thus,--in such a way? Also:
the Caus. of kádto--to go, etc. Pakadtoá siá dídto. Order him to
go there. Pakadtoí siá. Let someone go to him. Have him called
upon. Call him.

_pakaduhá_, Second cousin. (cf. pakárwa id.).

_pakaín-káin_, (H) To go from one place to another, shift from one
position to another, be unreliable, have no fixed purpose, be a
changeling. (cf. kaín).

_pakaisá_, (H) First cousin. (cf. pakás-a).

_pakaíyan_, To show off, be ostentatious, make a display of oneself,
do what one pleases, to display one's riches, etc. Nagapakaíyan gid
lang ang mga manggaránon sa íla mga áwto, bísti, etc. The rich ones
like to display their automobiles, their dresses, etc. (cf. patúyang,
paiyáíya, pamiyómíyo, pabugál).

_pakaiyán-íyan_, Dim. and Freq. of pakaíyan.

_pakâkâ_, To cram, stuff full, fill. (cf. kâkâ).

_pákal_, To stab, stick, pierce, to aim at or hit an object with
some sharp or edged tool, especially applied to a sport or pastime,
often indulged in by rice-harvesters. It consists in trying to hit the
handle of one rice-cutter (kayóg) with the edge of another. Nagapakaláy
silá. They are trying to hit each other's rice-cutters. Ginpákal níya
ang ákon kayóg. He hit (struck at) my rice-cutter with the edge of
his. (cf. bunô).

_pakalipóng_, To take (apparently) no notice of, pretend to
know--, see--, hear, etc.--, nothing, be insensible to, feign
unconsciousness. (cf. palipónglípong).

_pakalisúd_, To cause sorrow or distress, give trouble to, to grieve,
afflict; to hurt, wound the feelings of. Indì ka magpakalisúd sa íya
sing lakás. Don't distress him too much. Indì mo pagpakalísdon ang
ímo mga ginikánan. Don't cause sorrow to your parents. Don't grieve
your parents. (pa, kalisúd).

_pakamahál_, To esteem highly, hold dear, value, prize, set great
store by, think much of, hold in high esteem, appreciate. Pakamahalá
ang pagtóo. Esteem the Faith highly. Also: to affect high worth or
dignity. Indì ka magpakamahál, kay dílì man ikáw halángdon. Don't
affect great dignity, for you are not a dignitary (one of those that
are to be looked up to). (paka--, mahál).

_pák-an_, A fish, a small bantaláan. (cf. panít, bantaláan).

_pakán-an,--on_, Passive forms of pakáon.

_pakánaw_, To polish, burnish, brighten, make clear, cause to
shine. (cf. kánaw).

_pakáng_, A club, beater, bat, clothes-beater, etc.; the row of teeth
a shark uses in striking; snout, sword (of a fish); to beat, strike,
knock, club. Pakangá ang ákon delárgo kon maglabá ka sinâ. Beat my
trousers well when you wash them. Indì mo pagpakangón ang ákon bág-o
nga báyò, kóndì tapátapáhon mo lang, agúd índì magísì. Don't beat my
new jacket with the beater, but with the hands only, lest it should
be torn. Ipakáng sa mantél iníng kawáyan. Use this piece of bamboo
to beat out the table-cloth with. (cf. bákol, hámpak).

_pakangán_, Provided with a pakáng, particularly applied to sharks
with formidable rows of teeth.

_pakángan_, The swordfish.

_pakánta_, Caus. of kánta--to sing. Pakantahá siá sinâ. Let him sing
that. Ipakánta ko sa íya iníng bág-o nga kalantáhon. I'll let him
sing this new song. Pakantahí siá sang amó nga ambahánon. Have that
song sung for him,--in his honour. (cf. paámba).

_pakántò_, To put at the edge of, walk near the edge of; to give
oneself airs, take a prominent place, show off. (cf. ámpag, paámpag,
kántò).

_pakáon_, To feed, give food to, regale, refresh, give a meal to,
nourish, dine (transitive), let--, give to--, eat. Pakán-a silá sing
páhò. Give them some mangoes to eat. Pakán-a silá sa pínggan. Let them
eat from plates. Ipakáon mo sa íla iníng bindonggáda. Give them this
tripe to eat. Manámit ang ginpakáon níya sa ámon dídto. The food he
gave us there was delicious. Pakán-i sa íla ang kárne. Let them eat
(make a meal off) some of the meat. (pa, káon).

_pakápot_, To have the essential marriage-rite performed by the giving
of mutual consent in presence of the Parish-priest, said of couples
that marry on their death-bed or who do not receive the solemn nuptial
blessing during Holy Mass. (cf. kápot).


_pakapút_, Caus. of kapút. Also: to ask another to be godparent (of
one's child). Sín-o ang pagapakápton mo sa ímo anák? Whom will you
engage as godfather (godmother) to your son (daughter)? (cf. paanák,
pakúgus).

_pakaraháy_, To let somebody else step in or take one's place,
especially in playing cards, etc. Mapakaraháy akó sa ímo, kay akó
ákon may pagakadtoán. I will let you take my hand (my cards), for I
have to go away.

_pakarás_, To harrow, the harrow. Pakarasí ang talámnan. Harrow the
field. Papakarasá si Fuláno sang ákon umá. Get N.N. to harrow my
field. Ipapakarás ko sa ímo ang ákon talámnan. I will let you harrow
my field. (pa, karás) N.B. karás alone without pa--is scarcely,
if ever, used.

_pakarí_, To come here, cause to come here. Ang pagpakádto-pakarí. Ang
pagpakádto kag pagpakarí. The journey to and fro. Pakarión mo (nímo)
siá sa ákon. Let him come to me. Call him here. (cf. karí).

_pakarô_, Water-hen.

_pakárwa_, (B) Second cousin. (cf. pakaduhá).

_pákas_, To cut in two, split open, slit, kipper, slit up, lay open,
rip open, divide lengthwise (as fish for drying, etc.). Isdà nga
pinákas. Kippered fish. Fish slit up (and dried with or without
salt). Pakása ang ísdà. Cut the fish in two. Cut the fish open
lengthwise. Also used metaphorically: Karón pakáson ta ikáw. Now I
will give you a good thrashing. Ang maáyo sa íya pakáson. It would
be best to punish him severely. (cf. píhak, pihák).

_pakás-a_, (B) First cousin. See pakaisá id.

_pakasalâ_, To sin, commit sin, commit a fault. Indì ka magpakasalâ
liwán. Do not sin again. Sín-o ang ginpakasál-an mo? Whom did you sin
against? With whom did you commit sin? Likawí ang kahigayónan mo sa
pagpakasalâ (nga ikapakasalâ sa ímo). Avoid the occasions that may
lead you into committing sin. (cf. salâ).

_pakasántos_, To sanctify, hallow, to make or become saintly
or holy, keep holy, observe (as sacred); to affect sanctity, be
sanctimonious. Pakasantosón mo ang mga Domíngo kag Piésta. Keep the
Sundays and Feast-days holy. Ang grásya nga nagapakasántos. Sanctifying
grace. Indì ka magpakasántos, kay dílì ikáw sántos. Don't affect
sanctity, for you are not a saint. (paka--, sántos).

_pakátay_, To put up in a line or row, line up. Pakatáya ang
mga bátà. Put the children in line. Make the children form in
line. Ipakátay ang mga linábhan sa písì. Hang the wash in a row on
the line. (pa, kátay).

_pakátlo_, Third cousin. (pakaisá--first cousin; pakaduhá--second
cousin).

_pákaw_, Handle, crank for turning a shaft or axle, especially
applied to the handle of a cloth-roller in a loom and to the handle
of a cornmill.

_pakáwas_, Caus. of káwas--to escape over the brim of, etc. Indì mo
pagpakawáson ang mga katáng sa alát. Don't let the katáng-crabs escape
(get out of) from the fish-basket.

_pakáwat_, Caus. of káwat. Bantayí siá kag dílì mo siá pagpakawáton
sináng mga páhò. Watch him well and don't let him steal those mangoes.

_pakáyang_, To put face upwards; to toss up, play pitch and
toss (game). Pakáynga (pakayangá) ang bátà. Place the baby face
upwards. Pakáyang kitá. Let us toss up.

_pákdol_, To knuckle the head. Pakdolá siá. Knuckle his
head. (cf. kadól).

_pákha, pák-ha_, A Chinese woman having little feet (made small by
binding); Chinese woman (in general).

_paki-_, A verbal prefix denoting an attachment to, a wish, desire or
love for, what the root implies, e.g. pakitábang--to desire, wish, ask
for help; pakibulág--to wish for a separation or divorce, etc. Pagpaki-
stands for the infinitive, nagapaki-, magapaki-, magpaki- stand for
the present, future and imperative respectively. Magapaki- and nagpaki-
are often shortened to maki- and naki- (cf. pakig-, maki-, naki-).

_pakî_, Twisted, crooked, bent (abnormally), awry; wry, bandy,
bow, distorted; to become twisted, etc. Nagpakî ang íya kamót, kay
binutí. His hand is twisted, because he has had smallpox. Pakî ang
íya bútkon. His arm is twisted. (cf. kiwî, hiwî, sambigî).


_pakiábyan_, To make friends, to befriend, try to be friends, be
friendly, be pleasant or obliging in social intercourse. (paki--,
ábyan).

_pakiadór_, A contractor, whole-sale dealer, one who undertakes a job
with full responsibility. (cf. pakiáw and note the Sp. suffix as in
lab-asíro, etc.).

_pakiána_, (H) To ask information, interrogate, ask questions,
to question, inquire, query. Pinakiánhan siá ni nánay kon diín siá
maghalín. Mother asked him where he came from. Nagpakiána siá sa
ákon kon diín ang dálan padúlong sa Manílà. He asked me the way to
Manila. (cf. pangutána, pángkot, pamángkot).

_pakiáw, pákiaw_, A contract by which it is agreed to pay and accept a
lump sum for the whole work; to make such a contract. Pakiawí siá sing
isá ka baláy sang napúlò nga íya pagapatindogón, kay nagapapákiaw siá
sa malúyag magpákiaw. Get him to give you the contract for one building
of the ten he is going to erect, for he is drawing up contracts with
all that wish to apply. Ginapasolabí sang ibán ang sóhol nga inádlaw sa
pakiáw. Some prefer daily wages to a contract for the whole. Mapísan
silá magpangabúdlay kon magpákiaw, ápang mahínay kon mag-inádlaw
(sa inádlaw). They are good workers at a contract for the whole,
but slow at daily wages.

_pakibáw-as_, To befriend--, ingratiate oneself with--, a childless
couple (in order to obtain some favours, inherit their property,
etc.). (cf. báw-as, pamáw-as).

_pakibô_, Caus. of kibô--to beat, throb. Amó iní ang nagpakibô sing
madásig sang íya nga tagiposóon. This was what made his heart beat
fast. This was what set his heart beating fast.

_pakiburák_, To barter, exchange goods without the use of
money. (cf. báylo).

_pakig_--, See paki--.

_pakigábyan_, To befriend, etc. See pakiábyan.

_pakigbísog_, (B) To hold one's own, remain firm, stand one's ground
even against odds. (cf. pangísug).

_pakigkítà_, (_pakikítà_), To wish or desire to see, to see or consult
(a doctor, etc.), have an interview with. (pakig--, kítà).

_pákil_, A game or pastime. See under kúbung.

_pakilála_, Causative of kilála--to be acquainted with, etc. Ipakilála
mo sa íya si Fuláno. Introduce N.N. to him. Make N.N. known to him.

_pakilî_, Cuirass, armour; harness.

_pakilímos_, To solicit alms, ask for an alms, beg, be a beggar or
mendicant. (cf. limós).

_pakilóoy_, To petition, ask pardon or forgiveness, beg mercy,
supplicate, request help, sympathy or assistance. Nagpakilóoy siá
sa ákon nga tabángan ko siá. He asked me to help him. Magpakilóoy
(makilóoy) ka sa íya. Beg his mercy. Ask for his help. (cf. lóoy,
kalóoy, makalolóoy).

_pakinháson_, A general name for shell fish. (cf. pangínhas).

_pakíntud_, (B) To ask, request information. Walâ mo gánì pagpakintudá
(--orá) kon matúod iná ukón butíg. You did not even ask, whether
that was true or not. (cf. pángkot, pamángkot, pakiána, pakisáyod,
pangutána).

_pakirasâ_, (B) To neglect, ignore, bestow no care upon, treat without
consideration, pay no attention to. Nagpakirasâ gid lang silá sa íla
mga manák. Ginpakirás-an gid lang níla ang íla mga manák. They utterly
neglected their step-children. (cf. pabayâ, ahígahíg, ihígihíg).

_pakírot_, To dim (a light), turn down a lamp-wick, or the
like. (cf. kírot).

_pakisáyod_, To ask for an explanation, to request information. Kon
buút ka mahibaló sinâ makisáyod (magpakisáyod) ka sa kay Fuláno. If
you wish to know that, ask N.N. Ginpakisáyran (ginpakigsáyran) níya
akó kon matúod balá ang sinúgid ni Pédro. He asked me if it was true
what Peter had said. (cf. paki--, sáyod).

_pakisúay_, To pick a quarrel with, altercate, wrangle--, dispute--,
argue--, contend--, with. Pakigsúay id. (cf. súay, paki--, pakig--).

_pakisungkitâ_, To wish or desire to--meet,--see,--have an interview
with,--join or come together with. (cf. sungkitâ, pakigkítà).


_pák-it_, Abrasion, excoriation, laceration, slight injury; to
gall, abrade, chafe, fret, rub or scrape the skin off, tear off
a small piece. Pak-itá ang papél. Tear off a small piece (bit,
scrap) of paper. Pak-ití ang búnga, kay tan-awón ko kon mapulá
ukón maputî ang íya sinâ nga unúd. Scrape the fruit a little that
I may see whether--its pulp is red or white,--it is red or white
inside. Ginpák-it níya ang pánit sang káhoy. He stripped a little bark
off the tree. Napák-it (Nagkapák-it) ang pánit sang ákon kamót. The
skin of my hand got a little chafed. (cf. pák-ad).

_pak-ítpák-it_, Dim. and Freq. of pák-it. Napak-ítpák-it
(nagkapak-ítpák-it) na iníng dumáan nga laráwan. This old picture is
fading, is discoloured, is full of abrasions, or the like.

_pakítà_, To show, let see, exhibit; to appear. Ginpakítà níya sa ákon
ang bág-o níya nga áwto. He showed me his new automobile. Ipakítà
sa ákon ang (pakitái akó sang) ímo binakál. (Show me) Let me see
what you bought. Ang Diós nagpakítà kay Moisés. God appeared to
Moses. (cf. kítà).

_pakitáan_, Exposition, show, exhibition. (cf. pakítà).

_pakitâ-kitâ_, To show partly, expose to view, exhibit, give a
glimpse of, allow to be seen; to be vain, ostentatious. Indì ka
magpakitâkitâ sang dápat tabúnan. Don't expose to view what should
be covered. (cf. pakítà).

_pakitarakáng_, To meddle or interfere in, poke one's nose in,
interpose, butt in, intrude oneself in, take part in (impertinently),
mix oneself up with. Indì ka magpakitarakáng sang mga buluhatón sang
ibán. Indì mo pagpakitarakangán ang mga buluhatón sang ibán. Don't
meddle in (with) the doings of others. (cf. pasilabút).

_pakitíd_, To make narrow, etc. Caus. of kitíd--to be or become narrow.

_pakitidalúm_, To humble oneself, be humble, lowly, meek,
low in one's own estimation, submissive, yielding, to cringe,
kow-tow. Nagapakitidalúm siá, kay nahádluk. He is--humbling
himself,--cringing,--kow-towing, because he is afraid. (cf. idálum,
paubús).

_pakítkit_, Caus. of kítkit--to gnaw, nibble.

_páklang, pakláng_, A palm-leaf, a large leaf-stalk, as of the burí
palm, the coconut palm, etc. to grow--, have--, form--, leaves,
especially said of all kinds of palms.

_páklay_, Bamboo-shoots cut up in thin slices, mixed with meat and
fried in lard. Nakakáon kamí dídto sing manámit nga páklay. We had
there a savoury dish of bamboo-shoots mixed with meat.

_páklis_, To scratch, line, score or mark with a sharp point. Napáklis
ang kamót ko sang dúgi. My hand was scratched by thorns. Kuháa iníng
mga símsim sa dálan, agúd índì mapaklisán ang mga umalági. Take
these bamboo-branches off the road. Passers-by might be scratched by
them. (cf. bákris, pákris; pák-ad, pák-it).

_páko_, A kind of plant.

_pakô_, Sleeve; wing of a bird. (cf. pákpak, sóol, mángga).

_pakóg_, Stick, bat, piece of wood, etc.; to throw, shy, fling or hurl
any lengthy missile, as a stick, log of wood or the like. Ipakóg ang
palakóg. Hurl the missile. Pakogá ang báboy sing biníal. Throw a piece
of split bamboo at the pig. Gimpakóg níya ang páhò sa káhoy. He shied
(hurled) a piece of wood at the mango on the tree. (The augmentative or
frequentative form "pamakóg" is more often used than the simple pakóg).

_pákok_, A slow walker, slow-coach, slow of understanding, dull,
stupid, ignorant; to be or become slow, etc. Pákok siá nga táo. He
is a slow or dull man. Pákok siá sa paglakát. He is slow getting
about. Napakókan akó sa íya. I consider him slow, he appears to me
to be a slow-coach. (cf. mahínay; bulúk, kalóng, kagúng).

_pákol_, A kind of banana containing many seeds, even more than
the lisóhan.

_pakolíntas_, To provide with, or put on, a necklace, etc. Pakolintasí
siá. Put (Hang) a necklace on her. (cf. kolíntas).

_pakoló_, (B) Causative of koló--to carry Negrito-fashion,
etc. Pakolohá, pakoloá--or--pakólwa siá sing tabungós. Let him carry
a tabungós-basket Negrito-fashion. Ipakoló sa íya iníng bakág. Have
him carry this carrier's basket as Negritos do (i.e. held in place
by a band round the forehead).

_pakórbot_, Causative of kórbot. Pakorbotá ang ímo tabákò. Puff
(puff at, pull at) your cigar.


_pakót_, To guess, conjecture, divine, surmise, speculate, solve a
riddle. Pákta (pakotá) kon saráng ka makapakót sinâ. Guess if you
can. Dílì nímo mapáktan--or--dílì nímo mapakót iní. You cannot guess
this. (cf. lágpat, mái-om).

_pakót-pákot_, Dim. and Freq. of pakót. To venture a guess, think,
be of the opinion that, suspect.

_pákpak_, The wing, pinion, pen (of a bird). (cf. pakô).

_pákpak_, To knock, beat, brush or rub off (as dust, ants, etc. from
clothes, etc.).

_pakpákan_, Having large wings, broad--or large-winged; winged (in
general). Also: an evil spirit, the áswang.

_pákris_, (B) To scratch, etc. See páklis, bákris; baríras, gábà,
gádras.

_páksì_, To tear or twist off a small piece, to pluck, pull off. Paksiá
ang isá ka ságing sa sipî. Break off one banana from the bunch or
cluster. Paksií akó sing pilá ka dáhon sang búyò. Pull off a few
buyo-leaves for me.

_páksiu_, See págsiw, págsyu--a dish of meat with vinegar, etc.

_paktákon_, Riddle, conundrum (pakót; cf. palaktónon,
paratkónon). Also: to solve riddles, give each other riddles to
solve. Nagapaktánon (nagapinaktánon) silá. They are giving each other
riddles to solve, are playing at propounding riddles.

_paktánay_, To play at propounding riddles, to give each other riddles
to solve. (cf. pakót).

_pakúbkub_, To lower, incline, bend down. (cf. kúbkub--to bow).

_pakúbkub_, Caus. of kúbkub--to undermine; scratch, etc.

_pakubús_, Caus. of kubús. Pakúbsa (pakubusá) ang bilí siníng
balalígyà. Lower (Cut) the price of this merchandise. Pinakúbsan silá
sang íla nga binulánbúlan. They had their monthly salary lowered (cut).

_pakúgus_, (H) Causative of kúgus--, to take--, fold--, carry--,
bear--, in one's arms. Also: To ask or request another to be godfather
or godmother. (cf. pakapút, paanák).

_pakuláhaw, pakulaháw_, Merely formal, not hearty, not sincere;
to do coldly or perfunctorily. Pinadálhan níya kamí sing isá ka
pangágda ngga pakuláhaw gid. He sent us a very cold (merely formal)
invitation. Pagkádlaw nga pakuláhaw. A cold, forced, not a hearty
or natural smile. (cf. alakápa, pasamústra, matúgnaw, hiláw, dílì
hutúhut).

_pakúmbò_, To cook in the manner of kúmbò, which see. Also:
to make rise, swell, puff up, as bread, a cake, etc. (by
fermentation). Ginpakúmbò níla ang mga ságing sa mantékà. They fried
the bananas in lard as if they were making kúmbò.

_pakurás_, To harrow; to shock, surprise, make one's hair stand on
end. (cf. pakarás).

_pakuribúng_, To be silent, sit still, make no stir, keep very
quiet. Indì ka magpakuribúng, kóndì maghúlag ka na. Don't sit still,
but be stirring. Don't stick there mooning, but--stir yourself,--be
on the move,--get a move on. Nagapakuribúng gid lang siá sa higád
sang íya baláy. He just stays slumped (remains quiet) in a corner of
his house. (cf. pahimúyong, patáwhay, húkò).

_pakúsug_, Force, violence, physical or moral compulsion; forceful,
by force or compulsion, violent; to use force, compel. Sa pakúsug nga
paági----. By violent means (methods)----. (cf. palúgus, kúsug, kusúg).

_pála_, (Sp. pala) Shovel, spade; to shovel. Paláha ang dútà. Shovel
the earth. Paláhi ang kalóg. Dig the ditch with a spade.

_palâ_, A kind of large red ant with a very painful bite, similar in
size and shape to the black ayámayám.

_pálà_, To erase, wipe out, efface, rub out, obliterate, expunge,
clean. Paláa ang sinulát sa pisára. Rub out the writing on the
slate. Palái ang pisára sing isá ka dinalán. Wipe out one of the
lines of the blackboard. Itúsmug mo iníng lapát sa túbig kag ipálà
sa pisára. Dip this cloth in water and clean the blackboard with
it. Paláa inâ sa ímo nga panumdúman. Forget it. Efface it from your
mind or memory. Don't recall or recollect it. (cf. pánas, páhid).

_pala-_, A prefix indicative of a habit or natural inclination to what
is implied by the root, e.g. palaínum, palahúbug--a drunkard (inúm,
hubúg); palahámbal--chatterbox, a great talker (hámbal); palanúgid--a
tale-bearer, story-teller, one given or addicted to tale-bearing
(panúgid); palakádlaw--one who--laughs much and often,--is always
laughing (kádlaw); palahámpang--one given or addicted to sport,
a sportsman (hámpang), etc. (cf. para-- id.).

_palaabúton_, (H) Future events, the future, the hereafter, the time
to come, expectations, what is to come or to happen in the future,
what is expected or looked forward to. (cf. abút, paabút).

_palaanggíran_, Likeness, simile, similitude, figure, image (of
speech), resemblance, analogy, parallel, parallel case; parable,
comparison, (cf. ánggid, halimbáwà, katúlad, pananglítan).

_palaayónan_, One who likes to be flattered, who can easily be coaxed;
moody, fretful, hard to please, (cf. paayónáyon).

_palabá_, Caus. of labá--to wash clothes. To let wash, send to
the wash, get things washed. Kon malúyag ka palábhon ko ikáw sang
ákon mga panápton. If you are willing, I'll--give you my clothes
to wash,--let you wash my clothes. Ipalabá ang mahígkò nga báyò sa
mamumunák. Let the washerwoman wash the dirty jacket. Ang tanán nga
lalábhan nga mapalabá mo sa amó nga bulunakán pagatatápon sing maáyo
kag igaúlì sa ímo nga matínlò kaáyo. All the wash you may send to that
laundry will be handled carefully and returned to you perfectly clean,
(cf. labá, pabúnak).

_palábà_, (H) To lengthen, elongate, draw out, make long, extend, add
to the length of, produce (a line). Palabáa ang kalát. Lengthen the
rope. Ginpalábà níla ang, halígi. They lengthened the post, (pa, lábà).

_palabáw_, To raise above, raise to a greater height than, make to
overtop, make higher than something else; to be haughty, insolent,
overbearing. Ginpalabáw níya ang atóp sang kosína sa mayór. He made
the roof of the kitchen higher than the main roof. Indì ka magpalabáw
sa ibán. Don't esteem yourself above others. Don't look down on others,

_palábaw_, To cause to go over or across something, (pa, lábaw).

_palábi, palabí_, To prefer, esteem more, to hold in greater favour,
favour, fancy, choose rather, think more of, rather--have,--do, put
before, value more highly. Palabíha ang paghigúgma sa Diós sang sa
ímo ginikánan. Love God more than your parents. Ginpalábi níya ang
páhò sa dúlse. He preferred the mango to the sweetmeat. (pa, labí).

_palabíd-lábid_, To cross one's legs, rest one leg across the knee
of the other. (cf. palambídlámbid id.).

_palabí-lábi_, Pride, haughtiness, overbearing, insolence; to be
proud, haughty, insolent, lofty, arrogant, to take on airs, give
oneself airs, be high and mighty, behave oneself in a haughty manner,
be supercilious. Indì ka magpalabílábi. Don't be proud. Don't think
too much of yourself. Nagpalabílábi siá sa ákon. Ginpalabílabíhan níya
akó. He was supercilious to me. He was patronizing me,--condescending
to me. He treated me as an inferior. Ang íya pagpadayáw kag
pagpalabílábi nakadáldal sa íya sa olíhi sa madámò nga kalakasán nga
makahuhúyà. Her vanity and pride led her finally to many shameful
excesses. (cf. labí).

_palabí-labíhon_, Proud, haughty, insolent, supercilious,
overbearing, arrogant, stuck-up, lofty, overweening, conceited,
presumptuous. (cf. bugalón, matinaastaáson).

_palábtog_, To chop, mince, make mince-meat, put through a sausage
machine. Unúd nga pinalábtog. Mince-meat, minced meat. (cf. lábtog).

_palabuarán_, (H) A place or farm for stock-breeding, raising cattle,
etc. Palabuarán-manók, palabuarán-háyup, palabuarán-báboy, etc. A
farm for breeding poultry, cattle, pigs, etc. (cf. búad).

_palabuarón_, (H) What is to--, should--, can--, be propagated,
generated, procreated, bred, hatched, multiplied (as fish, poultry,
domestic animals, etc.). (cf. palabuarán).

_palabúlak, palabulák_, (H) Flowering, having (bearing) many
flowers. (cf. búlak, himulák, hamulák).

_palabúnga, palabungá_, (H) Fruit-bearing, bearing fruit. (cf. búnga,
palamúnga, palabungáhon).

_palabungáhon_, (H) Made to bear fruit, for fruit-bearing. Káhoy,
nga palabungáhon. A fruit tree. (cf. búnga).

_palabúthon_, (H) What is to--, should--, can--, be generated,
begotten, produced, hatched (from eggs), etc. (cf. botó, palabuarón).

_palád_, A kind of cactus that is often used for making quickset
hedges.

_pálad_, The palm of the hand; fate, luck, chance,
fortune. (cf. kapaláran).

_paladág-on_, One who has to--, is to--, can--, should--, be beaten
or overcome (in a fight, in an election, etc.); beatable, conquerable,
surmountable. (cf. daúg).

_paládpad_, To shake, flutter, flap, blow away, carry off, waft away,
sway to and fro (said of the wind, etc.). Ang hángin nagapaládpad sang
mga hinaláy nga panápton. Ginapaládpad sang hángin ang mga hinaláy
nga panápton. The wind is fluttering the clothes hung out to dry on
the line. Napaládpad sang hángin ang íya kálò. His hat was blown off
by the wind. (cf. pálad, lápad; pálid).

_palád-pálad_, Dim. of pálad--the palm of the hand; fate, luck. Also:
the prickly-pear cactus.

_paladugayón_, That is to be continued or preserved for a long time;
durable, lasting, keeping well (without alteration). (cf. dúgay).

_palág_, Flustered, flurried, distracted; to be flustered, flurried,
distracted with many cares, bewildered, preoccupied, put out, upset,
to have one's head turned with a multiplicity of affairs to be attended
to. Nagpalág akó tungúd sang madámò nga mga bisíta. Napalág akó, kay
madámò ang mga bisíta. I am quite bewildered with so many visitors--to
attend to,--to look after. (cf. lingín, libúg).

_palagás_, Caus. of lagás--to run after, pursue, etc. Ginpalagás
níya ang báboy sa idô. He ordered the pig to be hunted off by the
dog. Palágsa (palagasá) ang idô sang báboy. Make the dog chase the
pig. Send the dog in pursuit of the pig. Palágsi (Palagasí) si Fuláno
sing kabáyo, básì maábut pa siá sa dálan. Send someone on horseback
after N.N., perhaps he may still be overtaken on the road.

_palagawarán_, Paying office, ticket-station, etc. (cf. gáwad).

_palághuy_, Caus. of lághuy--to sigh; chirp.

_palagkótan_, What is to be pasted or glued; label, slip of paper,
etc. (págkot).

_palágpag_, To be dishevelled, etc. See págpag, búkag, bukágkag,
bulungáyngay, parágpag.

_palág-palág_, Dim. and Freq. of palág--to be distracted, etc.

_palaguáan_, (H) See palagwáan, (guâ--gwâ).

_palagupák_, The rattle as used during Holy Week or anything resembling
such a rattle; a clapper. (cf. talátalá).

_palagwáan_, (H) Stage, scene, theatre; drama, stage-play. (cf. gwâ).

_palagwáon_, That is to be--sent away,--made to go outside,--shown
or produced (on a stage, or the like); opera comique, musical comedy,
play, drama, theatrical entertainment. (cf. gwâ).

_palágway_, Causative of lágway--slow, etc. Palagwayá ang hámbal mo,
agúd makasunúd kamí sang ímo nga ginapaháyag. Speak slowly, that we
may be able to--follow you,--to follow your explanation.

_palágwis_, To taper, taper off, cut to a point or taper, bring
or sharpen to a point. Palagwisá ang pagtábas sang kóla sang íya
sáya. Cut the train of her gown to a point. (cf. palígwis, parígwis).

_palágyo_, To run away, run off, escape, flee, retreat, take to flight,
make off, turn tail, take to one's heels, beat a retreat, abscond,
bolt, decamp, skedaddle, show a light pair of heels. Nagpalágyo
siá. He ran away. He fled. Nakapalágyo siá sa bilanggóan. He succeeded
in escaping from prison. Ginpalagyohán níya ang íya mapíntas nga
agálon. He ran away from his cruel master. Indì kamó magpalágyo
súbung sang mga matálaw, kóndì mangatúbang kamó sing matútum sa mga
kaáway. Don't retreat (run away) like cowards, but bravely face the
enemy. (cf. lágyo, tál-as).

_palahádak_, (H) A chatterbox, great talker, etc. See hádak, hadakán,
wakalán, buraán).

_palahaláy-haláyan_, (H) A part of a house not walled in, a balcony
or the like, where one can sit (rest, recline) in the open air,
or where clothes can be dried, etc.; veranda, gallery, kiosk,
summerhouse. (cf. pahaláyhálay).


_palahálban_, Pasture, pasture-ground, pasturage, grazing
ground. (cf. hálab, halálban).

_palahámbal_, (H) Chatterbox, great talker. (pala--, hámbal).

_palahangín-hangínan_, Place--in the open air,--for taking fresh air,
as a balcony, garden, park, open veranda, court-yard, public square,
promenade, or the like. (cf. hángin).

_palahanhánan_, Recreation room, drawing room, resting place, play
ground. (cf. hánhan).

_palahanúngdan_, (H) Attributes, merits, desert, etc. See pahanúngdan.

_palahayagán_, (H) Place where something is shown or demonstrated;
public opinion, forum, tribunal, court; advertisement,
demonstration. (cf. háyag, hayág, paháyag).

_palahíd-láhid_, Hint, clue, suggestion, advice; to give a hint or
clue to, to prompt, suggest, give the cue to. (cf. lahídláhid).

_palahiláy-hiláyan_, Anything for leaning against or lying upon,
as a couch, an easy chair or the like; a resting place. (cf. hiláy,
palahaláyhaláyan).

_palahinakayán_, (H) What is to be, or can be, hired; for hire, that
is hired out, let out for hire, to be rented, to let, to be let,
to be for (on) hire. Salákyan, baláy, etc. nga palahinakayán. A
vehicle--for hire,--that is hired out,--that is let out on hire,
a house to let, etc. (cf. hinákay).

_palahuáyan_, (H) Rest, resting place, repose, quiet, ease, peace,
relaxation. Palahuáyan nga dáyon. Eternal rest. (cf. pahúay).

_palahúbug_, A drunkard, sot, toper, soak, booser, boozer, one who
is often or habitually drunk. (cf. hubúg, balúng, lingín).

_palahuwáyan_, See palahuáyan--rest, etc.

_pálak_, To quiver, shake, struggle, tremble, be convulsed, as a
chicken immediately after its head is cut off. Nagpálak gid lámang ang
íya láwas kag napatáy. His body was convulsed and then he died. Ipálak
ang láwas mo. Shake all over (as if in your last agony). Nagapálak
siá sa pagkádto sa báyle. She is trembling with eagerness to go to
the dance. (cf. kúrug, kiréu, kíryo).

_pál-ak,_ A scar or white, hairless spot on the head, a bald spot,
mostly the result of various skin diseases; abrasion, excoriation,
superficial wound, laceration; to tear, lacerate, injure, wound
(the surface of), (cf. pinalían; pál-us, pál-ok).

_palakâ,_ Caus. of lakâ--to widen, etc.

_palákad,_ Caus. of lákad--to step over.

_palakáng,_, Caus. of lakáng--to pace, step.

_palakán-on,_ (H) What is to be fed, a person as a consumer of food;
one who is dependent on another for his support. Madámò siá sing mga
palakán-on sa íya baláy. He has many mouths at home to feed. Palakán-on
níya siá. He is supported by him. He is a dependent of his. (cf. káon,
pakáon).

_palakát,_ (H) To let or order to go, etc. Palákta siá sa umá. Order
him to go to the field. Ginpalakát níya ang íya sologoón sa Manílà. He
ordered his servant to go to Manila. Paláktan mo lang sa íla ang
ímo talámnan. Let them walk over your field, (pa, lakát). Also:
in wickerweaving: The leaving out of several cross-layers near the
top or end, in order to secure an even rim. May palakát sa pagrára,
agúd maglíg-on kag magsaláma ang higád (binít). "Leaving-out" is
practised in the making of wicker-work, in order that the rim may be
firm and even.

_palakóg,_ (H) A club, stick, bat, particularly the bat used in the
game of sáto or tip-cat, (cf. pakóg).

_palákpak,_ To flap or beat the wings, to clap the hands, applaud. Dúro
nga pagpalákpak--or--pagpinalákpak sang pagdiskúrso níya. There was
much clapping of hands during his discourse. Palakpakí siá. Clap
him. Applaud him. (pákpak). (cf. tokáp).

_palák-pálak,_ Dim. and Freq. of pálak. Nagpalákpálak siá kag namáskug,
kay naígo ang íya úlo sang isá ka dakô nga bató. He moved convulsively
and became rigid, for he was hit on the head by a large stone.

_pal-ákpál-ak,_ Dim. and Freq. of pál-ak. Also: at random, by fits
and starts, here and there, without plan or without concerted action.

_palákton_, What is to--, can--, be guessed; a riddle. (cf. pakót).

_palaktónon_, A riddle. (cf. palákton, paktákon).

_palakúkwan_, A young bird not yet able to fly, a fledgeling;
a locust starting to grow wings. (cf. lúkso--a very young locust
without wings, a hopper; tárik--a locust able to fly, but not far;
apán--a full-grown locust).

_palakúsgan_, (H) Anything that needs force, great efforts or
application; arduous, laborious, hard, difficult. (cf. kusúg, kúsug).

_palalábhan_, (H) Anything that is to be washed, as clothes, dirty
linen, etc. (cf. lalábhan, labá).

_palalandóngon_, (H) Meditation, etc. See palandóngon.

_palaligarón_, (H) That has to--pass,--elapse,--go by; coming,
next. Sa túig, pitoádlaw, etc. nga palaligarón. Next year, week,
etc. (cf. lígad).

_palaligoán_, (H) A place for bathing, bath; swimming pool. (cf. lígò).

_palalingkóran_, (H) A (vacant) seat, an office of power, honour
or dignity that should have an incumbent. (cf. língkod, palíngkod,
palalingkóron).

_palalingkóron_, (H) Worthy to be--seated,--given a post of honour
or authority. (cf. palalingkóran).

_palalípdan_, (H) Screen, cover, shelter, hiding place, trench,
entrenchment, anything serving as a cover or protection. (cf. lipúd).

_palaliwáliwáhan_, (H) Recreation ground, campus, play ground,
park, holiday resort, place where to spend a holiday or
week-end. (cf. paliwálíwa).

_palálpag_, (H) Anything used as a hammer or knocker. (cf. pálpag,
palapâ, palapák).

_palaluntáran_, (H) Any place or site suitable or fit for--a
residence,--a home,--a homestead,--a prolonged stay; colony,
settlement. (cf. lúntad).

_palám-ag_, (B) To do to excess, too much, immoderately, excessively,
to overdo, overstep the mark, exceed the proper limits. Indì mo
pagpalam-agón ang ímo nga dayáw. Don't be so excessively vain. Indì mo
siá pagpalam-agán sang hámbal. Don't talk too much to him. (cf. lám-ag,
patámà).

_palamahawán_, (H) Refreshment room, restaurant, inn, public house,
any place where refreshments are served. (cf. báhaw, pamáhaw).

_palamahawón_, (H) Food for breakfast, for lunch or afternoon tea;
provisions (for any light repast). (cf. palamahawán).

_palamakurán_, Fortress, fort, stronghold, rampart, outwork,
fortification; strength. (cf. bákud, pamákud).

_palamangkótan_, (H) Adviser, counsellor, member of a council;
question-box, information office, place or person to be gone to for
advice. (cf. pángkot).

_palamangkotánon_, (H) Question, query, inquiry, interrogation,
something to be asked. (cf. pangkotánon).

_palamanóg_, (B) Swelling, dropsy, ascites. (cf. banóg, panghubág,
palanghubág).

_palamatían_, (H) Place where something is heard, as a
telephone-receiver, etc. Also: something to be listened to, worth
while hearing; audible. (cf. batî, pamatî, památì).

_palamatín-an_, (H) Hearing, ears, sense of hearing. (cf. palamatían,
etc.).

_palamául_, (H) Tiredness, weakness, exhaustion; tiring, weakening;
to tire, weaken. (cf. pául, paúl).

_palambíd-lámbid_, To cross the legs, rest one leg on the knee of
the other. (cf. palabídlábid).

_palamidyáan_, Fingerboard, etc. See pamidyáan.

_palamíking_, Pucker, wrinkle, fold, crease; to pucker, wrinkle,
etc. (cf. píking, pamíking).

_palamílot_, To be nearly closed or only half-open (of eyes),
to see but little, have a dim eyesight. Nagapalamílot ang íya mga
matá. His eyes are nearly closed. He sees but little. He can hardly
open his eyes.


_palamíngko_, A sharp knife or slender, sharp bolo used for sticking
pigs with, etc.; a dagger. (cf. plamíngko).

_palamínhod_, Stiffness, numbness, cramps (in the calf of the leg,
or the like). (cf. bínhod).

_palamírot_, See palamílot.

_palámsut_, To crush to pulp. See palamúsut id.

_palamúgnan_, (H) Place of work, work, job, position, situation,
place, employment. (cf. pógon, púgon, alagarán, palangabudláyan).

_palamugtákan_, (H) Embroidery, embroidery shop. Talahían kag
palamugtákan. Dress-making and Embroidery. (cf. pamugtákpúgtak).

_palamulá_, (H) To become red, to redden, flush, blush, crimson, to
turn red, turn scarlet or crimson, to colour, colour up. Nagapalamulá
ang íya guyá sa lakás nga ínit, sa kaákig, sa kahuyâ, etc. His face
is--flushed on account of the excessive heat,--turning red with anger,
with shame, etc. (cf. pulá).

_palamúlngan_, (H) Hospital, infirmary. See bulúlngan. (cf. pamulúng,
bulúng).

_palamúnga_, (H) Bearing fruit. Káhoy nga palamúnga. A fruit-bearing
tree. A fruit tree. (cf. búnga, himungá, palabungá).

_palamus-ónan_, (H) The anus; lavatory, privy, water closet (W.C.),
jakes, places, latrine. (cf. pús-on, pamús-on; kalipunát; lubô, komún).

_palamúsut_, To crush, squash, squelch, press to pulp; to be crushed,
etc. (cf. lamúsut).

_palamúypuy_, (H) Weakness, debility, lassitude, frailty, feebleness;
to be or become weak, etc. (cf. púypuy, lúya, panglúya).

_palan_--, _palang_--, _palang_--, _palam_--, Forms of pan--(which
see) with an intercalated--la--. They are very often used for the
formation of "frequentative verbs" (especially plural forms) and nouns,
e.g. palangdokót--to stick to (dokót); palangláspì--to grow pale
(láspì); palanóktan--debts (taxes) to be collected (sokót), etc. etc.

_palanagatán_, (H) Suitable--, fit--, used--, for fishing at sea,
as a fishing net, fishing smack, fish corral, etc. (cf. dágat,
panágat, panagatán).

_palanagoán_, (H) Hiding place, concealment; safe, secret closet or
chest (for money, etc.). (cf. tágò, panágò).

_palanagtagán_, (H) A distributing centre. (cf. tágtag, panágtag).

_palanagtagánsulát, palanagtagán-sulát_, (H) Post-office. (cf. koréo).

_palanák_, The wooden pieces or the cat used in the game of sato or
tipcat. (paranák id.).

_palanan-áwon_, (H) Sight, vision, eyesight, faculty of seeing;
spectacle, scene, show. (tán-aw).

_palándong_, To meditate, contemplate, turn over in the mind,
think over well, consider, ponder, muse upon; have regard or
consideration for. Nagapalándong siá sang ginagíhan sang Aton
Ginóo. He is meditating on the life of Our Lord. Palandongá sing
maáyo ang ginsilíng níya. Think well over what he said.

_palandóngon_, Meditation, consideration, contemplation, reflection;
something that requires deep thinking. (cf. palándong).

_palandulúm_, (H) To become dark, obscure, dim; to darken, dim
(intransitive). Nagapalandulúm ang íya mga matá. His eyes are getting
dim. Nagpalandulúm ang íya panúluk. His sight was impaired, he was
nearly blind. He looked daggers,--fierce. (cf. dulúm, pandulúm).

_paláng_, A slice, cut, cutlet, piece of meat, etc. Pabákli akó sing
isá ka paláng nga unúd sang báka. See that a piece of meat (beef)
is bought for me.

_palangabudláyan_, Work, drudgery, fatigue, occupation entailing hard
work; workshop. (cf. búdlay, pangabúdlay).

_palangabuhián_, (H) Pasturage, pasture, etc. See buhián,
búy-an, búhì. Also: livelihood, business, position,
employment. (cf. palangitán-an).

_palangadíon_, (H) Prayer, oration, orison. (cf. pangadî; pangamúyò).

_palangagarán_, (H) Employment, situation, position, job, etc. See
alagarán, palamúgnan).


_palangágat_, (H) A biter, one that bites, as a dog, etc.; to bite,
grip or tear with the teeth. (cf. kagát).

_palangágdan_, (H) See palangagarán.

_palangakóan, palangakoán_, (H) Power, authority, office, position
of power or influence. (cf. ákò, gahúm).

_palangalipáyan_, (H) Place of joy, recreation ground, pleasure resort,
place of pleasure or amusement; merriment, good cheer, object of
pleasure, joy or consolation; diversion, entertainment. (cf. lípay,
kalípay).

_palangamuyoán_, (H) Place of prayer, oratory; shrine, altar, chapel,
church. (cf. pangamúyò).

_palangán_, To stop, cease, make an end of, leave off, break off,
have done with, give over, quit, discontinue. Nagpalangán siá
sang íya pagbúthò, pagsímba, pagkonpesár, etc. He stopped going
to--school,--church,--confession, etc. Ginpalángnan (ginpalanganán)
níla ang pagáni, kay madámol ang ulán. They gave over harvesting rice,
because it rained heavily. (cf. langán, puút, dúlug).

_palanganináwan_, (H) Type, model, mirror, example, pattern, paragon,
picture, ideal representative of a class or group. (cf. anínaw,
laráwan, huáran, solóndan).

_palangánti_, See pangáti. Also: to behave or act like
a--dandy,--coxcomb,--fop,--dude. (cf. padayáw).

_palangasáw-on_, (H) A prospective wife, bride, affianced, fiancee,
intended, betrothed, engaged. Siá amó ang íya nga palangasáw-on. She
is to become his wife. (cf. asáwa, pangasáwa).

_palangatubángan_, (H) Place or district to
be--faced,--confronted,--represented. Puók nga
palangatubángan. Electoral (senatorial) district. (cf. atúbang,
mangangatubáng).

_palangatúl_, (H) Itch; to itch, have or contract the skin disease
"katúl".

_palangáw_, (H) To expose to flies, let be covered with flies. Indì
ka magpalangáw sang tinápay. Indì mo pagpalangawán ang tinápay. Don't
let the bread be covered with flies. (cf. lángaw).

_palánggà_, Favourite, darling, pet, duck, ducky, dear, deary, sweet,
sweety, honey; to fondle, caress, pet, cherish, love, treat with
great affection or tenderness. Palanggaá ang bátà. Treat the baby
with great tenderness. Pet the baby. (cf. ánggà).

_palanggána_, Wash-basin. (cf. planggána, palanghilam-ósan, labadór).

_palanggíran_, (H) See palaanggíran--likeness, similitude.

_palanggít-um_, See palangitúm--to become black, etc.

_palanghálin_, (H) Change; transformation; to pass into another state,
change (colour, expression, etc.). Nagpalanghálin ang íya nawóng
(guyá). His face changed colour. His countenance fell. (cf. hálin).

_palanghátag_, (H) Liberal, generous, open-handed; to be liberal,
etc. (cf. hátag, matáhud, maálwan, mahinatágon, paraná-o).

_palanghilam-úsan_, (H) Basin, wash-basin, an open vessel in which
to wash the face, hands, etc. (cf. hilám-os, palanggána, labadór,
hulunáwan).

_palanghingikî_, (H) A tooth-pick. (cf. kíkì, hingikî, palanghiningá).

_palanghiningá_, (H) Tooth-pick. (cf. palíto, tingá).

_palanghubág_, (H) Swelling; dropsy. (cf. palamanóg; hubág, banóg).

_palanghuyús_, (H) To turn pale, blanch, tremble, fear; to become
weak, lean, wan, white, ghastly, emaciated, particularly said of the
face. Nagpalanghuyús ang íya nawóng. His face turned pale.

_palangihián_, (H) Chamber pot, bedchamber vessel for urine;
lavatory. (cf. íhì, pangíhì).

_palanginán-an_, (H) A banquet, feast, rich entertainment, place
where food is served, table or dishes laden with food, where "one's
bread is buttered", a well paid position. (cf. káon, kalán-an).

_palanginbabáe, palanginbabáye_, Addicted to women, fornicator,
libertine, rake, roué. (cf. manginbabáe).

_palanginhásan_, (H) Place where shell fish are gathered; a lucrative
post or position, paying concern. (cf. pangínhas, palanginán-an).


_palanginlaláki_, Addicted to men, whore, prostitute, bad woman,
a woman of loose morals. (cf. manginlaláki).

_palangipotán_, (H) Water closet, privy; cess-pool. (cf. ípot,
palamusónan).

_palangisdáan_, Aquarium, fish-pond; fishery, place for catching
fish. (ísdà).

_palángit_, Towards heaven, heaven-ward; to go to heaven. Ang waláy
pagtóo índì makapalángit. Without faith one cannot go to heaven. Ang
grásya nga nagapakasántos amó ang ikapalángit sang táo. Sanctifying
grace enables a man to go to heaven. (cf. lángit).

_palangitán-an_, (H) Livelihood, living, means of subsistence,
work, calling, business, by which one supports oneself, employment,
position, lucrative engagement, trade, vocation, place; employ,
pursuit, occupation, situation, berth. Anó ang íya palangitán-an? How
does he manage to live? What is his business or employment? How does
he get, gain or earn, his living (livelihood)? (cf. kítà, pangítà).

_palangitúm_, (H) To become dark, black (in the face,
etc.). Nagapalangitúm ang íya guyá gíkan sa masoswélo. She is becoming
black in the face through an attack of convulsions. (cf. itúm;
palanggít-um).

_palangkótan_, (H) One to ask, to be asked or consulted; consultor;
oracle. (cf. pángkot).

_palangkóton_, (H) Adviser, counsel, one to be asked for advice,
etc.; one to be--asked,--questioned,--investigated. Siá amó ang
íya palangkóton. He is his adviser, he is often consulted by
him. (cf. palangkótan).

_palanglibángan_, (H) Privy, etc. (cf. komún, lubô, palamus-ónan,
palañgipotán, palanlibángan).

_palanglígbos_, (H) To shudder, receive a shock or fright that makes
one's hair stand on end. (cf. panglígbos, kibút, hanguyús).

_palanglingáwlingáwan_, (H) Distraction, diversion, amusement,
recreation, relaxation, holiday. (cf. lingáw).

_palanglúpaw_, To wither, fade, decline, droop, languish, grow
thin and weak, waste away. Nagapalanglúpaw na siá. He is wasting
away. Nagpalanglúpaw na ang íya láwas, kay tigúlang na man siá. He
has grown thin and weak, for he is quite old. (cf. lúpaw, lúmpaw).

_palanglúspad,_ Paleness; anemia; to grow pale. (cf. lúspad).

_palanglúya,_ Weakness, exhaustion; to grow weak. (cf. lúya).

_palangmatáy,_ Mortification, death of a part of an animal body, decay;
to fade, wither, become paralyzed. Palangmatáy sang láwas. Palsy,
paralysis. (cf. matáy, patáy).

_palangolóhan, palangolohán,_ Needing, lacking or wanting a --head,
--chief, --director. (cf. ólo, pangólo, pangolohán).

_palangót,_ To touch, cleave to, stick to, have contact
with. (cf. pangót, angót, ángot).

_paláng-paláng,_ Husks, pods, (of the sebúkaw-tree, etc.).

_paláng-pálang,_ Dim. of paláng--a slice, piece.

_palangúl-ul,_ Stiffness, numbness; to be or become stiff, numb,
benumbed (and painful). Nagpalangúl-ul ang íya páa nga napilásan
sang makahihílo nga panâ. His leg, the one that was wounded by the
poisonous arrow, became stiff and painful, (cf. úl-ul).

_palangúmhan,_ (H) Field, land, grounds, ground, estate, farm. Malápad
ang íya palangúmhan. His farm-lands are extensive. He has (owns)
a large farm. (cf. umá, pangúmhan, mangungúma).

_palangúpus,_ Shrinkage, dwindling; to shrink, dwindle, fall off;
to cringe, bend, crouch (with servility), (cf. kúpus).

_palangúrug,_ Tremble, trembles, milk sickness; to tremble, shiver,
quake, (cf. kúrug, kúdug, pangúrug).

_palangusúg,_ Stiffness, hardness, callousness; to be or become stiff,
hard, rough, horny, callous, wrinkled. Nag-palangusúg ang pánit sang
íya kamót. The skin of his hand became hard and rough. (cf. kusúg).

_palangyôyô,_ Weakness, debility; weakening, slackening; to grow weak,
slacken, become feeble, be remiss. (cf. yôyô).


_palanihaponón_, Food for supper. (cf. hápon, panihápon).

_palanilagán_, (H) Observation-post, watch-tower. Palanilagán
sang panahón. Meteorological station. Weather-Bureau,
Observatory. (cf. panílag).

_palanlibángan_, See palanglibángan--Privy, etc.

_palánog_, Caus. of lánog--to bruise, etc.; to report, etc. (palánug
id.).

_palántang_, To procrastinate, put off, prolong, produce, delay,
defer to a later time, (pa, lántang).

_palanublíon_, See panublíon--heritage, etc.

_palanúdlan_, (H) Receptacle, vessel, container. (sulúd; kasúdlan,
sulúdlan).

_palánug_, See palánog.

_palánug_, To bruit or noise abroad, to report, publish; to throw,
let fly, heave, shy, cast, fling, hurl. Palanúga ang bóla, etc. Throw
the ball; etc. Ipalánug ko sa ímo ang bóla. I'll let you throw the
ball. Ginapalánug níla nga----. They are spreading the rumour (news)
that----. (cf. lánog).

_palanúgnaw_, (H) Cold, catarrh, chill, slight influenza,
indisposition, discomfort caused by (through the influence
of) cold weather or the like; to feel cold, catch a cold, to
shiver. (cf. túgnaw).

_palanungáw_, Evaporation, exhalation, steaming out; itch (as after
shaving, etc.). (cf. sungáw).

_palanumdumánan_, Memorial, commemoration, remembrance,
souvenir. (cf. dúmdum, panúmdum, handumánan, halandumánan).

_palanyagahón_, Food for dinner. (cf. panyága).

_palaón_, Pertaining to the ants called palâ; full of palâ.

_palaóy-láoy_, To raise the voice, to shout, sing aloud. Magpalaóyláoy
ka sang ímo tíngug. Palaóylaóya ang ímo tíngug. Raise your voice. Shout
or sing aloud. (palaúyláuy id.).

_palapâ_, A hammer. (cf. pâpâ, palapák).

_palápad_, To make wide, extend, widen, broaden. Palapára ang
lamésa. Make the table wide or wider. Ipalápad ko sa ímo ang ákon
kaingín. I'll let you increase the extent of my jungle fire. You
may burn over a greater area. Indì ka na magpalápad sang dálan, kay
túman na kalápad. Don't make the road broader (wider), for it is broad
(wide) enough already. (cf. lápad).

_palapagô_, A fishing line, the line to which the fish-hook is
attached.

_palapák_, A hammer or beater, knocker, club, flail, rod, particularly
a cotton beater. (cf. papák).

_palápak_, Caus. of lápak--to tread or step on, etc. Also: A devotional
practice whereby the base of a statue of a Saint is applied to the
head or to other parts of the body; to apply the statue or have
it applied. May palápak. There is (was or will be) an applying of
the statue. Mapalápak (Magapalápak) akó. I am going to receive the
"palápak". Madámò gid ang ginpalapákan sang piésta ni San Bisénte. Very
many people received "palápak" on the feast of S. Vincent. Ipalápak
sa íya ang laráwan ni Sánta Ríta. Take the statue of S. Rita and give
him the "palápak". (palápak literally means: to cause to tread on,
to allow another to put his foot on one's head or neck (an ancient
sign of submission).

_palá-pála_, Lattice-work for supporting plants, trellis; bower.

_palapangayô_, A petitioner, beggar, haggler, higgler, one who always
asks for some discount, privileges, gratuities, etc. (cf. ayô).

_palapatawarán_, Place where pardon can be obtained;
confessional. (cf. patáwad).

_palapatawarón_, What can be--, is to be--, forgiven or pardoned;
one entitled to amnesty; venial, pardonable. (cf. palapatawarán).

_palapilián_, A candidate for election, one who is, or wishes, to
be chosen for an office, or the like. (cf. pílì, pilî, pumililî,
piniliáy).

_palapít_, (H) To approach, approximate, draw nigh or near, come
close to, come--, go--, towards, go or come near. Pumalapít ka sa
íya. Approach him. Draw near him. Indì ka magpalapít sa ákon. Don't
come near me. Papalapitá si Hosé sa ákon. Make José come near
me. Palapití si Hosé. Go near José. Pinalapitán akó níya. He came
near me. He approached me. Ipapalapít mo sa ákon ang síya. Place the
chair near me. Put the chair nearer me. (pa, lapít; papalapít is the
Caus. of palapít).

_palápnag_, To extend, spread, to propagate, cause to be more
extensively used or known, promulgate, circulate, disseminate,
diffuse, popularize. Ginpalápnag níla ang pagtóo. They spread the
faith. Palapnagá iníng kláse sang bínhì. Make general the use of
this kind of seeds. Walâ pa silá pagpalapnagí dídto sang amó nga
galingán. That sort of machine has not yet been introduced there
amongst them. Ipalápnag dídto ang amó nga balasahón. Make propaganda
there for that paper. Increase the circulation of that paper in that
locality. (pa, lápnag).

_paláran_, (H) Fortunate, lucky, happy, successful,
blessed. (pálad). (cf. buláhan, baláan).

_palarawánan, palarawanán_, A place where pictures are made or sold;
a picture shop, studio, a photographer's atelier. (pa, laráwan).

_palásang_, To upset, bewilder, confuse, pump, ply with many questions,
cross-question, cross-examine. Ginpalásang sang mananábang ang
sáksi. The lawyer tried to bewilder the witness with many questions,
cross-examined him with the intention of inducing him to say some
foolish things, make absurd statements. Palasánga ang mga bátà,
agúd mahibaloán ta kon matúod nga maálam silá sang íla leksyón. Ask
the children many questions, so that we may know, if it is true that
they know their lesson. (pa, lásang).

_palas-ánon_, That is--, has--, to be borne or endured; bearable,
tolerable, supportable, endurable, sufferable, burden, what can be
borne. (cf. pás-an, lulukdóhon, lúlan, síngkaw).

_palasarán_, Foundation, base, groundwork, support. (cf. pásad).

_palasarón_, Truss, trussing; raw material; what is to be founded or
established. (cf. pásad, palasarán).

_palás-aw_, To thin out, dilute. (cf. lás-aw).

_palás-ay_, To make distasteful, give one a distaste for or a dislike
of, cause antipathy, avert from, cause to become disgusted with, induce
a sense of loathing. Ipalás-ay sa íya ang batásan sináng táo. Bring
him to detest that man's character. Palas-ayá siá, agúd dílì na siá
magpadáyon sang íya mga pagdúaw dídto. Tell him something to make him
disgusted, so that he may discontinue his visits there. Bisán anó
ang hámbal mo índì ka makapalás-ay sa ákon sa kay Fuláno. Whatever
you may say, you will not be able to make me dislike N.N. (pa, lás-ay).

_palásik_, Caus. of lásik--to scatter, fly or jump off, etc.

_palásik, palasík_, To put away secretly or fraudulently, to hide--,
conceal--, transfer to someone else--, part of one's lands or assets
in order to avoid payment of taxes, sequestration, or the like. Sang
pagembárgo sang íya nga pagkabutáng ginpalasík níya ang ibán nga mga
pinunâ sang íya dútà. When his property was sequestrated he managed
to have some parcels of his land transferred to someone else. Kon
masápwan ikáw nga nagpalasík ikáw sang amó nga palangúmhan pagasilótan
ka sing dakô. If it is found out that you have transferred that farm
to someone else, you will be severely punished.

_palasipalahán_, (H) Deserving to
be--insulted,--reviled,--vilified,--treated with ignominy;
contemptible, despicable, mean, vile, wicked. (cf. pasipála).

_palasokán_, (H) That is to be filled up or covered (as hollows and
holes). (cf. pások).

_palasúgid, palasugíd_, A boaster, braggart; chatterbox. (cf. pala--,
súgid).

_palasulabihón_, (H) Preferable, more desirable, that is to be chosen
or preferred. (cf. labí, pasulábi).

_palasyáran_, (H) Promenade, parade, place for walking or
taking a stroll, park, recreation ground; walk, stroll,
constitutional. (cf. paseár, pasyár).

_pál-at_, Interstice, interval, pause, interruption, etc. See láng-at,
bál-ot.

_palatáynan_, (H) See palatayonán.

_palatayonán_, (H) Conduit, channel, pipe or tube, water-system,
irrigation-system. (cf. tayón).

_palatigayonón, palatigayónon_, Efficient contrivance,
procurement, preparation, previous arrangement; things to be--got
ready,--prepared,--attended to. (cf. patigáyon, hilikotón, hilimosón).


_palatiguná_, (H) To aspire to--be first,--to come out on top; to vie,
compete with. (cf. úna, pasiguná).

_palatihón_, (H) Meriting belief, reasonable, probable, well-founded,
likely, believable, reliable, trustworthy, plausible, credible,
worthy of credit, credence or belief. (cf. páti).

_palatík_, (H) A beater, hammer, knocker, stick, anything to
strike a gong with, beat a drum with, or the like. Palatík
sang bómbo. Drum-stick. Palatík sang mananggíti. The piece of
split bamboo used by toddy-gatherers for scraping clean their
toddy-receptacles. (After the cleaning of the "salúd" the "palatík"
is struck several times against the coconut palm in order to rid it
of the adhering dregs; hence the name). (cf. patík).

_palatikángan_, (H) That on which one is stepping or walking or
making one's living, hence: commerce, business, trade, traffic,
commercial pursuit, mercantile undertaking, occupation, living,
position. (cf. tikáng, palangitán-an, pangítà).

_palat-ínan_, (H) Something to be--marked,--noted down,--signed,
a symptom to be watched, an event to be remembered or recorded,
an incident to be registered, or the like; worthy to be recorded,
worth making a note of. (cf. pát-in).

_palatindúgon_, (H) Anything to be erected, built or established. Ang
Báhin sang mga Palatindúgon. The bureau of Public Works. (pa, tíndog).

_palatión_, (H) Near new moon. Gáb-i nga palatión. A night near new
moon, i.e. a dark night. (cf. latî).

_palatipigán_, Safe keeping, storage, strong-room,
store-room, store-house, place where anything is preserved or
kept. Palatipigán sang pílak. Palatipigán-pílak. Savings bank. Safety
deposit. (cf. típig).

_palatúbson_, (H) The expected yield from a farm, plantation,
mine, manufacturing plant, etc.; crops, produce, commodities,
output. (cf. patubás).

_palatukán_, (H) Foundation, principle, ground,
basis. Palatukán-Pagbulút-an--Legislature, congress, legislative
assembly. (pátok).

_palatúk-an_, (H) Poultry yard, feeding ground for poultry, barnyard
for fowls. (cf. tukâ).

_palatúkdan_, Principles, etc. See palatukurán.

_palatúk-on_, Chicken-food, grain, or the like, to be scattered and
picked up by poultry, birdseed. (cf. tukâ, palatúk-an).

_palatukurán_, Principles, constitution, rules, foundation, fundamental
laws, maxims, postulates. (cf. túkud, palatúkdan, palatukán).

_palatulúg_, (H) A sleeper, slumberer; a lazy fellow, sluggard,
sleepyhead. (cf. túlug, tulúg).

_palatunawán_, (H) Place where something is melted, dissolved or made
liquid; smeltery, foundry, melting furnace; digestion. (cf. túnaw).

_palatúnggon_, (H) Anything employed to make a sound, sounding-board,
musical instrument. Nagahímos kag nagabinagáy-bágay silá sang íla
mga palatúnggon. They are getting ready and tuning up their musical
instruments. (pa, túnug).

_palátyon_, (H) One to be killed or executed, condemned, sentenced to
capital punishment, condemned to die (death). (cf. patáy, mamalátyon).

_palaumurán_, Restraint, restriction, reserve, refrainment,
abstention, abstainment; what is to be--restrained,--abstained from,
or the like. Indì na palaumurán ang paghinámbit sang amó nga mga
butáng. There is now no restriction (limitation, reservation) on
mentioning those things (such matters). (cf. úmud, paúmud).

_palaút_, Caus. of laút. To make sick, excite aversion. Iníng malás-ay
nga pagkáon nagapalaút sang ákon solóksolók. Such tasteless food
makes me sick.

_palautwáson_, That is to--, can--, should--, be brought to
the surface; worthy to--rise,--come out on top,--occupy a high
position. (cf. útwas).

_palaúy-láuy_, To raise (the voice). See palaóyláoy.

_paláw_, To end, stop, terminate, cease, close, finish, conclude,
cause to cease, put a stop to, bring to an end, put an end to, said
especially of troubles and difficulties. Palawá ang íya kalisúd. Put a
stop to his distress. Ipaláw iníng kalingáwlingáwan sa íya kasubô. Make
use of this diversion to make her stop mourning. Ang pagabút ni tátay
nagpaláw sang íya nga kamíngaw. The arrival of father was the end of
her loneliness. Ginpaláw sang diósnon nga kaló-oy ang íya makahanúsbò
nga kahimtángan. The mercy of God granted that his pitiable condition
should end. (cf. paráw).

_paláw-ay_, (H) To make ugly, hideous, etc. Palaw-ayá ang íya guyá,
agúd índì na siá makilála sang mga táo. Make his face so ugly (Make him
look hideous) that people may not recognize him any more. Ipaláw-ay
sa íya iníng úling. Make him look hideous with this charcoal. (pa,
láw-ay).

_paláwig_, To lengthen, prolong, extend. (cf. láwig).

_paláwis_, To sharpen to a point; to protract, prolong. (cf. láwis,
paláwig).

_pálay_, Unhulled rice. (cf. humáy, páray).

_paláy_, A wooden peg, pin, bolt or nail.

_paláyag_, To provide or fit out with sails; strike with the back of
a knife, bolo, etc. (cf. láyag).

_palayág_, To set sail, sail off, make sail, go or travel--under
sails,--under canvass. (cf. láyag).

_paláyas_, An addition to a house, as a balcony, annex, veranda,
etc. (cf. paláypay, padóros).

_palayáw_, To let loose, to let roam free, to leave in the open
field. Palayawá lang ang mga báka sa latagón. Just allow the cattle
to roam about free in the open field. (pa, layáw; cf. paluyáw id.).

_paláygay_, To let or order to admonish, etc. Indì siá magpaláygay. He
is not amenable to admonitions. He will not take advice. Palaygayá siá
sa íya bátà. Order him to correct his child. Palaygayí ang masakít. Get
someone to give salutary instructions to the sick person. (pa, láygay).

_palayô_, (H) To let or make go far away, remove to a great
distance; to go far away, retire, recede, withdraw to a far (safe)
distance. Palayô (Magpalayô) ka dirí. Go (far) away from here. Palayoá
(Ipalayô) siá sa ákon. Send him far away from me. Oh Ginóo, ipahilayô
(ipalayô) mo sa ákon ang tanán nga mga kalalát-an. Oh Lord, remove
far from me all evils. Nagpalayô siá sa dútà nga íya nataóhan. He went
far away from his birthplace (from the place of his birth). (cf. layô,
pahilayô).

_paláy-on_, To cover with sand and earth, to bar the flow of a
water-course in order that the earth and sand carried along by
a flood may accumulate behind the weir (levee, dam, dyke) and
so raise the level of the water or divert the flood to another
channel. Ginpalay-onán níla ang sapâ. They built a weir across
the brook.

_palayóng_, Caus. of layóng--to dry up, etc.

_paláypay_, Plural form of páypay--to fan; to beckon.

_paláypay_, An addition to a main building, annex, wing. (cf. padóros
id. Padorósi--palaypayí).

_páldas_, (Sp. faldas) Skirt, train, flap; the lap.

_paldíyas_, (Sp. faldillas) Skirts; coat-tails; rim, brim (of a hat,
etc.).

_palénke_, (Sp. palenque) Palisade, paling; public market; exposition,
exhibition, circus.

_pálhì, pálhi_, Shunned, to be avoided, neglected, kept away from;
to shun, avoid, neglect, ignore, eschew, have nothing to do with, keep
away from, steer clear of. Pálhì nga lugár. A place to be avoided. A
place it is inadvisable to go to. Dílì mo pagpalhión ang mga ímol. Do
not shrink from (shun, keep aloof from) the poor. Ginapálhì níla yanáng
táo. They pay no attention to that man. They ignore, despise that
man. (cf. dílì, dumílì, ahíg-ahíg, ihíg-ihíg, síkway, pahámak, támay).

_pálhì, pálhi_, Extraordinary, special. (cf. pasahî).

_pálhit_, To smear over, to plaster, to put on or spread (an ointment,
glue, or the like). Palhití ang pagkítan sing kóla. Put glue on the
paper. Pinalhitán mo ang búyò sing lakás nga ápog. You have smeared
the búyò-leaf with too much lime. Ginpálhit níya ang lúnang sa guyá
sang bátà. He besmeared the child's face with mud. Ipálhit mo ang
mantekílya sa tinápay. Spread the butter on the bread. Butter the
bread. Spread the bread with butter. (cf. háplas, hídhid, bádlis).


_pálhuk_, Pocket, burse, small bag. (cf. bólsa).

_páli_, A kind of mango smaller than the regular variety.

_palî_, Scar, mark left by a wound, boil or the like, a cicatrix,
cicatrice. (cf. pinalian, kapalián).

_pálì_, To form a scar, cicatrize, skin over, heal (said of a wound,
etc.). Nagkapálì (Napálì) na ang íya pilás. His wound is healed. Búlnga
ang hubág agúd magkapálì (mapálì). Put some medicine on the boil,
that it may heal up. Idápat iníng bulúng sa pagpapálì sang pilás. Use
this medicine to cure the wound. (cf. áyo).

_paliás-liás, paliás-lías_, To step quickly aside, to sidestep,
draw back, withdraw, retire a little or to a short distance, jump
away. (cf. liás).

_palibát_, To squint, look askance, give a side-glance, look out of
the corner (tail) of the eye. Indì ka magpalibát sa ákon. Indì mo
akó pagpalibatán. Don't look askance at me. (cf. libát, lisíng).

_palíb-ok_, To sustain one's voice, to keep up--, hold--, a note,
to sing, shout, or speak without taking breath for a considerable
time. Palib-oká ang ímo tíngug. Sustain your voice. Sing, shout or
speak without a breathing spell for a considerable time,--without
taking breath. (cf. líb-ok).

_palibó-líbo_, To think over well, ponder, muse, meditate, reflect
upon, consider, turn over in one's mind. Palibólibóha ánay ang sulát
mo sa íya. Turn over in your mind beforehand (Ponder well) what you
are going to write to him. (cf. libólíbo, painóíno, panghunâhúnà,
basóbáso, palándong).

_palíbon_, To close completely, leave no opening, enclose entirely
without any hole or aperture. (cf. líbon).

_palíbud_, Caus. of líbud--to peddle, hawk, etc. Palibúra siá sang
ísdà sa íla dálan. Order him to peddle the fish in their street.

_palibúg_, To confuse, distract, disconcert, fluster, put out, upset,
bewilder, cudgel one's brains, worry, be at a loss. Amó inâ ang
nagpalibúg sang íya ólo. That was what--worried him,--confused his
mind,--bewildered him. Nagapalibúg siá sang íya ólo sa pagpangítà
sing kaluásan sa íya mga kalisúd. He is cudgelling his brains
to find a way out of his difficulties. Amó inâ ang ginapalíbgan
(ginapalígban) karón sang íla mga ólo. That disconcerts (worries)
them for the present. Palíbga (Palibugá) ang íya ólo. Perplex or
embarrass him. Involve him in difficulties. Ang amó nga hitabô walâ
gid magpalibúg sang íya panumdúman. Walâ gid pagpalíbga ang íya
panumdúman sang amó nga hitabô. That event did not upset him in the
least. (cf. libúg, palíngin).

_palíbut_, Caus. of líbut--to go round, etc. Also: Around, round,
neighbourhood, environs, round about, encircling. Sa palíbut sang
baláy. Round about the house. (cf. maglíbut).

_pálid_, To blow away, carry off or along, whisk off, send sailing
or flying (said especially of wind). Ginpálid sang hángin ang íya
pányò. His handkerchief was blown away by the wind. Andamí ang
papél, agúd índì pagpalíron sang hángin. Mind the paper, lest it
should be--(Take care that the paper is not)--carried off by the
wind. (cf. dalá).

_palídan_, Causative of lídan--to pass, go by. Palidána ánay ang
pándut. Postpone the feast. Let the feast first be over. Wait till
after the feast. (cf. palígad).

_palígà_, (B) Caus. of lígà--to forget. Paligáa ang bátà sináng mga
butáng. Let the child forget it (such things).

_palígad_, Caus. of lígad--to pass, etc. (cf. palídan).

_palígbok_, To sustain one's voice. See palíb-ok id.

_palígdas_, Caus. of lígdas--to slip, glide off. Paligdasá lang ang
kángga sa bató, agúd makibút ang mga sumalákay. Let the cart slip
off the stone, that those riding in it may get a fright (to give the
passengers a fright).

_palígid_, Caus. of lígid--to roll, etc. Indì mo pagpaligídon (-íron)
ang bómbo sa salúg. Don't roll the drum across the floor. Paligídi
(-íri) iníng tápì sang baríl. Roll the barrel over this plank. Ipalígid
ko sa ímo iníng bató, kay akó índì makasaráng. I'll let you turn this
stone over, for I am not able. Kon maáyo ang pagpalígid mo sang ímo
pagkabutáng makasáplid ka gid sing dakô. If you wisely invest or make
good use of your wealth, you will reap a large profit.

_palígò_, Caus. of lígò--to bathe, lave, etc. (cf. palígos).


_palíg-on_, Caus. of líg-on--to be firm, etc. Also: Assurance, surety,
bail, pledge, security, bond, confirmation.

_palígos, paligós_, (H) Caus. of lígos. Also: to take a bath, bathe,
wash oneself. Magapalígos (Mapalígos) akó ánay. I am going to take a
bath. Nagpalígos silá sa subâ. They bathed in the river. Papaligósa
lang siá. Let him have a bath. Napaligósan ko kaína ang bág-o nga
bubón. I took a bath in the new water-hole a short while ago.

_paligosán_, (H) A bath-tub, bathroom, bathing place. (cf. palígos).

_paligóy_, To be lazy, indolent, shirk one's duty, etc. (cf. ligóy,
tinamád, pasalipótpot).

_palígpit_, Caus. of lígpit--to squeeze, jam, etc.

_palígwis_, (H) To cut to a point or taper, to point, taper, give a
point to sharpen to a point, bring to a--point,--taper. (cf. palágwis).

_palíhog_, Caus. of líhog--to request, ask a favour. Ipalíhog mo akó
sa----. Palihóga akó----. Let me ask you the favour of----. Please
(to)----. Do me the favour of----. Would you--kindly,--be so kind as
to,--have the goodness to----.

_palíhon_, Like--, pertaining to--, páli--a small mango; green, fresh.

_palikáw_, Caus. of likáw--to avoid. Palikawá siá sang amó nga
dálan. Let him avoid that road. Don't let him take that road.

_palímbong_, Causative of límbong--to cheat, etc. Indì ka magpalímbong
kag índì ka magpadalá sa pílak. Don't allow yourself to be cheated
and don't be carried away by (the glitter or desire of) money.

_palímlim_, To observe, watch, spy, be on the lookout, hang about,
hover near, linger near, wait for an opportunity to abstract something
secretly or the like. Ang bátà nagapalímlim sa luyó sang tabungós nga
may sulúd nga páhò. The boy is lingering near the basket of mangoes.

_palímot_, Caus. of límot. Palimóta (Palímta) siá sinâ. Let him
forget it.

_pál-in_, To segregate, separate from. (cf. páin).

_páling_, The decline of day after mid-day, postmeridian, afternoon;
to decline.

_palíngin_, Causative of língin--to be dizzy, confused. Nagapalíngin
silá sang íla mga ólo, kay----. They are cudgelling their brains,
because----. Their heads are all of a whirl, for----. (cf. palibúg,
palíntong).

_palíngkod_, Caus. of língkod--to sit, etc. Palingkorá (-odá) siá dirâ
sa únhan. Seat him there in front. Let him sit down there in front.

_palíntong_, Caus. of líntong--to be confused, etc. Nagpalíntong siá
sang íya ólo. He is cudgelling his brains. (cf. palibúg, palíngin).

_palío_, Caus. of lío--to contrive, etc. Also: to manage to make
a profit, do business, negotiate, utilize as a means to gain one's
end. Palióha akó sing pilá ka písos. Loan me (Let me borrow) a few
pesos. (cf. pahítò, patúga, pandihútan, rimédyo, palígid).

_pálio, pályo_, (Sp. palio) Pallium; canopy.

_palípas_, To let or make avoid, let pass, etc. Palipása ang kángga
sa dálan. Let the cart pass through the road. (pa, lípas).

_palipát_, Caus. of lipát. Palipatá siá sinâ. Let him forget it
(that). Palipatá siá sa kay Fuláno. Let him give N.N. a slap.

_palípong_, Caus. of lípong. To cause a fainting fit, etc.; to
render insensible, make unconscious, anaesthetize, anesthetize;
an anaesthetic. Sang pagbúsbus sa íya pinalípong siá ánay (walâ siá
magpalípong). When he was operated upon (underwent--, submitted to--,
an operation), he was (first)--anaesthetized,--given a narcotic
(he would not submit to be chloroformed, etherized, narcotized,
anaesthetized).

_palipóng-lípong_, Dim. of palípong. Also: to pretend not to know,
plead ignorance, take no notice of, do as if not aware of. Indì
ka magpalipónglípong, kay nakahibaló kamí nga nakasáyod ka sang
tanán. Don't plead ignorance, because we know that you know
everything. (cf. pakalipóng).

_palíp-ot_, Caus. of líp-ot. To shorten, make short, abbreviate,
abridge, curtail, cut short. Palip-otá ang íya sárwal. Shorten his
trousers.


_palipúd_, To screen, let screen, put up a screen, screen off,
hide, hide oneself, take shelter. Palípdi ang masakít sa kátre
(higdáan). Screen off (Put up a screen for) the sick person in
bed. Palipúd ka. Hide yourself. Take shelter. (cf. lipúd).

_palís_, A ring, hoop, band, ligature in the form of a ring.

_pális_, To deviate from one's course, deflect, swerve from the
straight route, be blown off one's course, applied to the wind
interfering with the straight course of a vessel at sea, etc. Ang
ámon sakayán ginpális sang hángin. Our boat was blown off its course
(by the wind). Indì kamó maglárga karón, kay kóntra ang hángin kag
básì palíson kamó. Don't sail now, for the wind is contrary and you
may be blown out of (deflected from) your course.

_palísò_, To make turn round, let turn, reverse, turn round
(transitive); to convert. Palisóa ang karabáw. Make the buffalo turn
round. Turn the buffalo round.

_palísta_, To let or make-enlist,--enroll, have one's name inscribed
on a list. Mapalísta kamí sa manuglísta. We are going to be enlisted by
the registrar. Palistahá siá sang íya nga ngálan. Have him enlist. Let
him enter his name on the list. Let him have his name put down in
the list. Let him have his name listed. Ipalísta sa piskál ang ímo
anák. Let the fiscal register the name of your child. (cf. lísta,
pasulát).

_pál-it_, A bald spot, (hairless) scar; tonsure. (cf. pál-ak, koróna).

_palíta_, (Sp. paleta) A small shovel, trowel; palette.

_palitáda_, (Sp. paletada) A trowelful of mortar, or the like.

_palíto_, (Sp. palito) Toothpick. (cf. palanghiningá).

_palítog_, Embezzlement, malversation, misappropriation, fraud; to
defraud, embezzle, appropriate fraudulently money, etc. Ginpalítog
níla ang pílak sang bánwa. They used the people's money for private
purposes--or--they defrauded the public. Indì mo pagpalitógon ang
kwárta nga tinúgyan sa ímo. Don't embezzle the money entrusted to
you. (pa, lítog).

_paliwá-líwa_, Recreation, vacation, holiday, time off, free time;
to spend a holiday, take a vacation, get--a day off,--an hour free,
divert oneself, take a walk, spend an hour or so in recreation,
etc. (cf. lingáwlíngaw, paluyáwlúyaw, liwálíwa).

_paliyán-líyan_, Neglect, abandonment; to neglect, shirk, leave undone,
abandon, leave. Indì mo pagpaliyánliyánan ang ímo mga buluhatón. Don't
neglect--or--abandon your duties. Ginpaliyánliyánan sang mga bátà ang
pagbúnyag sang mga tanúm kag nagsúgud silá sang hámpang. The boys
neglected to water the plants and started playing. (cf. biyâbíyà,
pasalipótpot, pabuyánbúyan).

_palíyo_, See palío--to contrive, etc.

_palíyo_, (Sp. palillo) Any small stick; bobbin.

_paliyohán_, A frame for bobbins; reel-stand.

_pálkas_, To wash away or take out a stain, etc. See kakás id. Palkasá,
palkasí, ipálkas--kakasá, kakasí, ikakás.

_palmíta_, (Sp. palmeta) A stroke or slap with a ferule on the open
palm of the hand, formerly often given us a punishment to naughty
school-children.

_pálo_, (Sp. palo) The mast of a ship; stick, cudgel; to beat, thrash,
cudgel. (cf. lámpus, bilogón, tagsáon, súngkud).

_paló_, A kind of small fish.

_palô_, Hammer, mallet; to hammer, strike with a hammer. Paloá (Pál-a)
ang lánsang, paláy, etc. Hammer the nail, the bolt, etc.

_palógot_, Covered with dust and perspiration, dirty, stained,
soiled. (cf. pológot).

_pálok_, The crow of a cock; to crow. (cf. pamálok, pamálò).

_palók_, Having prominent or protruding eyelids. Palók siá sing
matá. He has protruding eyelids. (cf. parók).

_pál-ok_, To scale--, peel--, come--, off (of skin, etc.); to tear,
abrade, lacerate. Napál-ok (nagkapál-ok) ang pánit sang íya bútkon,
kay naliswahán sang túbig nga inínit. The skin came off his arm,
because scalding water had been poured on it. (cf. pál-ak, pál-us).

_palókot, palolón_, Caus. of lókot, lolón--to roll up (a mat, a
(stiff) rug, etc.).


_palolós_, Caus. of lolós--to roll up, etc. Ipalolós sa
íya ang hinúmlad nga mantél. See to it that he rolls up the
spread-out table-cloth. Palolosí kamí sang kortína. Have the
curtain--raised,--rolled up,--removed, for us. (cf. pabalólon,
palókot, palolón).

_palólos_, Means of escape; assets, resources, something to rely
upon or to fall back upon (in time of need). Walâ kitá sing palólos
(ipalólos ikapalólos) nga kwárta. We have no money, are poor or out
of cash. May palólos pa siá. There is yet a remedy for him. He has
yet some means (of escape). (cf. palónos, palús).

_palomaría_, A tree with medicinal properties. (cf. dangkálan id.).

_pálong_, To extinguish, blow--, snuff--, out, damp, choke, stamp out,
put out a light or fire, suffocate a flame. Ang kaláyo sang inpiérno
índì mapálong. The fire of hell cannot be extinguished. Palónga ang
sugâ. Put out the lamp.

_palóng_, Having drooping ears; to hang down the ears, put the ears
back. Palóng siá sing dalúnggan. His ears hang down. Indì ka magpalapít
sa siníng kabáyo, kay nagapalóng. Don't go near this horse, for he
is putting his ears back, (ready to bite you).

_pál-ong_, To stop, halt, bar, debar, block, thwart, preclude, put
an end to. Sa hinálì napál-ong ang íya paghámbal. His talk suddenly
came to an end. Pal-ongá ang íya paglákat. Bar his progress. Halt
him. Bring him to a--halt,--stand,--stop. Ginpál-ong níya ang
pagpatíndog ni Fuláno sing baláy dirí. He stopped N.N. from building
a house here. (cf. puút, papuút).

_palónos_, Resources, means, something to fall back upon. Walâ na kamí
sing saráng ikapalónos (ikapalólos) sa íya. We cannot help him, for
our resources are exhausted. We cannot support him, we can no longer
bear with him, or the like. May palónos pa siá sa pagpadáyon sang íya
sugál. He still has the wherewithal to continue gambling. May ipalónos
siá sa pagpugúng sang íya kaákig. He found strength to suppress his
anger. (cf. palólos).

_palónos_, To grant, consent, concede, Palonósi ang íya nga
ginapangabáy. Grant his request. Concede his petition. (cf. sugút).

_palóy-páloy_, Weak, unsteady, precarious; to weaken, lessen,
decrease. Palóypáloy ang pangabúhì sináng mga kambuyahán. The life
of those companies is a precarious one.

_pálpag_, To strike or hit with a hammer, to hammer. Palpagá ang
lánsang. Hammer the nail. Hit the nail with the hammer. (cf. palô,
pápà).

_pálpal_, A small post, stake or stick fixed in the ground and used
chiefly for tethering an animal. Also used as a verb. Palpalán mo
ang karabáw. Tether the buffalo to a stake in the ground. (cf. búgsok).

_palséte_, (Sp. falsete) Falsetto voice.

_palsipikasyón_, (Sp. falsificación) Falsification, forgery.

_palsipikár_, (Sp. falsificar) To forge, counterfeit, falsify.

_pálso_, (Sp. falso) False, spurious, counterfeit, bad, forged. Pílak
nga pálso. Counterfeit money. (cf. kulirô).

_pálua_, Palm-leaves, especially the palm-leaves or branches blessed
on Palm-Sunday. (cf. rámos).

_palúgus_, Caus. of lúgus--to force, etc. Also: Force, violence;
by force, forceful, compelling, using physical or moral
pressure. (cf. pakúsug).

_paluhúd_, To let or make kneel down, or genuflect, make one go
down on his knees or bend the knee. Palúdha ang bátà. Make the child
kneel down. Ginpaluhúd níya kamí. He made us kneel down. Sín-o balá
ang pagapalúdhon níya sa íya pagpakasál? Whom will he ask to be his
witness when he marries? (cf. luhúd).

_palúkpuk_, Cob, corn-cob. (cf. kayán).

_palumátay_, (H) See paalumátay--to seem--, pretend--, to be dead, etc.

_palumáw_, Caus. of lumáw--to grope in mud, etc.

_palumáw-lumáw_, Dim. of palumáw. Also: to fill with tears, brim
with--, be full of--, tears. (cf. kanáwkanáw).

_palúmbà_, (H) Racing, competition; to race, let (make) race. May
palúmbà sang kabáyo, bisikléta, karabáw, etc. There is (was,
will be) a horse-race, bicycle-race, buffalo-race, etc. Ipalúmbà
ang ímo kabáyo. Let your horse take part in the race. Run your
horse. (cf. lúmbà).

_palúmpat_, To let or make--jump,--leap,--spring,--bound. Palumpatá
lang siá. Just let (make) him jump. Ginpalúmpat níya ang kabáyo
sang kodál. He made the horse take the fence. He put (jumped, leapt)
the horse over the fence. (cf. lúmpat).

_palungkágay_, Caus. of lungkágay--to rattle, clatter.

_palúngpung_, Tassels, fringes; a bunch, (of flowers,
etc.). (cf. púngpung).

_palupád_, To let or make fly, to fly (transitive). Palupará (-adá)
ang buladór. Fly the kite. Indì kamó magpalupád sang buladór dirí;
kon malúyag kamó paluparí lang nínyo ang wayáng. Don't fly your kite
here; if you want to fly it, do so in the open field. (cf. lupád).

_palúpid_, See palúpig.

_palúpig_, Caus. of lúpig--to oppress, subdue, keep under the thumb,
etc. Indì ka magpalúpig (magpalúpid) sa íya. Don't allow yourself to
be imposed upon (outdone) by him. (cf. palupô).

_palúpò, palupô_, To let or make treat--ignominiously,--harshly, to
allow to outdo or overcome, etc. Indì ka magpalúpò (magpalupô). Don't
allow yourself to be--slighted--treated ignominiously (with
ignominy). (cf. lupô).

_palupók_, To let or make a gun go off, to fire, let off, discharge,
detonate, fire a salute, fire off salvoes, to cannonade, cause
something to burst with a loud report, to fire shots by means of a gun,
rifle, mortar, etc. Also noun: shooting, salvo, salute with guns,
or the like. Sang piésta dídto sa báryo may palupók sa kawáyan. At
the feast there in the village they fired off a bamboo gun. Palúkpi
(Palupokí) ang Nobéna. Fire off mortars during the novena. Ipalupók
ko sa ímo iníng rekámara sa ínyong piésta, ápang kon magubâ (mapérde,
maránggà) báklan mo akó sing isá nga bág-o (sing isá ka rekámara nga
bág-o). I'll let you have this mortar for your Feast, but if it should
be ruined, you'll have to buy me a new one. (cf. lupók).

_palúpok_, A shooting mortar (rekámara, rekámra);
fire-cracker. (cf. palupók).

_palús_, To slip out, glide or slide off, free oneself from a grip,
etc.; to escape, disentangle oneself. Nakapalús ang ísdà sa ákon
kamót. The fish slipped out of my hand. Napalusán ang íya kamót sang
isulúlat. The pen slipped from his hand. Palusí ang maís sang íya
pánit. Husk the corn. Daw sa índì na siá makapalús sa mapíot níya
nga kahimtángan. He will scarcely be able to get out of (escape from)
his difficult (tight) position. (cf. pádlus).

_pál-us_, Weal, bruise, laceration, an open wound; to wound, injure,
tear the skin, lacerate; to scorch, singe. (cf. pál-ak, pál-ok, pílas).

_palúsad_, Caus. of lúsad--to step out of a vehicle, dismount,
etc. Palusára siá sa karabáw. Make him come off the buffalo.

_palúsad_, A granary on the ground-floor, a large rice-container
under the main floor of a house. (cf. tambóbo, damiság).

_palusáng_, Caus. of lusáng--to burst open, etc.

_palús-aw_, Caus. of lús-aw--to lose colour, to fade; be or become
a--failure,--fiasco.

_palúsò_, Caus. of lúsò--to fray, etc.

_palusô-lúsò_, Dim. of palúsò.

_palusó-lúso_, To abate, diminish, moderate, calm. Palusólusóha ang
ímo kaákig, painóíno, etc. Moderate your wrath, calm your mind, etc.

_palusút_, Caus. of lusút--to slip or squeeze through, etc. Palútsa
siá sa kodál nga kawáyan. Make him (Let him) slip (creep, squeeze
himself) through the bamboo-fence.

_palútak_, Caus. of lútak--to step in, etc. Indì mo pagpalutákon ang
mga bátà sa lúnang. Don't allow the children to wade through the mud.

_paluták_, Caus. of luták--to cleave, split, break.

_palútay_, Caus. of lútay--to set muscles, etc.

_palutáy-lútay_, Dim. and Freq. of palútay. Also: to engage in a tug
of war, fight, try one's strength against another.


_palúya_, To weaken, make weak; feign or pretend weakness. Nagapalúya
gid lang siá sang íya láwas sa labíng diótay nga ginabátyag. He
pretends great weakness for the slightest indisposition. Ang mabáskug
nga pangabúdlay nagpalúya sang íya láwas. Hard work made--his body
weak,--him feeble. Paluyáha siá. Weaken him. (pa, lúya).

_palúyà_, To tire, make tired or exhausted. Paluyáa lang siá. Make
him tired. Tire him out. (pa, lúyà).

_palúyag_, Caus. of lúyag--to like, etc.

_paluyán-lúyan_, (B) See pabuyánbúyan, paliyánlíyan--to neglect,
disregard, etc.

_paluyáw_, Caus. of luyáw--to be out in the open air,
etc. (cf. palayáw).

_paluyáw-lúyaw_, Dim. and Freq. of paluyáw.

_pálwa_, See pálua--palm leaves, etc.

_pálya_, (Sp. falla) Fault, defect, deficiency; break, leaving work,
taking a day (or more) off, shirking one's duty; to shirk, stop (leave
off) working for a time, default. (cf. lápas, palangán, pasalipótpot).

_pamáa_, Form or shape of legs. Matibúnog (Magamáy) siá sing pamáa. He
has round, stout (small, slender) legs. (cf. páa).

_pamáan_, (B) To make known, advise, inform, let know, acquaint
with, impart to, apprize, give notice, bring--, send--, leave--,
word. Pamán-i siá. Inform him. Ipamáan mo sa íya nga----. Give him
notice that----. Pinamán-an níya kamí sang nahanabô dídto. He has sent
us word of what has happened there. He informed us of the happenings
there. (cf. máan, pahibaló, pasáyod).

_pamábà, pamâbâ_, Way or manner of talking; form or shape of one's
mouth; to talk much and flippantly, tell stories (lies), be a
chatterbox, to prattle, prate. Ang ímo pamábà dílì bágay sa isá ka
magtotóon. Your way of talking is unbecoming in a teacher. Sín-o
ang namábà (nagpamábà) sinâ? Who told that story? Who said such
silly things?

_pamábdus_, Freq. and Caus. of mábdus--to be pregnant,
etc. (cf. pangmábdus).

_pamádbad_, Freq. of bádbad--to wind on a reel; unravel, etc.

_pamádmad_, Freq. and Caus. of mádmad. To get quite awake, become
wide awake, wake up, get one's head clear after sleep. Pamádmad ka
ánay. First get fully awake. Kán-a iní sa pagpamádmad sa ímo (agúd ka
mamadmarán). Eat this in order to get quite awake. Ginaróti siá, kay
naggwâ sa hangínan nga walâ makapamádmad. He fell ill (had a fit or
swoon), because he went out into the breezy air before he was quite
awake (i.e. he did not stay long enough in the room after awaking
from sleep, but rose and immediately went out in the fresh air).

_pamádo_, Strong, durable, lasting. Pamádo nga sapátos, baláy,
kampanáryo, kodál, etc. Strong boots, a strong house, belfry,
fence, etc.

_pamadô_, To go to a banquet, assist at a feast. Indì siá buút
magpamadô karón, kay masákò siá. He does not like (wish) to assist
at the feast, because he is very busy. (cf. bádò).

_pamádyà_, Freq. of pádyà. To tease, call by a nickname or other
contemptuous name.

_pamág-an_, To lighten, make light, make bearable, to ease. Pamag-aná
ang íya lúlan. Lighten his burden. Give him a light load to carry. Put
a light load on him. (pa, mág-an).

_pamág-ang_, Corner, corner-stone; form or shape of one's molar
teeth. (cf. bág-ang).

_pamághot_, Freq. of bághot--to cut back--, cut off a piece of
(less than half an inch a day)--, lop off the tip of--, the "swak"
(the fruitstalk of the coconut palm) in order that the tubâ may flow
the better.

_pamág-o_, Freq. of bág-o--to make new, renew, renovate.

_pamág-o_, Caus. and Freq. of mág-o--to be or feel new in a place
or position, not habituated, not familiar, unaccustomed, startled,
surprised. Namág-o siá dídto. He feels new there, is not yet quite
at home there, has not yet settled down there, feels strange in his
new surroundings. Anhon ko ang pagpamág-o sa mga bisíta?--Pasud-aní
silá sing ginamós kag pahigdaá silá sa salúg. What shall I do to
startle (give a surprise to) the visitors?--Give them pickled fish
(as a side-dish to rice) and let them sleep on the floor.


_pamág-on_, Freq. of pág-on--to strengthen, fortify, to be firm,
decided, resolute, determined.

_pamahál_, To make dear, overcharge, sell at a high (extravagant)
price, ask (exorbitantly) much, raise--, put up--, boost--, the
price. Pamahalá ang tubâ. Raise the price of tubâ. Ginpamahál níya ang
mga kólon sing taglimá ka dakô. He put five centavos more on--, he put
up (boosted) the price of--, each earthen rice-pot (by five centavos).

_pamahaón_, (B) Freq. of bahaón--to sneeze. (cf. pangátsi).

_pamáhaw_, Breakfast, afternoon tea, light repast; to have breakfast,
to breakfast, take a light repast. Namáhaw (Nagpamáhaw) ka na? Have
you breakfasted yet? Tagái silá sing pamáhaw. Give them a light
repast. Papamaháwa silá. Give them--, prepare for them--, let them
have--, breakfast. Pinamaháwan kami níla--, hinatágan kamí níla sing
pamáhaw--, dídto sa íla baláy. They gave us breakfast there at their
house. (cf. báhaw, meriénda).

_pamahóg_, Freq. of bahóg--to mix food, feed a pig, etc. (pandamóg).

_pamahóng-pahóng_, Attention, respect, consideration (for the feelings
of others), concern. Sa walâ gid sing pamahóngpahóng pumalapít siá
sa ákon. He approached me--, came near me--, without any formality
or without any consideration for those present. (cf. pahóngpahóng).

_pamáhoy_, Freq. of báhuy. A scarecrow; a ghost; to behave and do
mischief like a witch, to frighten people by night, to haunt. Si
Fuláno nagapamáhoy, konó. N.N. is scaring people by night, they say.

_pamáhug_, Freq. of páhug--to intimidate, frighten, scare, threaten,
daunt, overawe, deter by threats.

_pamahúlay_, Freq. of bahúlay--cold sweat (perspiration); to be in a--,
be covered with--, cold sweat.

_pamáin, pamaín-páin_, Freq. of páin--to separate, segregate, etc.

_pamakál_, Freq. of bakál--to buy, etc. Ang pamakál kag
pamalígyà. Buying and selling. Baráto (Mahál) siá sing pamakál. He
buys cheap (dear).

_pamákdol_, To knuckle, beat, strike. (cf. pákdol).

_pamákhò_, To sigh, grieve, etc. (cf. bákhò).

_pamáklang_, Freq. of páklang--to form--, have--, grow--, large leaves
(of palms or the like).

_pamákol_, (H) Freq. of bákol--to beat, cane, cudgel.

_pamáksì_, Freq. of páksì--to break or twist off, etc.

_pamákud_, Freq. of bákud--to be strong, firm, etc.

_pamakúd_, Anything that gives strength or security; a strong wall,
fence, etc.; fastening, lock, bolt, or the like. (cf. pamákud).

_pamakudán_, (B) See pamakurán.

_pamakurán_, (H) Fortress, fort, fortification, stronghold; strength,
firmness, durability, stability. (cf. bákud, palamakurán, pamakudán).

_pamákyaw_, Freq. of pákyaw--to contract for the whole, etc.

_pamalá_, (H) Caus. and Freq. of malá--to be dry, etc.

_pamaládpad_, Freq. of paládpad. Also: To wave, swing to and fro,
shake, flourish, brandish.

_pamaláklon_, (H) Freq. of baláklon, bakál. To visit shops
with the intention of making purchases, to buy goods, to go out
shopping. Nagapamaláklon pa silá. They are still buying goods. Kon
tápus na kamó makapamaláklon bumálik kamó dirí sa ámon sa madalî. When
you have done (finished) your shopping, come back to us here at
once. (cf. pamakál).

_pamalákpak_, Freq. of palákpak--to clap the hands, to clap, applaud,
give applause; to flap--, flutter--, the wings, etc. (cf. pákpak).

_pamalándong_, Freq. of palándong. Meditation, consideration,
contemplation, reflection, thought; to meditate, contemplate,
consider well, think well on, give (a matter) thought, ponder,
muse over, reflect upon. Pamalandongá inâ sing maáyo. Ponder that
well. Consider that matter carefully. (cf. painóíno, hunâhúnà, dúmdum,
tamúd, basóbáso, libólíbo).

_pamalandongánan_, Meditation, etc. See palandóngon, pamalándong.


_pamalandóngon_, Meditation, etc. See palandóngon, pamalándong.

_pamalangáw_, A rail, tie, crossbeam, transverse piece of wood,
bamboo, etc.; the horizontal bamboos lashed to the upright posts in
the fishtrap called "punút".

_pamalása_, Freq. of balása--to mix or shuffle cards, to cut (a pack
of) cards; the way or method of shuffling cards, etc.

_pamalásan_, Freq. of balásan--to warn, give notice beforehand, etc.

_pamalatián_, Sickness, illness, infirmity, disease, ailment,
complaint, disorder, malady, epidemic, pest, pestilence; to ail,
be sick or ill, fall a victim to--an epidemic,--a plague,--a pest,--a
pestilence, to fall--sick,--ill, take--, catch--, suffer from--, labour
under--, be affected with--, a sickness, etc. (cf. balatían, balatián).

_pamalaúd_, Dysentery; epidemic of dysentery. (cf. balaúd).

_pamaláwpaw_, To avoid the ordinary road, walk (wander) about in fields
or in a jungle, pick one's way along the bank of a river, or the like.

_pamaláye_, The relationship between the parents of the bride and
the parents of the bridegroom before the marriage of the young
couple; to stand in such a relationship or to make efforts to
bring it about, to woo for, be a match-maker or go-between, ask
for the hand of a young lady on behalf of her admirer. Nagapamaláye
silá. They are arranging the marriage between their respective son
and daughter. (cf. baláye--the relationship of the parents after the
marriage of their respective children). (cf. pangágon).

_pamálì_, (H) Freq. of pálì--to heal over, form a scab, etc.

_pamál-i_, The imperative passive of the obsolete pamaló (Freq. of
baló)--to understand, but now only used in the meaning: How can I
(you, he, etc.) know? I (you, he, they, etc.) know nothing about it,
or the like. Pamál-i ko sináng mga butáng. I know nothing about such
matters. How can I know such things? Pamál-i níya sinâ. He knows
nothing about it. Pamál-i níla sang pangomérsyo, nga walâ níla
pagtón-i. What do they know about commerce (business)? They have
never studied it. (cf. panghimál-i, kalibutáni, man-ihí).

_pamalíbad_, (H) Freq. of balíbad--to find excuses, etc.

_pamalígyà_, Freq. of balígyà--to sell, etc.; way or method of selling,
etc. Mahál (Baráto) siá sing pamalígyà. He sells dear (cheap).

_pamaligyáon_, Selling, sale, selling price. Sa súbung karón
nga pamaligyáon----. At present selling--or--at the current
price----. (cf. balígyà, pamalígyà).

_pamálik_, Freq. of bálik--to return, etc.

_pamalík-bálik_, Dim. of pamálik.

_pamalingót_, To be displeased, angry, etc. See
pamulingót. (cf. bulingót).

_pamalískad_, Freq. of balískad--upside down.

_pamalô_, To make use of a wooden hammer, hammer with a palô or mallet.

_pamálò_, Freq. of bálò. To give an alarm; to crow (of
cocks); cock's crow. Ang pamálò--or--pagpamálò sang manók. The
crowing of the cock. Ang manók nagapamálò. The cock crows (is
crowing). (cf. toktoróok, pamálok).

_pamálok_, Freq. of pálok. To crow (of a cock). (cf. pamálò).

_pamálon_, Freq. of bálon--to take provisions along for a trip, etc.

_pamalóng_, See pamalúng.

_pamalótbot_, Freq. of balótbot--to pull up, lift out of water, etc.

_pamálpag_, Freq. of pálpag--to hammer, etc.

_pamálpal_, Freq. of pálpal. To put sticks, stakes or small posts into
the ground. Ginpamalpalán sang kaminéro ang binít sang dálan. The
road-mender planted stakes along the side of the road. Nagapamálpal
siá. He is setting sticks (small posts) into the ground.

_pamáltò_, To wear--, show--, something for the first time, as a new
dress, etc. Ipamáltò ko iníng bág-o ko nga térno sa ámon pándut. I
shall wear this new suit for the first time at our feast. Nagpamáltò
siá sang íya bág-o nga báyò nga sóklà sa bádò sa baláy ni Fuláno. She
displayed her new silk-blouse at the banquet in N.N.'s house. (cf. dunâ
which, at times, is also used in the meaning of pamáltò).

_pamalúng_, Freq. of balúng--to be drunk, etc.

_pamalúng_, Freq. of palóng. Also: to look or stare about one with
gaping mouth after having missed or lost something or in disappointment
at the failure of obtaining a desired object. Sang pagabút níya sa
dungkáan namalúng siá nga daw lipóng sa kasákit, kay ang sakayánhúlas
naghalín na. When he arrived at the harbour he stood there (staring
with) gaping (mouth) like one stunned with grief, because the steamer
had left. (cf. pamusímusí, pamulúng).

_pamalús_, Freq. of palús--to slip out of, escape, etc.

_pamána_, Freq. of bána--husband. To take a husband, to marry (of a
woman), be in search of a husband. Buút siá magpamána. Buút níya ang
pagpamána. She wishes to--marry,--get a husband.

_pamanâ_, To use a bow and arrow, shoot--, let off--, fly--, an
arrow. (cf. panâ).

_pamánaw_, (B) Freq. of pánaw--to walk, go, march. (cf. pangádto,
panglakát).

_pamánday_, Freq. of pánday. To be a carpenter, etc.; to practise
carpentry, etc. Nagapamánday siá. He is a carpenter, smith, etc. He
is an artisan. He plies the trade of a skilled craftsman.

_pamandáyan_, An artisan's shop (as a carpenter's, joiner's, smith's,
wheelwright's, etc.).

_pamángag_, Freq. of bángag--to crack, split, cleave; fissure, crack
(in the soil, especially in rice-fields).

_pamángan_, Freq. of bángan--to ambush. (cf. pamánggà).

_pamánggà_, Freq. of bánggà--to lie in wait for,
ambush. (cf. pamángan).

_pamánggas_, Freq. of pánggas--to set seeds by making a small hole in
the soil with a dibble, putting in the seeds and covering them with
earth. Sa tápus ang áni pamanggasán mo ang talámnan sing maís. After
the rice-harvest you will plant corn in the field. Nagapamánggas
silá. They are setting seeds (by hand). (cf. sábud--to sow, strew,
scatter, broadcast).

_pamángil_, Freq. of bángil--to put something underneath, etc.

_pamángkot_, Freq. of pángkot--to ask information, query, etc.

_pamangkotánon_, Things to be asked, queries,
question. (cf. palamangkotánon).

_pamángon_, Freq. of bángon--to rise from a recumbent position.

_pamangpángon_, River bank; lands adjacent to the banks of a river; to
be situated--, stretched--, to walk--, along a river bank. (pángpang).

_pamánhaw_, Freq. of bánhaw--to raise to life; rise from the dead.

_pamánhop_, (B) Freq. of pánhop. To oil the hair with the juice
of coconut meat either chewed or otherwise crushed for the
purpose. (cf. panghísò).

_pamánhul_, A swelling, jab, prod, punch, hardness, callousness;
to swell, become swollen, hard, callous; to gall, fret, chafe, be
bruised and swollen. (cf. bánhul).

_pamaníg_, To spread one's mat, lie down on a mat. (cf. baníg).

_pamánit_, Form, shape, colour of one's skin; to skin, peel,
flay. Bukáy (kayumánggì) siá sing pamánit. He is white (brown). He
is white-skinned (brown-skinned).

_pamánsag_, To celebrate, etc. See pahimánsag, bánsag.

_pamantálà_, Freq. of bantálà--to publish, etc. (cf. pabalítà).

_pamantaláan, pamantalaán_, Newspaper, periodical, magazine,
gazette. (cf. balasahón).

_pamántay_, Freq. of bántay--to guard, watch.

_pamántug_, Freq. of bántug--to be, become or make famous. (The
Caus. is pabántug).

_pamánwa_, The management or direction of a township; to live as a
citizen, take part in public affairs, etc.; to govern a municipality,
etc. (cf. bánwa, himánwa).

_pamányos_, Freq. of bányos. To put on a salve or plaster; rub
oneself. Nagapamányos siá. He is putting on a plaster, is rubbing
himself with some salve or ointment.

_pamaón_, Freq. of paón--bait; to bait.

_pamápà, pamâpâ_, Freq. of pápà. To hammer, strike or beat as with
a hammer. Pamapáa ang maís túbtub nga magkabókbok sing maáyo. Beat
the corn till it is quite reduced to powder.

_pamapák_, Freq. of papák--to strike, beat, hammer. (cf. pamápà).

_pamápas_, Freq. of pápas--to destroy, exterminate, etc.

_pamapás_, Freq. of papás--to beat or strike down; to attack, assault.

_pamarág_, (B) Freq. of parág--to send or drive away (off); to turn
a person out (of doors), refuse hospitality. (cf. panábug).

_pamaragáng_, Freq. and Caus. of maragáng--to be blood-stained,
etc.; to spread, extend, cover a large extent of the skin (said of
an eruptive skin-disease, etc.). (cf. pígang, dalupápan).

_pamarakát_, To step briskly, walk quickly (with raised skirts,
as women do when in a hurry, etc.). (cf. lakát, baláking, baráking).

_pamaráy-báray_, Freq. of baráybáray--to be stiff, etc.; to confuse,
be confused, etc. Nagapamaráybáray ang íya likód. He has a feeling
of pain and stiffness in the back. He has rheumatic pains in the
back. His back feels stiff and painful.

_pamárbas_, To shave (the beard). Mamárbas akó. I am going
to--shave,--have a shave. Maáyo gid ang pagpamárbas mo. Nakapamárbas
ka sing maáyo gid. You have shaved yourself very well indeed. You
have given yourself a very good shave. (cf. bárbas).

_pamaríphi_, To reject, refuse, decline; to make a gesture of
aversion, disgust or anger, gesticulate wildly as a sign of refusal
or disapproval. (cf. pamiríphi, pamirípirí).

_pamarókpok_, To flower (of the mango-tree, etc.). (cf. parókpok,
pamorókpok).

_pamása_, Freq. of bása--to read, etc. Method--, way--, manner--,
of one's reading.

_pamasâ_, Freq. of basâ--to be wet, etc.

_pamasá-bása_, Dim. of pamása--to read, etc.

_pamasâ-basâ_, Dim. and Freq. of basâ--to be wet, etc.

_pamásad_, Freq. of pásad--to erect, establish, found. Also:
foundation, constitution; method--, way--, of building houses, etc.

_pamasáran, pamasarán_, Base, ground-work, foundation, principles,
constitution. (cf. pásad, pamásad, palatúkdan).

_pamásaw_, (B) Freq. and Caus. of másaw--to feast, eat well,
etc. Namásaw silá dídto sa bádò. They ate well (there) at the
banquet. Pamasáwa ang mga bátà. Let the children eat to their heart's
content. (cf. pamáskwa, kánkan, paáyaw; papáskwa the Caus. of páskwa).

_pamáskò_, To use for a feast, display on a solemn occasion as during
Holy Week, or the like; to spend a feast. Ipamáskò ko iníng bág-o
ko nga delárgo. I shall wear this new pair of trousers during Holy
Week. Diín ikáw mamáskò? Where will you spend Holy Week? (cf. páskò).

_pamáskug_, Freq. of báskug. Strength, health; solidity, security;
stiffness, rigidity; to be or become strong, robust, etc.; to be or
become stiff, rigid, inflexible. Namáskug ang íya páa. His leg became
stiff, rigid.

_pamáskwa_, To feast, eat or dine well, attend a big dinner or banquet,
assist at a feast or solemnity. Namáskwa silá dídto. They had a big
dinner there. (cf. páskwa).

_pamások_, Freq. of pások--to wedge in--, put in--, between, etc.

_pamásol_, Freq. of básol--to reprimand, blame, etc.

_pamasól-basól_, Dim. of pamásol. To expostulate with, remonstrate
with.

_pamáspas_, Freq. of páspas. To cut down, fell, lay low all the trees,
shrubs, bananas, etc. in a limited area, strike down with a pole
fruit from trees, etc.


_památà_, Freq. of bátà--to give birth to. Child-bearing. To bear
children, bring forth, have offspring. Ginpamatáan (ginpamát-an)
siá ni Fuláno. She had a child by N.N. (cf. pamábdus).

_pamatá_, Sight, eyesight; look, gaze; form or shape of one's
eyes. Maáyo siá sing pamatá. He has a good sight, he sees
well. (cf. matá, paguyá, pangmatá).

_pamatádyong_, The form, shape or way of wearing the Filipino skirt
called patádyong. Ang íya pamatádyong buyâ. She wears her patádyong
slovenly, loose, not well tied, untidily. (cf. patádyong).

_pamatán-on_, Youth, young man, young person, boy, girl, lad, lass,
growing out of childhood into manhood (womanhood). (cf. bátà, památà).

_památbat_, To read out, give a decision or sentence; to
lead at prayers, read the prayers; declaration, decision,
sentence. Pagapamatbatán silá sang hokóm sa buás. Tomorrow the
judge will read to them his decision. Nabantálà na ang památbat
sang hokóm. The decision of the judge has been published. Sín-o ang
nagapamátbat sang Rosáryo? Who leads in saying the rosary? Pamatbatí
ang nobéna kay San Bisénte. Lead in the prayers of the novena of
S. Vincent. (cf. bása, súgud, bátbat).

_památdan_, To get or look for cuttings of sugar-cane; to cut
sugar-cane in pieces for planting. (pátdan).

_pamatî_, Freq. of batî--to hear, etc. (cf. památì).

_památì_, Freq. of batî--to hear. To hear obediently, listen, lend
a willing ear. Pamatíi kamí, oh Ginóo. Oh Lord, hear us. Indì siá
mamátì. He will not listen.

_památì_, Freq. of bátì--to feel. Feeling, physical condition. Dílì
maáyo ang pagpamátì (památì) níya. He does not feel well. Mabúg-at
kaáyo ang památì (pagbátì) níya. His condition is quite serious,
very grave.

_památi_, Freq. of páti--to believe, etc.

_památiag_, Freq. of bátiag--to feel, have a sensation, etc. (památyag
id.).

_pamatík-batík, pamatík-matík_, To investigate, inquire into, collect
information, gather news, try to elucidate the facts or truth (from
rumours or hearsay). (cf. batíkbatík, matíkmatík).

_pamató_, Counterpoise, counterweight attached to one end of a pole
for raising water and the like; metal blocks, balls or rings attached
to a fishing net, sinker. (bató).

_pamató_, To throw stones. Freq. of bató.

_pamatók_, Freq. of patók. To strike, hammer or pommel, especially
the head. Ginpamatók sang magtotóon ang mga úlo sang sutíl nga mga
bátà. The teacher pommelled the heads of the naughty boys.

_památok_, Freq. of bátok. To resist, oppose, protest, offer
opposition; a protest, objection. Madámò ang nagapamátok siníng
pagbulút-an. Many are opposing this law. Nagpasákà silá sing památok
sa matáas nga punoán. They sent a protest to the highest official.

_památok_, Freq. of pátok. To found, establish, etc. Igò lang siá
sang památok sing kabutigán. He is only fit for the spreading of lies,
for setting lies on foot.

_památon_, Freq. of báton--to receive.

_památse_, To put on a plaster, a leaf, etc. Nagapamátse siá. He is
putting on a plaster. (Freq. of pátse).

_památyag_, See památiag.

_pamául_, Freq. of pául. To weaken, lose strength, get tired or worn
out; to grow stiff and painful (of muscles, etc.).

_pamáw-as, pamáwas_, Freq. of báw-as--to be sterile, etc. Also: to
ingratiate oneself with--, ask alms, gifts, etc.--, from a childless
couple; to empty, take all, exhaust, seize--, lay (get) hold of--,
everything so that nothing is left for others. (cf. pakibáw-as).

_pamáwì_, Freq. of báwì--to redeem, reclaim, etc. (cf. himawî).

_pamawód_, Freq. of pawód. To sew nípà on rods for roofing. Nagapamawód
siá. He is a maker of nípà--shingles (for roofing purposes).

_pamáyà_, Freq. of báyà--to leave, abandon, let alone, etc.

_pamáyad_, Freq. of báyad--to pay, etc.


_pamáyhon_, Freq. of báyhon--form, shape, outward appearance, etc.

_pamáylo_, Freq. of báylo--to change, exchange, etc.

_pamáyò_, To wear a--jacket,--blouse,--shirt-waist; the way or manner
of wearing one's (upper) dress. Indì pa siá anád sa pamáyò. Walâ pa siá
maánad sa pamáyò. He (She) is not accustomed yet to wearing a jacket
(blouse). Ang íya pamáyò dílì ígò (ángay). He does not wear his jacket
(She does not wear her blouse)--right,--in the right fashion,--in
the approved way.

_pamayó_, Freq. of bayó--to pound rice. Nagapamayó siá. He pounds
rice (professionally). He is a pounder of rice. He earns his living
by pounding rice.

_pamayô_, Freq. of payô--to move or shake up and down. (cf. payôpayô).

_pamáyong_, Freq. of páyong. To carry an umbrella, use--, put up--,
an umbrella; the way of carrying an umbrella, etc.

_pamáypay_, Freq. of páypay--to fan; to beckon.

_pámbo_, (B) A flow of blood--, a bleeding--, from the nose; to
bleed (said of the nose). Nagapámbo (Ginapámbo) siá. His nose is
bleeding. Pinámbo siá kahápon. Yesterday his nose was bleeding. Andam
ka, agúd índì ka pagpambohón liwán. Be on your guard or your nose
will bleed again. (cf. súnggo).

_pamentáha_, To be to one's interest or advantage, to gain, profit,
benefit, have the start of, reap advantage from, turn to good
account. (cf. bentáha, himulús, sáplid, kinaáyo).

_pamerénsa_, To iron--, press--, clothes, etc. with a
flat-iron. (cf. perénsa).

_pamidô-pidô_, Freq. of pidôpidô--to sneak or slink away.

_pamídyà_, To finger, twang, touch or play a musical
instrument. Pamidyái sing maáyo ang mga kwérdas. Finger the chords
well. Twang (pluck) the strings properly. Observe the right fingering
in striking the chords.

_pamidyáan_, The finger-board of a musical instrument,
key-board. (cf. palamidyáan).

_pamidyô-pídyò_, To be or act like a loafer,
parasite. (cf. pidyôpídyò).

_pamiérde_, Freq. of piérde--to lose, sustain a loss, etc.

_pamiésta_, To assist at a feast, go to a feast or festival. Mamiésta
man ikaw? Are you also going to the Feast? Madámò ang namiésta
dídto. Many went there--for the Feast,--to the festival (Freq. of
piésta).

_pamígà_, Freq. of bígà. To act like a harlot, practise
harlotry. (cf. pangálpot id.).

_pamíhak_, Freq. of píhak--to cut in two.

_pamihák_, Freq. of pihák. One half; page (of a book).

_pamíking_, Freq. of píking. To wrinkle, pucker, crease, be wrinkled
or wrinkly, be or become furrowed with wrinkles, form folds and
wrinkles. Nagapamíking ang pánit sang íya kamót. The skin of his hand
is becoming wrinkled. (cf. palamíking id.).

_pamilâ_, To give one the wink, etc. See pamírà, pamirâ.

_pamilág-pilág_, Freq. of pilágpilág--to be thinly spread, etc.

_pamilahó_, (H) To grow or form a spike (biláho). (cf. pamiráho).

_pamilák_, Freq. of pilák--to hurl, throw away.

_pamílak_, Freq. of pílak--silver, money. To make money, get rich,
collect wealth. Maíwat sa karón nga panahón ang pamílak. At present
money is--difficult to obtain,--scarce,--tight.

_pamilát_, Freq. of bilát. Indì ka magpamilát, kay maláw-ay ang súbung
sinâ nga hámbal. Don't say "bilát", for such--talk is unbecoming,--an
expression is obscene, for to use a word like that is dirty.

_pamiláy-pílay_, Freq. of piláypílay--to tire, etc. Nagapamiláypílay
ang íya páa sa lakás nga paglakát. His legs are stiff and tired,
because he has walked too much, because he has done too much walking.

_pamilí_, Freq. of bilí. To value, put a price on, estimate at,
charge for, etc.


_pamílì_, Freq. of pílì--to choose select.

_pamilihón_, Price, cost. Walâ gid sing aníno nga magasáka ang
pamilihón sang kalámay kag sang kóprak sa madalî. There is no sign
yet that the price of sugar and copra--will rise,--is going up,
in the near future. (cf. bilí).

_pamilók_, (H) The kind or form of one's eyelashes; to blink, to
wink. (cf. pilók, milók).

_pamilókpilók_, Dim. of pamilók.

_pamílpig_, Freq. of pílpig--to tear, twist or beak off.

_paminángon_, Freq. of binángon. To wear a bolo. Ang kalabánan sang
mga umánhon nagapaminángon. The majority of those living in the
country wear bolos on their hips.

_pamíngaw_, Freq. of bíngaw. To lose a tooth; to lose the
milk-teeth. Ang mga bátà nagapamínggaw. Children lose their milk-teeth.

_pamíngaw_, To make sad, to sadden, cause dreariness or loneliness,
feel lonely, be sentimental. (pa, míngaw).

_pamínghal_, Freq. of bínghal--to bark, etc.

_pamíngkal_, Freq. of bíngkal--to force open, break in (off).

_pamíngkong_, To gather with the fingers remnants of food or
the like left on a plate, etc. Ang mga bátà nagapamíngkong sang
kalámay sa pasungán. The boys are collecting the sugar left in
the trough. Pamingkongá lang ang mga kán-on nga nagapamilít sa
pínggan. Just collect with your fingers the rice that is sticking to
the plate. (cf. panígput).

_pamingót_, To be envious, spiteful; be stingy, miserly; to chafe,
fret, be angry, look cross or offended. (cf. palamingót).

_pamínhod_, Numbness, stiffness; to be benumbed, etc. See bínhod,
palamínhod.

_pamíntal_, To bar, block, secure, bolt. (cf. pintál--a bolt).

_pamíntas_, Freq. of píntas. To treat cruelly, harshly. Indì mo
pagpamintasán ang mga bátà. Don't be cruel to children (to the
children).

_pamíntig_, Freq. of bíntig--to break or twist off.

_pamíntok_, Freq. of píntok--to dot, spot, puncture, etc. Also:
to beat, thrash. Pinamintokán níya ang íya nga tíngkoy. He thrashed
him. (Literally: He marked (dotted) his neck).

_pamíod_, Freq. of píod--to fold, etc. Maábtik siá magpamíod kag
maghúsay sang mga panápton. She is dexterous at folding and arranging
clothes.

_pamípi_, Freq. of pípi--to rub off, brush away. Nagapamípi silá
sang mga subáy sa íla mga bútkon. They are brushing--off the ants
from their arms,--the ants off their arms.

_pamípì_, Freq. of pípì--to beat out, crush out, squeeze out, extract
by beating, etc.; to clean the hair, apply a hairwash. Nagapamípì
silá sing salangkúgi. They are beating out the juice of the salangkúgi.

_pamírà, pamirâ_, To give a sign with the eyes, give one the wink. Indì
ka magpamírà. Don't wink (with your eyes). Pinamiráan níya akó. He
winked at me. (cf. mírà, mirâmirâ--mucus (of the eyes)).

_pamiráho_, (B) To grow a large spike (biráho) of flowers at the top
of a plant, said of sugar cane, tigbaw-reed, etc. Nagapamiráho na
ang tubó. The sugar cane is flowering now. (cf. pamilahó).

_pamiríphi, pamiríphì_, To turn away from in disgust, reject
scornfully, refuse, repulse, make a sign or gesture of disdain;
to brush off. (cf. pamípi, pamirípi).

_pamirípi_, See pamiríphi id.

_pamirí-pirí_, See pamaríphi, pamiríphi--to decline, refuse, etc.

_pamísa_, A Mass stipend or Mass intention; to have a Mass said or
pay the stipend for a Mass intention. May panáad siá sa pagpamísa. He
has made a vow to have a mass said. Ginpamisáhan ko si nánay. I had
a mass said for mother. Ipamísa ko lang iníng kwárta. I intend to
give the money for masses. Madámò nga pamísa ang ginabáton ni Párì
Hosé. Father José is receiving many mass-intentions. (pa, mísa).

_pamís-ak_, Freq. of bís-ak--to cleave asunder, to split.

_pamísak_, Freq. of písak--to wedge in, put in a wedge.


_pamísan_, Freq. of písan--to be or become diligent, etc. to apply
diligence, perform assiduously, do with zeal and energy.

_pamisáwpisáw_, Freq. of pisáwpisáw--to wink, blink, open and
close the eyelids repeatedly; to nictitate or nictate (of a bird's
eyes). (cf. pamisók, pamisókpísok).

_pamisík_, Freq. of pisík--to jump or move with great agility, to
make a swift movement or sudden rush.

_pamisíl_, Freq. of pisíl--to press, compress, squeeze.

_pamíslit_, Freq. of píslit. See pamisíl id.

_pamíslong_, Freq. of píslong--to pour or put rice into the mortar
for pounding.

_pamisók_, Freq. of pisók--to close--, shut--, the eyes, etc. To wink,
open and close the eyes, blink, twinkle.

_pamisók-písok, pamisók-pisók_, To wink, blink twinkle. (cf. pamisók,
pamisáwpisáw).

_pamisót_, Freq. of pisót. To say "pisót", etc.

_pamísta_, See pamiésta id.

_pamíste_, Freq. of péste. Pest, plague, epidemic, pestilence, murrain.

_pamíste_, Freq. of bíste. To dress, wear garments; form and shape
of one's dress; way and manner of wearing one's dress.

_pamítak_, To enclose, store (rice, etc.). (cf. pítak).

_pamíto_, Freq. of píto--pipe, pennywhistle, catcall. To blow--a
whistle,--a horn,--a siren, to toot, honk, wind. Nagapamíto ang
polisíya. Policemen blow the whistle. Madalî na lang magapamíto ang
sakayán-húlas. Within a short time the steamer will whistle. Pamitóhi
siá. Whistle to him (to come).

_pamítos_, Freq. of pítos--to slap, strike; a slap on the hand of
one who loses in games like balínsay, kodô, búnggit, etc.

_pamítos_, Freq. of bítos--intestinal worm. To have intestinal worms;
the disease called "worms".

_pamiyó-míyo_, (Probably derived from the Spa. mio--my, mine). To
be egoistic, selfish; to be concerned only about oneself; to
silently disregard or ignore petitions, questions, etc. made by
others. Nagapamiyómíyo lang siá, ápang sa waláy duhádúha may madámò
siá nga pílak. He just keeps his own counsel, but he certainly has
much money. Sa tungâ sang pamiyómíyo kag paiyáíya sang kalabánan sa
karón nga panahón may ibán pa man nga mga táo nga may patugsíling kag
pasunáid sa íla isigkatáo. Amongst the egoism and selfishness of the
majority now-a-days there still remain some who have consideration
and regard for their neighbours. (cf. paiyáíya).

_pámlay_, A quarter or leg of meat, especially a quarter of beef
or pork.

_pamóbod_, Freq. of bóbod--to scatter grains, etc.

_pamobód-bobód_, Dim. and Freq. of pamóbod.

_pamókol_, Freq. of bókol. To form buds, to bud; to form fruit
especially applied to the coconut palm and burí palm. Nagapamókol na
ang lubí. The coco-palm is now beginning to bear fruit, is bearing
young nuts. Nagapamókol na ang mga rósas. The rose trees are budding,
the roses are--budding,--in bud.

_pamókpok_, Freq. of pókpok--to beat cloth, strike, punch, pommel. Ang
mga babáye nagapamókpok sang íla patádyong. The women are beating their
skirts. Indì ka magpamókpok (mamókpok) sa látok. Indì mo pagpamokpokán
ang látok. Don't strike (hammer) the table with your fist.

_pamólas_, Freq. of bólas. To say "bólas", often used in contempt or
anger. (cf. pamilát--to say "bilát").

_pamólo_, Freq. of pólo--the handle of a bolo. To make a handle for
a bolo, grasp a bolo by the handle, etc.

_pamópò, pamôpô_, Freq. of pópò--to pluck, etc.

_pamoróg-poróg_, To be in a hurry, do at once, do forthwith, be
anxious about, dispatch quickly. (cf. pólog, pórog).

_pamorókpok_, To flower (of mango trees). See pamarókpok.


_pamósò_, Freq. of pósò. Nagapamósò na ang ságing. The bananas are
now budding. Nagapamósò silá sing maís. They are gathering corn-cobs
and making them up into bunches. (cf. pósò, posô).

_pamostúra_, Freq. of postúra. Bearing, carriage, gait, posture,
behaviour, outward appearance, way or manner of dressing, walking,
etc. (cf. pamáyhon).

_pamotón_, Freq. of botón. To put or sew buttons on a garment.

_pamotónes_, Freq. of botónes--button up, to button, fasten the
buttons of a garment.

_pamóyboy_, Freq. of bóyboy--to chide, expostulate with, remonstrate
with, complain of ingratitude, enumerate another's faults and criticize
them, censure, find fault with, carp, cavil. Dáyon gid lámang silá
nagapamoybóyay (nagapamoyboyáy, nagaboyboyánay). They are constantly
finding fault with each other.

_pamóypoy_, See pamúypuy.

_pamúad_, Freq. of búad--to increase, multiply, procreate, augment,
be prolific.

_pamuág-puág_, (B) Freq. of puág-puág--to stand idle, have nothing to
do, kill time, lean lazily against a wall, etc. (cf. panindógtíndog).

_pamúbud_, See pamóbod. (búbud--bóbod).

_pamúdlat_, To stare at, glare at, look at with goggle--eyes. Pamudlatí
ang bátà sa pagpáhug sa íya. Look fierce at the boy in order to
frighten (scare, intimidate) him.

_pamúdlus_, To slip, escape from. (cf. púdlus, palús, pamalús).

_pamudyawí_, Freq. of budyawí. To put forth a spike of flowers at
the top, said of maize or corn.

_pamúdyot_, Freq. of púdyot. To take up a little between the fingers,
as when examining cereals, etc.

_pamuérsa_, Freq. of puérsa. To use force, to force, make great
efforts, apply one's whole strength. (cf. panikasúg, paningúhà,
pamurúg-ot, etc.).

_pamúgaw_, Freq. of búgaw--to drive off, etc.

_pamúgkos_, Freq. of búgkos. To bind up in a bundle or package, etc.

_pamúgo_, Freq. of púgo. To gather, collect; put chickens in a basket
or pen.

_pamúgon_, Freq. of púgun--to work for a daily wage, be a journeyman,
unskilled workman or labourer. Ang pagpamúgon amó ang íya pangítà. He
earns his living as an ordinary workman. Dílì mo pagpapamúgnon
ang mga matámad magpangabúdlay, kóndì ang mga mapísan. Don't
engage labourers that are lazy at work, but such as are diligent
(assiduous). (cf. palamúgnan).

_pamúgtak_, Freq. of púgtak--to dot, spot; to embroider.

_pamugták-púgtak_, Dim. of pamúgtak.

_pamúhat_, Freq. of búhat--to do, act, work, bring about.

_pamúhin_, Freq. of búhin--to diminish, take away from, decrease.

_pamúka_, To rise early in the morning, get up early. Namúka lang
kamí kay mabúgnaw ang paglakát sa kaagáhon. We rose early, for it is
fresh walking in the morning. (cf. púka).

_pamukâ_, Freq. of bukâ--to open, cut open, etc.

_pamukád_, Freq. of bukád. To spread, open out as the petals of
a flower.

_pamúkad_, Freq. of búkad--to disclose, open (boxes, trunks, etc.).

_pamukádkad_, Freq. of bukádkad--to blossom, bloom, flower.

_pamukás_, Freq. of bukás--to open.

_pamulá_, To redden, turn red, blush. (cf. pulá).

_pamulág_, Freq. of bulág--to separate, divorce from, etc.

_pamúlag_, (H) Freq. of púlag. To remonstrate, expostulate with,
scold, talk loudly and excitedly, speak in anger. Anáno ang ímo
ginapamúlag? What is the reason of your using strong language? Why
are you talking so excitedly? (cf. pamúrag, pamúsa, pamulúgsò, puyas,
pamuyáyaw).


_pamulág-púlag_, Dim. of pamúlag. Ginpamulágpulágan níya akó. He
spoke to me angrily, roughly. He scolded me rather severely.

_pamúlak, pamulák_, To flower, blossom, bloom; cover with
flowers. (cf. búlak, pamulákan).

_pamulákan_, Garden, flower-garden, park. (búlak).

_pamulálong_, Freq. and Caus. of mulálong. Ipamulálong mo sa íya
iníng sulát. Let him read through this letter carefully. Namulálong
(Nagmulálong) siá sang amó nga laráwan sa dakô nga katingála. He looked
at that picture with great wonder. He gazed at that very picture in
high admiration.

_pamulán_, To take a walk or stroll by moonlight; to seek the society
of young maidens. In this latter sense cf. panalága. (búlan).

_pamulanón, pamulánon_, Menstruation, monthly discharge, menses,
catamenia. (cf. búlan; régla, tuíd).

_pamulásik_, To fly off, jump off, be propelled or hurled to a great
distance. (cf. ásik, ágsik, ápok, lásik).

_pamúlhug_, Freq. of búlhug--to throw; push, drag. Pinamúlhug níya
ang patáy nga idô sa búhò kag tinampokán sang dútà. He dragged the
dead dog to the hole and covered it with earth.

_pamulingót_, To frown, be displeased, angry. See bulingót, pamalingót.

_pamúlo_, To grasp, grip (by the handle, as a hammer, bolo,
etc.). (cf. púlo, pamólo).

_pamúlong_, (H) Freq. of púlong--to say, speak, utter.

_pamulúd_, Freq. of pulúd--to fell, hew down, lay low.

_pamulug-atón_, Hard or heavy work, drudgery; to work hard, drudge,
make great physical exertions. (cf. búg-at).

_pamulúgnan_, (H) Work, job, position, situation, employment,
(cf. púgon, pulúgnan, palamúgnan, alagarán).

_pamulúg-ot_, To exert oneself, etc. See pamurúg-ot.

_pamulúgsò_, (H) To gesticulate wildly and talk angrily or excitedly,
complain, give utterance to displeasure or dissatisfaction, use
violent language. (cf. pamúlag, pamúrag, pamúsa, etc.).

_pamúlung_, (H) Freq. of búlung--to spin, etc.

_pamúlung_, (H) See pamúlong.

_pamulúng_, Freq. of bulúng. To doctor, be a physician, practise
medicine, etc.

_pamulúng_, To stare at, to gape, etc. See pamalúng.

_pamulúngon_, (H) Speech, utterance, say, flow of words; to speak,
say. (cf. himulúngon, pululungón).

_pamulús-ónon_, (H) Stool, faeces, excrements. Matíg-a nga
palamús-ónon. A hard stool. (cf. pús-on).

_pamúlut_, (H) Freq. of púlut--to take up, lift up, raise from
the ground.

_pamúnak_, Freq. of búnak--to wash clothes. (cf. mamumunák).

_pamúnga_, Freq. of búnga--to bear fruit.

_pamungós_, To make up into a knot or chignon. (cf. pungós).

_pamunít_, Freq. of bunít--to fish with line and hook.

_pamúnlaw_, Freq. of búnlaw--to rinse, etc. Also: to wash oneself
with clean or sweet water, as after a bath in the sea or the like.

_pamúnò_, Beginning, start, commencement; heading, title (of a book),
introduction, exordium, opening sentences (of a discourse, etc.);
to commence, start, begin, enter upon, lead off. (cf. púnò).

_pamunô_, Freq. of bunô--to stab, stick, etc.

_pamunô_, Freq. of punô--to fill, etc.

_pamunóan_, To visit (inspect) the "bunóan" of a fish-corral (in
order to catch the fish that may have entered).

_pamúnong_, Freq. of púnong--to enclose, confine; build a dam or dyke.

_pamúntug_, Freq. of búntug--to strike (of snakes).


_pamúnyag_, Freq. of búnyag--to water; to baptize.

_pamúrag_, (B) See pamúlag, pamúsa, pamulúgsò, pamúyas--to scold,
fume, bluster, rage, thunder, storm, berate, vituperate.

_pamuríg-ot_, See pamurúg-ot.

_pamurúg-ot_, (B) To use all one's strength, make great efforts,
apply force to. (cf. pamuérsa, pamurús, pamulúg-ot).

_pamúrung_, (B) See pamúlung.

_pamurús_, (B) Freq. of purús. To use force, etc. See pamuérsa,
pamurúg-ot.

_pamúsa_, To scold loudly, talk in an angry voice, show displeasure
by using strong or violent language. (cf. pamulúgsò, pamúrag, etc.).

_pamúsbus_, Freq. of búsbus--to cut open, etc. Also: to perform a
surgical operation, be a surgeon, practise surgery, operate upon.

_pamusíkad_, Freq. of busíkad--to part asunder, etc.

_pamusíl_, Freq. of pusíl--to shoot, fire, fire a rifle, let off,
discharge a firearm, etc.

_pamusílang_, To wear spectacles or glasses; to use a magnifying
glass or lens. (cf. siláng, tagosílang).

_pamusí-musí_, To gape, stare in wonder, look about with wide
open eyes, show surprise or disappointment by opening the eyes
wide. (cf. pamúlung).

_pamúsin, pamúsing, pamusíngal_, Freq. and Caus. of músin, músing,
musíngal, respectively and meaning: to soil, stain, dirty.

_pamusísì_, Curiosity; inquiry, investigation, registration; to be
curious; to inquire into, investigate, register, examine curiously
or minutely. Freq. of busísì.

_pamúskad_, (H) Freq. of búskad--to open, as a flower, etc.; to bloom,
blossom. (cf. pamúkad, pamukádkad).

_pamúskag_, See pamúskad. (búskag--búskad).

_pamúslut_, Freq. of púslut--to slip out of, escape. (cf. pamalús,
púdlus, pamúdlus).

_pamús-on_, Evacuation, stool; to evacuate the bowels, to go to stool,
go to--the places,--the W.C. Maíwat nga pamús-on. Difficulties of
evacuation. (cf. pús-on).

_pamúsud_, Freq. of púsud--corner, nook, angle.

_pamúsung_, Freq. of búsung. Gravidity, pregnancy; to be big with
child, be pregnant, bear a child.

_pamutá_, To divide, distribute, etc. See pamutáputá.

_pamúta_, Harlotry, prostitution; to follow the customs or manners
of a prostitute, be a prostitute, be a bad woman. (cf. púta).

_pamutáltag_, Lying about in disorder, in confusion, higgledy-piggledy,
badly arranged, slovenly; to leave things lying about in disorder,
to be badly arranged, be slovenly, untidy, pell-mell. Indì kamó
magpamutáltag sang mga galamitón dirí sa balatonán. Don't let the
furniture in the reception room be scattered about (lie about in
disorder). Ginpamutáltag níla ang íla kasangkápan sa salúg. They
left their tools--lying in disorder on the floor,--strewn about
the floor. Dílì mo pagpamutaltagón ang mga butáng sa sulúd sang
hulút. Don't turn the things in the room topsy-turvy. (cf. dúm-ok,
hál-id; sáprat, damák).

_pamút-an_, From pamuút, buút. Ginpamút-an (ginpangbút-an) sang
mga ginikánan ang íla mga kabatáan, agúd nga índì na magbulúthò
(mageleskwéla). The parents wished (desired, ordered, ruled) that
their children should not go to school any longer.

_pamút-an_, From puút, pamuút--to stop, put an end to, etc. Ginpamút-an
níla ang pagsugilánon sang pagkabatî níla sang binásal sang mga
linggánay. They stopped talking when they heard the peal of the
bells. Ginpamút-an níla ang íla mga kaáway. They stopped (halted,
ambushed, waylaid) their enemies (on the road).

_pamutá-púta_, Freq. of pamúta.

_pamutá-putá_, Freq. of putáputá. Division, distribution; to divide,
distribute; to be dispersed, distributed, scattered one by one,
be wide apart, to straggle, be at a considerable distance from each
other or from others.

_pamutáy_, Freq. of putáy.

_pamúto_, Freq. of púto. Bankruptcy, insolvency; to be or become
bankrupt.

_pamúto_, Freq. of púto. To make rice-cakes called "púto", etc.

_pamútò_, Freq. of bútò.

_pamutók_, Freq. of butók--to lay down, throw down, force to the ground
(and bind); to make a package or bundle of.

_pamutók_, Freq. of putók--to kink, form kinks, twists or coils,
to twist, coil.

_pamútong_, Freq. of bútong--to pull, drag, haul. Also: confiscation,
sequestration (of property); to confiscate, sequestrate, embargo,
requisition, impound.

_pamútot_, To form--, develop--, fruit, etc. (cf. pútot).

_pamutúl_, Freq. of putúl--to maim, lop or cut off part of a limb, etc.

_pamúut_, Freq. of búut--to wrap in leaves, etc., in order to force
the ripening of fruits.

_pamuút_, Freq. of buút--to will, etc. Also: ruling, sway, management,
government; to be master, ruler, boss; to rule, govern, hold sway,
impose one's will upon. (cf. pangbuút).

_pamuút_, Freq. of puút--to stop, put an end to, etc.

_pamúut_, Freq. of púut--to stifle, suffocate, choke.

_pamúyas_, Scolding, vituperation, abusive language; to scold, abuse
in strong language, to fume, berate, vituperate. (cf. púyas, pamúrag).

_pamuyó_, Freq. of buyó--to accustom, habituate, etc.

_pamuyô_, Freq. of puyô--to live, stay, reside, etc.

_pamuyóng_, Brigandage, life and practices of brigands or robbers;
to follow the profession of a brigand, to rob, plunder, sack, ravage,
kill, be a gangster, etc. (cf. buyúng).

_pamúyong_, (B) To be quiet, make no stir, etc. See pahimúyong,
pahimúnong.

_pamúyos_, Freq. of púyos--to tie, bind up, etc.

_pamúypuy, palamúypuy_, Freq. of púypuy, póypoy--to weaken,
etc. Weakness, debility; to be or become weak, etc.

_pan_, (Sp. pan) Bread. (cf. tinápay).

_pan-_, A prefix denoting plurality. It indicates:--
1.) an often repeated action, or an action done by way of trade
or profession, e.g. Ang pamalígyà kag pamakál (pan, balígyà; pan,
bakál)--Buying and selling.
2.) the way, manner, form, shape, of what the root implies, e.g. Matáas
siá sing pamáa (pan, páa)--He is long-legged. Maláin ang íya pamábà
(pan, bábà)--He uses bad language. His mouth is vile.
3.) the looking for, or gathering of, what the root implies,
e.g. pangáhoy (pan, káhoy)--to gather wood; pangítà (pan, kítà)--to
seek.
Note. In the above examples pan--has changed into pam- and pang-,
the n of pan- being influenced by the initial letter of the root.
Before r no change is made, e.g. panrára.
Before d, n, s, t, the n of pan--remains unchanged, but the first
letter of the root is dropped, e.g. panalók (pan, dalók); panúsnus
(pan, núsnus); panabát (pan, sabát); panúluk (pan, túluk).
Before b, f, m, p, the n of pan- is changed to m, and the first letter
of the root is dropped, e.g. pamáklay, (pan, báklay); pamuérsa (pan,
fuérsa); pamúkmuk (pan, múkmuk); pamígos (pan, pígos).
Before k and the vowels pang- is written, and the k is dropped,
e.g. pangúlbà (pan, kúlbà); pangáway (pan, áway); panginúm (pan,
inúm); pangólhot (pan, ólhot); pangúrut (pan, úrut).
Before g, h, l, w, y either pan- or pang- is written, e.g. pangábut
or panggábut (gábut); panhálad or panghálad (halad); panlángbas or
panglángbas (lángbas); panwárik or pangwárik (wárik); panyáwyaw or
pangyáwyaw (yáwyaw).

For the composite forms nagpan-, magapan-, magpan- the shortened forms
nan-, nang-, nang-, nam-, man-, mang-, mang-, mam-, are mostly used,
the choice depending on the tense and the first letter of the root,
e.g. Nagpanglakát na silá--or--nanglakát na silá. They have gone.

_panâ_, Bow; bow and arrow; arrow, dart.

_panáad_, Freq. of sáad. To make a solemn promise, vow, especially
to make a vow to God or in honour of the Saints; a vow, solemn
promise. May panáad siá. He is under a vow. He has a vow. He
has--vowed,--made a vow,--taken a vow. Anó man ang ginpanáad mo? What
did you vow or promise solemnly? Ginpanaádan (--aáran) níya ang Diós
sang íya pagkaúlay. She vowed to God her virginity. Tumána ang ímo
pinanáad. Fulfil your vow. Perform what you have vowed. Keep your
promise. Keep--, make good--, your vow (word).

_panábà_, Freq. of tábà--to buy land, etc.

_panábad_, Freq. of tábad. To go to or assist at a banquet, take part
in a social reunion where food and drink are served.

_panabakô_, Freq. of tabakô--to smoke a cigar, a pipe, etc.

_panábang_, Assistance, help, succour; help, assist. (cf. tábang).

_panábas_, Freq. of tábas--to cut clothes. To be a tailor, dressmaker,
seamstress; the style--, way--, method--, of cutting cloth.

_panabát_, Freq. of sabát--to answer. Mode or way of answering. Ang
íya panabát kúlang sing katahurán. His way of answering was wanting
in respect.

_panábaw_, Freq. and Caus. of nábaw--to be or become shallow, etc.

_panabáy-sábay_, Hugging, dancing; to hug, dance; to jostle, hustle,
elbow, rub elbows. (cf. sábay).

_panábid_, Freq. of tábid--to hang (be tied) together, etc.

_panabíd_, Freq. of tabíd--to tie (fasten) together, etc.

_panáb-it_, Freq. of sáb-it--to hang on a peg, etc.

_panábtab_, Freq. of tábtab--to cut through, sever, separate by
cutting.

_panabúd_, Freq. of sabúd--to twist round, etc.

_panabúdlon_, (B) To ascend--, go up--, climb--, scale--, mount--,
a hill, etc. (cf. tokád, táklad).

_panábug_, Freq. of tábug--to drive away. (cf. pamarág).

_panabúlod_, See panabúdlon id.

_panáb-ut_, Freq. of dáb-ut--to reach, etc. (cf. panáwhat, pangáb-ot).

_panabút_, Freq. of sabút.

_panáda_, (Sp. empanada, panada) Meat-pie, a dish of mixed meat,
bread or flour and vegetables; panáda.

_panád-an_, From panará--to begin weaving, etc.

_panadéro_, (Sp. panadero) Baker.

_panagádsad_, To beware, be careful, be wary, take care, be cautious,
be on one's guard, consider well, think twice over, mind. Managádsad
ka sing maáyo, agúd nga dílì ka makatíplang sa maláin. Be careful,
lest you should stumble into (not to be surprised into doing) something
bad. (sagádsad).

_panagámsam_, Freq. of sagámsam--to try the taste of; to experience.

_panagámtam_, See panagámsam. (tagámtam--sagámsam).

_panagáng_, Freq. of sagáng--to prevent, hinder, avert a blow,
forestall, ward off, parry (a blow).

_panágap_, Freq. of ságap--to look for, seek. (cf. pangítà).

_panagápà_, To walk about--, grope one's way--, in the
dark. (cf. panugápà, pangápkap).

_panágas_, Freq. of dágas--to pick, gather, pluck (with pole and
hook), etc.

_panágat_, Freq. of dágat. To fish in the sea; to fish out, fish for,
find out, discover (the truth, secret, etc.).

_panagatán_, A fishing boat used on the sea, etc. See palanagatán.


_panagátsat_, Freq. of sagátsat--to talk--, answer--back, give a
sharp or thoughtless answer, retort. (cf. sátsat, panátsat).

_panagáwsaw_, Freq. of sagáwsaw--to dip in, step into mud,
etc. (cf. sáwsaw, panáwsaw).

_panagbaláy_, To say "tagbaláy!", to ask permission to enter a house,
or the like.

_panágda_, Freq. of ságda--to invite to partake of a meal or of
refreshments, offer food and drink to visitors. (cf. ágda, pangágda).

_panághap_, Freq. of sághap--to seek, look or search for, try to
find. Panaghápa nínyo ang mga manók nga nadúlà. Look for the lost
chickens. Ginpanághap níla ang síngsing, ápang walâ nílà makítà. They
searched for the ring, but could not find it. (cf. panágap, pangítà).

_panághap_, Freq. of tághap--to be afraid, shy, timid; to be
apprehensive of danger, etc.

_panághoy_, To sigh, moan, chirp, sough, rustle, murmur (of the wind,
of leaves, of flowing water, etc); Also noun: sigh, etc. Nagapanághoy
ang mga dáhon sa huyúp sang hánggin. The leaves are rustling in the
wind. Ang panághoy (pagpanághoy) sang hángin. The soughing of the
wind. (cf. lághuy, sághoy, tághoy).

_panaghóyon_, A sigh, moan, rustling, murmur; to sigh, sough, etc. See
panághoy, tághoy.

_panagibúut_, Good breeding, civility, politeness, willingness,
obligingness, docility, good will, discretion, readiness to comply,
disposition to do or behave (as told); to have (show) good manners,
be well bred, well educated, or the like. Magpanagibúut ka. Behave. Be
amenable. Ang íya nga panagibúut kag kalolô nagapakilála sang maáyo
níya nga tagiposóon. His willingness and kindness are evidence of
his good heart. (cf. buút, pagkabút-ánan).

_panagídsid_, Freq. of sagídsid--to emit a loud, shrill sound, to hiss.

_panagílò_, To glean, gather rice, wheat, etc. left after a harvest,
or the like. (cf. panálà, pamíngkong, panígput).

_panagíl-om_, To darken, get dark, gloomy, cloudy. Nagapanagíl-om ang
kalibútan. The sky is darkening. (cf. sagíl-om, pangilóm, pangitúm).

_panagíl-ot_, To press or squeeze in, thread one's way,
force a way through, make a passage through a crowd of people,
etc. Nanagíl-ot--or--nagpanagíl-ot gid kamí sa madámò nga mga táo. With
a great effort we pushed (We managed to push) our way through the
crowd of people. (cf. lótlot, sál-ot, dúkduk).

_panagíngting_, Freq. of tagíngting--to be hot, white (of heat).

_panaginsáwà_, To complain of ingratitude, of disrespectful treatment,
or the like, particularly to others behind the back of the alleged
offender.

_panagín-up_, To dream, have visions, imagine, know by
inspiration. Ginapanagín-up níya inâ. He knows it intuitively,
by inspiration. He dreams or imagines such things. (cf. dámgo,
hunâhúnà, lágpat).

_panagíp-ol_, To be envious, grudge another a distinction or
preference, feel a little jealous. Si Hosé nagapanagíp-ol kay
Pédro. José is a little jealous of Pédro. Tungúd kay ginapalánggà
ni Tíyò Pédro si María, nagapanagíp-ol kay María si Luísa. Because
Maria is Uncle Pedro's favourite, she is the object of Louisa's
jealousy. (cf. pangímon, ímon).

_panagiposóon_, Condition or quality of one's heart, aspiration,
intention, desire, etc. Matínlò siá sing panagiposóon. He is clean of
heart. Dirí siní makítà ang katín-aw sing panagiposóon ni Fuláno. From
this may be inferred the honesty (openness, frankness) of N.N.'s
intention (purpose). (cf. tagiposóon).

_panágit_, Freq. of dágit--to swoop down--, pounce--, upon, as a bird
of prey.

_panagítlon_, To make an effort to swallow as one with a sore
throat. Panagitloná gid ang diótay nga kán-on. Make an effort to
swallow a little rice. (cf. tulún).

_panagítsit_, To hush; to hiss, hist (in order to attract (draw)
attention). (cf. sítsit, sagítsit, panítsit).

_panagíya, panag-íya_, To own, acquire, obtain, be or become the owner
(possessor) of. (cf. tag-íya).


_panágmut_, To bite one's lips (and look fierce, look daggers), to
clench the teeth, close--, shut--, the mouth. Nagpanágmut (nanágmut)
siá sa ákon. Pinanagmután akó níya. He bit his lips and scowled at
me. He looked daggers at me.

_panágnà_, Freq. of tágnà--to predict, foretell, prophesy; portend.

_panágò_, Freq. of tágò. To hide, conceal, abscond, hide
oneself. Daw haló ikáw nga nagapanágò sang úlo kag nagapagitíb (or
nagapamurâ) sang íkog. You are like an iguana that hides its head
and shows its tail. Nanágò silá. They hid themselves. Amó iní ang
pinanagóan--or--ginpanagóan sang mga buyóng. This was the robbers'
hiding place.

_panagódtod_, To carry on the back or on the shoulder; to shoulder
a burden or responsibility; to work hard, drudge. (cf. tagódtod).

_panág-on_, Time, period, season. (cf. dág-on).

_panág-on_, From panaúg, the Freq. of daúg--to overcome, etc.

_panagónton_, To extend, spread all over, diffuse itself over,
penetrate. Nagapanagónton ang kasakít sang íya hubág sa búg-os níya
nga láwas. Ang búg-os níya nga láwas ginapanagontonán sang kasakít
sang íya hubág. The pain of his boil is spreading all over his
body. (cf. tagúntun, panagúntun id.).

_panagosílang_, To use (wear) spectacles, wear
glasses. (cf. tagosílang, pamusílang).

_panagósò_, Freq. of dagósò--to crowd, etc. Often used sarcastically
in the meaning of: not to go to large assemblies of people, not to
mingle in large crowds. Panagósò ka dídto. Don't go there where there
are such crowds of people.

_panagótsot_, To say "tut, tut", "tush", "pshaw",
pish! bah! rot! rats!, or the like in disapproval, irritation or worry;
to refuse, decline, disapprove. Indì mo pagpanagotsotán ang ákon nga
ginhámbal, kóndì ipaháyag mo sing maáthag ang ímo panghunâhúnà. Don't
say "tush" in answer to what I have told you, but state clearly what
you think about it.

_panágsà_, Freq. of dágsà--to drift, etc. Madámò nga mga sakayán ang
pinanágsà sa baybáyon sang mabáskug nga hángin. Many vessels were
drifted (driven) ashore by the violent storm.

_panágtà_, Freq. of dágtà--to stain, etc.

_panágtag_, Freq. of tágtag--to distribute, deal out, etc.

_panagúb_, To sheathe, put in the scabbard. (cf. tagúb).

_panagubáli_, Regard, respect for, consideration; to pay respect
to, have regard or consideration for, to honour, respect, think
much of. Indì mo na akó ipanagubáli. You have no regard for me any
more, you no longer have respect for me. Walâ níya pagpanagubalíha
ang sakít sang íya ólo. He paid no attention to his headache. He
did not act as if he had a headache. He acted as though he had no
headache. (cf. bálhot, bárhot, banâ, sapák, tamúd).

_panagubálus_, Return, gratitude; to be grateful, make return, return
a favour. (cf. bálus; timalús--to take revenge, etc.).

_panagubílin_, Advice, injunction, admonition, entreaty, the
last--wish,--order,--request,--petition,--word (words) of a person
about to die; to leave an order or injunction, to advise, urge,
admonish, entreat. Nagpanagubílin siá sa ákon sa pagbántay sing
maáyo sang íya baláy, kay siá íya makádto sa Ilóngílong. He left
orders to me to guard his house well, for he himself is going to
Iloilo. Ginpanagubilínan (Ginpanagubínlan) níya kamí sa pagbuligáy
kag pagtabangáy. He admonished us (He entreated us on his deathbed)
to help and succour each other. (cf. bílin).

_panagúd_, Freq. of sagúd--to take care of, etc.

_panagúdsud_, Freq. of sagúdsud--to draggle, shuffle.

_panagúhò_, To reel, stagger, stumble, sway to and fro, as a drunkard
or drunken person. (cf. dulíngdúling, panayódò).

_panagúntun_, Freq. of tagúntun--to spread, extend. See panagónton id.

_panagúob_, Thunder; to thunder. (cf. dagúob).


_panagústos_, To be full of--, covered with--, "tagústos".

_panagúyhà_, (B) Shame, confusion, abasement, humiliation; to
be ashamed, feel shame, be abashed or confounded, be confused or
disconcerted with a feeling of guilt or inferiority. (cf. huyâ).

_panágway_, Form, shape, figure, outline; be in the form or shape
of----. (cf. dágway).

_panágyad_, Freq. of ságyad--to fell (a tree); to beat (gold, etc.).

_panáhà_, To put forth suckers or offshoots from the roots of the
parent-stem, especially applied to bananas. Iníng mga ságing nagapanáhà
sing madámò. These bananas have many offshoots. (cf. sáhà).
panahâ, Freq. of tahâ--to respect, honour, revere, etc.

_panáhap_, Freq. of táhap--to be afraid, apprehensive, shy, timid,
have reverential fear, etc. (cf. panághap).

_panahî_, (B) Form or shape of one's forehead. (cf. dahî, pangágtang).

_panahî_, Freq. of tahî--to sew, stitch, etc. The style--,
manner--, method--, of sewing; to sew, be a tailor or seamstress,
be a dressmaker. Ang pagpanahî amó ang íya ginakabuhían. She lives
by sewing. She earns her living as a seamstress (costumier, costumer).

_panahín-táhin_, Freq. of tahíntáhin. To dress well, go about in
clean and tidy clothes, to be spick and span, to arrange well--one's
dress,--one's hair,--one's general appearance.

_panáhon_, To leaf, form leaves, grow--, put forth--, shoot out--,
shoot forth--, produce--, leaves. (cf. dáhon).

_panahón_, Season, time, period of time, epoch; climate. Sa karón nga
panahón. At the present--time,--juncture,--occasion, in these times,
under the present circumstances. Sang panahón sang ribók. At the time
of the Revolution. (cf. túig, dág-on, panág-on, tión, tiémpo).

_panahór_, Gambling, gaming; to gamble, game, be a
gambler. (cf. tahór).

_panahót_, Freq. of sahót--to attend to pay attention to, regard,
consider, have consideration or regard for. Often used sarcastically
in the meaning of: to keep aloof from, do not meddle or interfere,
or the like. Panahót (sahót) ka sinâ. Leave that alone. Don't bother
about it. (cf. sapák, dipára, tamúd, panahâ).

_panahúp_, Freq. of tahúp--to sift, separate the pounded (hulled,
husked) rice from the chaff.

_panákà_, Freq. of sákà--to go up--a ladder,--a flight of stairs,
or the like; to rise (of prices).

_panaká_, Freq. of taká--to loathe, etc.

_panakáb_, (B) Freq. of takáb--to pilfer, steal.

_panakáon_, A rise (in the price of a thing); to rise. (cf. sákà).

_panakár_, Freq. of sakár (Sp. sacar) To seek to get, try to
obtain, covet, desire. Nagapanakár gid siá nga manganák sang bátà
ni Fuláno. He wishes to have the honour of being godfather to
N.N.'s child. Nakapanakár siá sa íya mga ginikánan nga mamiésta
dídto. He obtained (got) leave from his parents to attend the feast
there. (cf. ahâ).

_panákas_, To go on land, to land, go away from the sea, leave the
sea-coast or the bank of a river, go up country. (cf. tákas).

_panákaw_, (B) Freq. of tákaw--to steal, rob, pilfer,
etc. (cf. pangáwat).

_panakáyon_, Journey, trip, travelling, sailing, going (by boat);
to sail, boat, go, travel, journey (by boat). (cf. sakáy, sakayán,
salákyan, sumalákay, sakayánon).

_panákga_, Freq. of tákga--to promise. Ang mga pinanákga (ipinanákga)
ni Hesukrísto. The promises of (made by) Jesus Christ.

_panákig_, Fever, epidemic of fever; to have fever, contract a fever,
suffer from malaria. (cf. tákig).

_panákit, panakít_, Freq. of sákit, sakít--to pain, etc.

_panáklam_, Freq. of sáklam--to encroach upon, etc.


_panáklas_, Freq. of táklas--to climb, etc.

_panákot_, Freq. of sákot. Ingredient, condiment, mixture, seasoning;
to mix, mingle. (cf. lakót).

_panakúp_, Freq. of takúp--to cover, etc.

_panakúp_, Freq. of dakúp--to catch, etc. (cf. pangdakúp).

_panakús_, Freq. of takús--to measure, etc. (cf. panókol).

_panalá_, Freq. of dalá--to carry, etc. See pandalá.

_panálà_, To glean, gather rice, wheat, etc., left after the
harvest. (cf. panagílò, panígput, pamíngkong).

_panálà_, (B) Freq. of sálà--to leave behind. Ginpanálà nánda sa baláy
ni Fuláno ang mga tabungós nga sinúdlan kang mga turulán-on. They
left behind the baskets filled with vegetables in N.N.'s house.

_panalâ_, Freq. of salâ. To confess, own to a fault, acknowledge a
mistake, admit being in the wrong, say "salâ ko".--It is my fault,
I am to blame. My mistake. Frequently this panalâ is almost identical
in meaning with súmpà, panúmpà--to swear, take an oath, declare under
oath. "Salâ ko" may also mean (according to the context): If what I
say is not true, I am a liar (am committing the sin of telling lies).

_panalabíton_, Crying, mourning, sighing, weeping, lamentation, lament;
utterance, expression; to sigh, mourn, cry, weep, grieve, moan, bemoan,
wail, bewail, keen, lament; to utter, express, give expression to
(one's feelings, thoughts, etc.). Nagpanalabíton siá sa dakô nga
kalisúd nga inmabút sa íya. She uttered lamentations because of the
great calamity that had befallen her. (cf. panalambíton; sámbit).

_panalábton_, Answer, retort, repartee, (severe) reply; to answer back,
retort, reply. (cf. sabát, panabát).

_panalága_, Freq. of dalága. To go after--, look for--, a girl,
try to meet girls, seek the society of young women. (cf. pamulán).

_panalágan_, Freq. of dalágan--to run, etc. Madásig (mahínay) siá
sing panalágan. He is a fast (slow) runner.

_panalágsa_, Rare, seldom, scarce; rarely, scarcely. Inâ malakâ pa
sa panalágsa. That almost never happens. That will scarcely ever
happen. (cf. talágsa).

_panalagsáhon_, Rare, seldom, scarce; difficult to find or to
obtain. (cf. panalágsa, maíwat, mahínà).

_panalambíton_, See panalabíton--to sigh, etc.

_panalápi_, To grow or gather salápi--a second crop from the roots
of the first.

_panál-as_, To run away, flee, disperse, disappear. (cf. tál-as).

_panálaw_, To be a coward, act dastardly or cowardly. (cf. tálaw).

_panaláwat_, Freq. of daláwat--to buy cereals.

_panaláwsaw_, To soak, drench, immerse, dip, plunge, put into
a liquid; put to the test, examine, investigate; examination,
investigation. Iníng mga butáng dápat nga usisáon sa isá ka dayág
nga panaláwsaw. This matter should be investigated by a public
hearing--or--in open trial. Nakapanagámsam kag nakapanaláwsaw siá sang
maluíb nga pamatásan sang kalibútan. She has tasted and experienced
the treacherous ways of the world. (cf. sáwsaw).

_panaláytay_, To make one's way along a river-bank, a mountain-ridge,
etc. where there is no beaten track. (cf. látay, táytay).

_panálgan_, Floor, shelf, ledge; story (of a house); platform. Ang
ákon estánte may ápat ka panálgan. My book case has four
shelves. Magapatíndog silá, konó, sing bág-o nga baláy nga may ánum
ka panálgan. They are going to erect, it is rumoured, a new house of
six stories. (cf. salúg).

_panalíbay_, (B) To walk along a ridge, along a river bank,
etc. (cf. panaríbay, panaláytay, panalíbtib).

_panalíbtib_, To walk along a steep river bank or along a precipice
(particularly in order to avoid crossing a deep river).

_panálig_, Freq. of sálig--to expect, trust, have confidence, etc.

_panalikalâ_, To make (form into) a chain; to put in
chains. (cf. talikalâ).


_panalínga_, To cup the hands behind the ears in order to hear the
better, to prick up the ears. (cf. talínga).

_panálo_, Freq. of tálo. An even chance, opportunity, luck; to
have an even chance to win, come out victorious (in gambling,
etc.). (cf. bagít).

_panálo_, Freq. of sálo--to sit down to a common meal, etc. Also:
comradeship, companionship, equality; to be equal to or a match
for. Walâ gid kamí sing panálo sa íla. We are no match for them. We
are inferior to them. There is no fellowship or equality between us
and them.

_panalô_, Freq. of salô--to catch a ball, fruit dropped from a tree, or
the like. Nagapanalô silá sang mga páhò nga ginahúlug ni Fuláno. They
are catching with their hands the mangoes dropped (from the tree)
by N.N.

_panalók_, To be greedy, etc. See dalók, dinalók.

_panalóndong_, Twilight, dusk; to shine feebly or mildly, to glimmer,
to shed--, give--, afford--, a feeble light. Nagapanalóndong
ang búlan. The moon is shining feebly, is giving a dim
light. Nagpanalóndong ang kasisídmon. The evening light faded, was
failing. Evening twilight set in. The shades of evening gathered.

_panalóngdong_, See panalóndong, panalúngdung.

_panaló-sálo_, Dim. and Freq. of sálo. To sit down to a common meal,
to feast, banquet, etc.; a banquet, feast, dinner. (panarósáro id.).

_panaló-saló_, To be a parasite, act as a hanger-on, sponge upon--,
frequent the tables of--, the rich, etc. (cf. paniróngsiróng,
panarósaró).

_panálsal_, To forge--, hammer--, work--, iron or other metal
at a forge; be a smith. Maálam siá magpanálsal. He knows to work
metals. (cf. sálsal, panalsálon).

_panalsálon_, Way or manner of working iron. Dílì maáyo sing panalsálon
iníng pánday. This smith (artisan) is not good at working iron,
iron-work.

_panálug_, Freq. of sálug--to fish--, catch fish--, with the hand.

_panalúg_, Form or shape of a floor; to lay--, put in--, a
floor. (cf. salúg, panálgan).

_panalúgsug_, Freq. of salúgsug--to enter, penetrate, pierce.

_panalúngdung_, See panalóndong--twilight, etc.

_panalúpsup_, Freq. of salúpsup--to enter deep,
penetrate. (cf. panalúgsug).

_panamá_, Panama; a kind of hat; a hat made of Panama-grass.

_panámay_, Freq of sámay. Also: to make fabrics called "sinamáy".

_panámay_, Freq. of támay--to contemn, despise.

_panámbì_, A superstitious practice of fishermen consisting in the
ceremony of putting some of the "small fry" of the first catch in a
tin. The tin containing the fish is then placed on a small raft and
send adrift. It may be considered a kind of sacrifice to Neptune, the
heathen sea-god. Also verb. Indì ka magkáon sing dánglay, parótpot ukón
sápsap nga pinanambián. Don't eat dánglay--, parótpot--or sápsap-fish
that have been offered to the sea-god. (panámbì is probably derived
from támbì, because the raft with the tin of fish on it somewhat
resembles a kitchen-balcony called támbì).

_panámbì_, To shelve; to dismiss, reject, despise. See the foregoing.

_panámbong_, Freq. of támbong--to be present at, attend.

_panámgo_, Freq. of dámgo--to dream. Also: To ponder, ruminate, muse,
imagine, build castles in the air, to day-dream. (cf. ginaóng).

_panamílit_, Freq. of damílit--to take one's leave, depart, say
goodbye.

_panamíng_, To shield, use a shield, protect oneself or others as
with a shield. (cf. tamíng--shield).

_panám-is_, Freq. of tám-is--to be sweet, etc. Sweetmeat,
confection. Also: to be pleased with, take pleasure in, gloat over,
be delighted with, take delight in. (cf. hinám-is).

_panámkon_, To conceive, Freq. of the obsolete
sámkon. Nanámkon--or--nagpanámkon siá. She conceived.

_panámpà_, Freq. of támpà--to slap, strike, beat; a blow, slap of
the open hand.


_panámpad_, Face, front, frontage, facade; to confront,
face. (cf. támpad, tamparán).

_panampoáy_, To bury one's face in one's hands; to grieve, mourn,
be down in--the mouth,--the dumps. (cf. tampoáy).

_panámpok_, Freq. of támpok. To fill up a hole; to set a precious
stone in a ring, etc. (cf. panáp-ok).

_panámpok_, Freq. of sámpok--to rush upon, fight (of cocks, etc.);
to beat or strike against. Nagpanámpok siá sa (sang) íya dúghan. He
struck (beat) his breast (as a sign of guilt, compunction, etc.).

_panámput_, Freq. of sámput--to arrive, come upon the scene.

_panamúd_, Freq. of tamúd--to look down; to consider, reflect.

_panamúd-támud_, Dim. of panamúd.

_pán-an_, From paón--to bait, etc.

_panán-aw_, (H) Freq. of tán-aw--to see, look at, inspect, behold,
view. Dílì na maáyo ang íya panán-aw. His eyes are impaired, he does
not see well any longer.

_panan-áwan_, Sight, eyesight, vision, faculty of seeing; view, scene,
sight (i.e. something seen). (cf. tán-aw, panán-aw, panan-áwon).

_panan-áwon_, Sight, view, look, gaze; scenic show, what can be,
or is to be, seen. (cf. talan-áwon).

_panan-áwtán-aw_, Dim. of panán-aw. (cf. panulúktúluk, pangalágkalág).

_panándà_, Freq. of tándà--to sign, mark, note, etc.

_panándig_, Freq. of sándig--to lean against (for support), etc.

_panánga_, To develop or grow branches, to branch out. (cf. sangá).

_panángdò_, Consent, assent, acquiescence; to consent, nod assent,
agree to, approve of. (cf. tángdò).

_panánghal_, To look for, seek, search after, try to get or
obtain. (cf. pangítà, lághap, ságap).

_panángis_, Freq. of tángis--to cry, weep, etc.

_panángkap_, To equip, furnish, make (get) ready, prepare, provide,
supply, have or get a supply (of furniture, tools, arms, ships,
etc.). (cf. sángkap, kasangkápan).

_panángkup_, Freq. of tángkup. To finish, terminate, complete, close.

_panánglà_, Freq. of tánglà--to look up (upwards), raise one's eyes,
etc. Also: to be on the lookout for, seek, try to obtain or engage
(workmen, farm-hands, etc.).

_panánglit_, An example, instance, illustration; to give an example,
to illustrate, cite a case or explain by means of an example or
a parable; for instance. Hunâhunáon ta panánglit nga----. Let us
imagine, for instance, that----. Saráng ikáw makapanánglit sang ímo
nga ginpaháyag? Saráng mo mapananglitán ang ímo nga ginpaháyag? Can
you illustrate what you have said by an example? Can you explain your
statement by a comparison? Ang kabúhì sang táo ginapanánglit sa asó nga
umalági. The life of man is compared to passing smoke. (cf. sánglit,
kahalimbáwà, ábi, súbung).

_pananglítan_, Example, likeness, comparison, simile, similitude,
figure, parable, case, illustration, analogy. (cf. sánglit, panánglit,
katúlad, kahalimbáwà, kaángay, kaanggídánggid, súbung).

_pananglitánan_, See pananglítan.

_panángsang_, Freq. of sángsang--to be or become vehement, violent,
etc.

_panángsò_, Freq. of tángsò--to become loose, etc.

_panángtang_, Freq. of tángtang--to fall, drop; to jingle, tink.

_panángub_, Freq. of tángub--to fill, cover or take in all, complete,
finish. Nanángub na kaáyo ang madalúm nga dágway sang kagab-íhon. The
dark form of night had completely covered all things.

_panáng-ul_, Freq. of sáng-ul--to hang on, hook in, etc.

_panángway_, Freq. of tángway--to buy a drink, etc.

_panangwáyon_, Dealing in drinks or refreshments, the buying and
selling of drinks, etc. (cf. tángway, panángway).


_panángyà_, To fish (catch fish) with a net called sángyà.

_panánum, pananúm_, Freq. of tánum; tanúm--to plant rice; plant
(in general), etc.

_panányag_, Freq. of tányag--to offer (for sale, etc.).

_panaón_, To fish--with,--in--, a small fish-trap called taón.

_panápa_, Freq. of tápa--to dry meat, etc.

_panápa_, Sometimes used instead of panapát, e.g. Nanápa siá nga
índì na gid magsakáy sa sakayán, kay makaisá nadiotayán lang siá
(kag) malúnud. He made a resolution not to travel any more by boat,
because once he was nearly drowned.

_panapá_, The (trapeziform) side of a roof. (cf. panólong--the
triangular end of a roof).

_panapák_, Freq. of sapák--to mind, care for, attend to.

_panápang_, Inkling, thought, idea, knowledge; to know (mostly used
with "walâ"). Walâ gid siá sing panápang kon diín siá mapakádto. He
had not an inkling (did not care) of where he was going to. Walâ gid
silá panápang kon anó ang íla madangátan. They have no idea of what
is in store for them. They don't (didn't) care for the consequences.

_panapás_, Freq. of tapás--to hew down, fell (trees, etc.). Panápson
nínyo ang mga káhoy dídto sa bánglid. Cut down the trees there on
the slope. (cf. púkan, pamulúd).

_panapát_, Freq. of tapát--to purpose, resolve, determine, make a
resolution, be determined to, make up one's mind, be bent (set) upon.

_panápat_, Freq. of dápat--to use, apply, etc. Anó nga bulúng ang
ginpanápat sa íya sang manugbúlung? What remedies did the doctor
apply to him? Also: to wear an amulet, or the like. Ang babáylan
nagapanápat gihápon sa íya láwas kon magkádto siá sa búkid. The
sorcerer always wears an amulet when he goes to the mountain. Anó
karón ang íya ginadalá nga panápat? What kind of an amulet does he
wear now? What sort of an outfit has he got now?

_panapó_, Freq. of sapó--to find, come upon by chance, find out.

_panapóg_, (B) The sense of smell; to smell. (cf. dapóg, sínghot,
panimáhò, panínghot).

_panáp-ok_, Freq. of táp-ok--to fill up a hole, etc. (cf. panámpok).

_panápton_, Clothes, clothing, dress, raiment, garment,
costume, attire, garb, vesture, vestment, wearing apparel, wear,
robe. (cf. sapút, panapút, ulús, naúg, bíste).

_panapulánga_, To turn as red as a red tapulánga-flower, i.e. to be
ashamed, or the like.

_panapúngol_, Freq. of tapúngol--to belabour with one's fist, beat,
punch, pommel, thrash. (cf. súmbag, pókpok, búngbung, ómol, patók).

_panapús-tapús_, Extreme, complete, consummate, utter, last, perfect;
to be extreme, etc. (cf. tápus).

_panapút_, To dress--, vest--, array--, drape--, robe--, enrobe--,
attire--, garb--, apparel--, deck out--, oneself, to don--, put on--,
assume--, wear--, clothes. Nagpanapút siá sing mapulá. She wore a
red dress. She was dressed in red. Magpanapút kamó sing maúgdang
(malígdong). Dress decently. (cf. sapút, panápton).

_panápyod_, To fish with a net called "sápyod".

_panará_, (B) To start weaving, commence actual weaving after
completing all preliminary work on the loom. Panarahí (Panád-i)
ang háblon mo. Begin (start, commence, set to, set about) weaving
the cloth (for everything is ready).

_panará_, To cook or warm over a slow fire; to warm oneself at a fire.

_panára_, See panáda.

_panarága_, (B) See panalága--to take a walk in order to meet girls,
etc.

_panarán_, See panará.

_panaráng_, See panará. (cf. aráng).

_panaríbay_, To walk along the edge or ridge of, to go by (along)
the--side,--edge,--border,--margin of, pick one's way at the side
of, march parallel to, or along, the border of. (cf. panaláytay,
pangalíhid, panalíbay, pangríbay).


_panárot_, Freq. of sárot--ugly, bad, miserable.

_panarót_, Freq. of sarót--to be or become difficult, trying,
troublous, wretched.

_pánas_, To rub out, erase, wipe out, delete, scratch out, obliterate,
scrape out, efface, expunge, blot--, take--, strike--, wash--,
sponge--, out, draw the pen through, apply the sponge. Panása ang íya
sinulát sa pisára. Wipe off the blackboard what he has written. Ipánas
sa pisára iníng lapát. Use this cloth to clean the slate with. Panási
ang papél sang sinulát. Erase the writing from the paper. Panása ang
tinalíkdan kag bag-ohá ang ímo pangabúhì. Obliterate--, wipe out--,
blot out--, (from your memory) the past and begin a new life.

_panás_, Erased, wiped out, obliterated, rubbed out, expunged,
cancelled, effaced, blotted out, etc. (cf. pánas).

_panásko_, Joking, jesting, fun; to joke, jest, make fun. (cf. tsásko,
langás, lahóg).

_panátsat_, Freq. of sátsat--to answer back, retort,
etc. (cf. sagátsat, panagátsat).

_panáug_, To come--, get--, go--, down, descend, go downstairs, go
down a ladder, leave the house, descend from a tree, dismount from--,
get off--, a horse, etc.; to bring down, take or fetch down. Manáug
ka. Come down. Go down. Leave the house. Papanaúga ang síya. Bring
down the chair. Papanaúga siá. Make him come (get) down. Panaúgi
siá. Go down to him. Papanaúgi siá sing síya. Bring (fetch) down a
chair for him. Nanáug (Nagpanáug) na ang mga dumulúaw. The visitors
have gone down, i.e. have left the house. The visitors have gone,
have left. Nanáug siá sa salákyan. He left (got out of) the
vehicle. (cf. náug).

_panaúg_, Freq. of daúg--to win, conquer, overcome, etc.

_panáut, panaút-sáut_, Freq. of sáut, saútsáut--to dance.

_pánaw_, (B) To go, walk, travel, hike, go on foot, tramp, trudge,
march, foot it. Panáwi siá dídto sa umá. Go to him there at the
farm. Anó ang pagabút mo dirí, pánaw lang ukón sakáy? How did you
come here, walking or riding? (cf. lakát).

_panáwag_, Freq. of táwag--to proclaim, call out the names; roll-call,
the giving (reading) out of a list of names.

_panawág_, Freq. of tawág--to call, request or order to appear,
to call upon in prayer.

_panáwhat_, Freq. of dáwhat--to accept, take in one's
hand. (cf. pangáb-ot, panáb-ut).

_panawóng_, (H) Form--, shape--, cast--, of one's face, physiognomy;
face, cover or title-page of a book, magazine, etc.; page (of a
book); to display or exhibit the best side of a thing. (cf. pauyahón;
pánid--leaf (of a book, etc.).

_panáwsaw_, Freq. of sáwsaw--to dip in, soak in; to fathom, examine.

_panáyà_, Freq. of dáyà--to cheat, deceive, defraud, etc. (pandáyà
id.).

_panáyà_, Freq. of táyà--to hold a weapon in such a way as to be
ready for attack or defense.

_panayâ_, Freq. of tayâ--to bet, wager.

_panayódò_, To reel, sway, totter, stagger, as a drunken person, walk
with body bent or stooping, be unsteady on one's legs. (cf. panayódoy
id.).

_panayódoy_, See panayódò.

_panáysay_, Freq. of sáysay--to explain, give an exposition of, etc.

_panaysáyon_, Explanation, exposition, clear statement; to give an
explanation, give out a statement. (cf. sáysay).

_pand-_, Now and then pand- is used instead of pan- in words beginning
with d, e.g. pandakúp, pandála, pandáyà, etc. etc. See pan-.

_pándag_, To show off, give oneself airs, be proud or
ostentatious. Nakapándag siá, kay nangasáwa sing manggaránon. He is
carrying his head high, because he has married a rich woman. Also:
to live peacefully, lead a steady or settled life, settle down,
have no worry.

_pandágas_, Freq. of dágas--to pluck, pick (fruit, etc.). (panágas
id.).

_pandahî_, (B) See panahî, pangágtang--shape of one's forehead.


_pandahútan_, Contrivance, machination. See pandihútan id.

_pándak_, Short, stocky, squat, squab, dumpy, stumpy, podgy, stubby,
low of stature and bulky or stout in comparison. Pándak nga táo. A
thick, short, stocky man. (cf. tipúngkò, búdul, karibúd).

_pandákà_, Short, stocky, etc. See pándak.

_pandakúp_, Freq. of dakúp--to arrest, take, seize, etc. (cf. panakúp).

_pandála_, Freq. of dála--to bear (a child), to be pregnant,
etc. (cf. pangmábdus, pamúsung, pamábdus).

_pandalá_, Freq. of dalá--to carry, bring, fetch, etc. Ginpandalá
níla sa Manílà ang tanán níla nga kasangkápan. They brought their
whole outfit (all their goods and chattels) to Manila. Indì amó inâ
ang pandalá sang kínke; subúnga siní. That is not the way of carrying
a lamp; do it like this.

_pandamóg_, Freq. of damóg--to feed a pig or dog, etc.

_pándan_, The screw pine, a cactus-like plant growing to a considerable
size. Its fibre is made into doormats, etc. (pángdan id.).

_pandáng-pándang_, A kind of Filipino dance.

_pánday_, Carpenter, artisan, craftsman, handicraftsman, skilled
workman, joiner, smith, wright, operative; to be or become a carpenter,
etc. (cf. pamánday).

_pandáyà_, Freq. of dáyà--to cheat, etc. (panáyà id.).

_panderéta, panderétas_, (Sp. panderete) A small tambourine.

_pandihútan_, Contrivance, machination, means, management, making,
scheme. (cf. pandahútan, pahítò, padíhut, padihútan, patúga).

_pandílya_, (Sp. pandilla) Party, gang, set, faction. (cf. hubón,
panóng).

_pandinganán_, (B) To be compared with, likened to, made an example
of, be exposed to criticism, be held up as a warning to others. Kon
magságad ka panábad (sang panábad) pagapandinganán ikáw sa kay
Tíban Bádò ukón sa kay Nánà Inkì. If you have the habit of going
to every feast you will be likened to "Stephan, the Feaster" or to
"Mama Inkì". Also used as noun: bad example, type to be avoided,
model (sort) not to be imitated. (cf. papánding).

_pandisál_, (Sp. pan de sal) Bread, ordinary bread. (cf. panisál,
tinápay).

_pándog_, Stocks to secure the feet (legs) of a criminal, lunatic,
etc.; to put in the stocks, to pillory. Napandogán siá. He was put in
the stocks. Pandogí siá. Put him in the stocks. Ipapándog ko iníng
búang. I'll have this madman put in the stocks. I'll see to it that
this madman is put in the stocks.

_pandokól_, To knuckle, etc. (See panokól, dokól).

_pándong_, Hood, awning, canopy, detachable roof, tilt, any light
cover for the head (against sun or rain); helmet, topi, topee, hat;
the bowl of a ladle, spoon, etc. Ang pándong sang kalésa. The roof
of the rig (calesa). Ang pándong sang luág. The bowl of the ladle.

_pándong_, To ordain, order, nominate, appoint, command. (cf. bílin,
tógon, sógò).

_pandúbla_, To roll a cigar, etc. See panúbla, dúbla.

_panduhá-dúha_, Freq. of duhá-dúha--to doubt, etc.

_pandulúm_, To darken, become obscure, etc. See palandulúm, dulúm.

_pandúlung_, To proceed, go to, approach, go in the direction of. See
panúlung, dúlung.

_pandungkól-dúngkol_, To loll, rest in a careless attitude, sit or
lie lazily with the head pillowed on the arm or the like, lie like
a log. (cf. dúngkul, dungkulán--a log).

_pándut_, Feast, festival, solemnity, celebration, Feast of the
Patron-Saint of a parish or town. Hiwáton níla, kunó, ang íla pándut
sa----. They are going to celebrate their feast, it is said, on----.

_panduyâ-duyâ_, Freq. of duyâduyâ. Also: to relax, do (eat,
etc.) slowly, weakly, or the like. (cf. dwáldwál).

_pang_--, Pang--is at times interchangeable with pan--in words
beginning with s or d, e.g. pangsagúp (panagúp, sagúp); pangdakúp
(pandakúp, panakúp, dakúp), etc. See pan--, pand--.


_pangá_, Hook, fire-hook; the small hook used for putting the threads
of the warp through the reed in a weaving loom.

_pangaáyo_, Freq. of kaáyo--to mend, repair, etc.

_pangabága_, Form or shape of one's shoulder (abága) Also: to
shoulder, undergo, tackle, handle, manage. Walâ siá sing igkasángkol
sa pagpangabága sang amó nga palangakoán. He has not the ability to
shoulder the duties of such an office. Pílit na gid nga magkangíl-ad
kamí sang íya pagpangabága (sang íya mga pangabága) sang íya mga
katungdánan. We are now forced to--repudiate his way of performing his
duties,--be disgusted with his manner of carrying out his obligation.

_pangabaníko_, To wave a fan, to fan oneself. (cf. abaníko, panguyáb).

_pangábat_, Freq. of ábat--to follow, call back,
summon. (cf. pangápas).

_pangabáw_, To exclaim "abáw!". (The English equivalent is a prolonged
"Oh" or "Awe!").

_pangabáy_, Freq. of kabáy. To wish, desire, ask for, hanker
after, covet, long for, crave. Ginapangabáy ko nga----. I wish
that----. Ginapangabáy ko sa ímo ang isá ka mahamungayáon nga
bág-ong túig. I wish you a happy new year. Nagpangabáy (nangabáy)
siá nga----. He desired that----. Indì ka magpangabáy (mangabáy) sa
íya sing maláin. Don't wish him any evil. Don't curse (imprecate) him.

_pangabayó_, To ride on horseback, mount a horse. (cf. kabáyo, kabayó).

_pangábis_, Freq. of kábis--to pay in full, pay off a debt, settle
an account, square a bill, or the like.

_pangabís-kábis_, Dim. of pangábis. Also: to excel, be superior,
surpass, give a very good account of oneself. Iníng bátà
nagapangabískábis sa tanán nga bágay. This boy excels in everything.

_pangáb-ot_, Freq. of káb-ot--to reach, make a long arm,
etc. (cf. panáwhat, panáb-ot).

_pangabúd_, Freq. of kabúd--to cling to, encircle, coil round, wind
round, trail over, be trained up, grow around an object, as a vine,
creeper, trailing plant, etc.

_pangabúd-kábud_, Dim. of pangabúd.

_pangabúdlay_, Freq. of búdlay. Hard work, toil, drudgery, exertion,
work in general, labour; to work hard, labour, exert oneself, toil,
toil and moil, drudge. Nangabúdlay (Nagpangabúdlay) siá sing dakô,
ápang awát man lang ang tanán níya nga paningúhà. He worked hard
indeed, but all his labour was (his exertions were) in vain. Ang
matámad magpangabúdlay (mangabúdlay) dílì takús nga pakán-on. He who
is too lazy to work does not deserve to be fed.

_pangabúhì_, Life, living, living conditions; to live. (cf. kabúhì,
búhì, buhî).

_pangabuhián_, Livelihood, living, means
of--sustenance,--subsistence,--support. (cf. kabuhián).

_pangabúkay_, To rummage, ransack, disarrange things in
search. (cf. abúkay).

_pangabút_, Freq. of abút--to arrive.

_pangábut_, Freq. of ábut--to catch up with, reach, overtake.

_pangábyan_, To make friends, be friendly with. Hirúpi kag pangabyána
siá sing maáyo. Try and make her acquaintance, and befriend
her. (cf. ábyan).

_pangadî_, To pray, say one's prayers. Magpangadî--or--mangadî
ka. Pray. Say your prayers. Pangadiá ang "Amáy námon". Say the
"Our Father".

_pangádlay_, To cause pain and swelling in the joints, said of wounds,
burns, scratches, etc. that have become infected. Ang pilás sang túdlò
sang íya kamót nagpangádlay sang íya bútkon--or--Ginpangadlayán ang
íya bútkon tungúd sang pilás sang túdlò sang íya kamót. The wound in
his finger has infected his arm (causing swellings in the elbow and
armpit). Ginapangadlayán ang íya hítà gíkan sa hubág sa íya tiíl. He
has a swelling in the groin due to the ulcer on his foot.

_pangádto_, Freq. of kádto--to go, etc.

_pangadtó-kádto_, Dim. of pangádto. To go (pass) to and fro, roam or
walk--about,--from place to place.

_pangádwas_, Freq. of kádwas--to take hold of or catch with
outstretched arm and with the palm of the hand turned downward.

_pangág_, Oblivious, forgetful, wandering in mind, not quite normal,
not all there, distracted, dreamy, wool-gathering. (cf. pungág).

_pangágad_, Freq. of ágad. To serve, be a servant or
employee. Especially: to serve for an intended wife in the house of
her parents.

_pangagálon_, Freq. of agálon. To seek a master or owner, look for an
employment, or the like, hunt for a job, try to find an employer. Ang
idô nagapangagálon. The dog is looking for its master. Magpangagálon
(Mangagálon) ka kon walâ ka sing palamúgnan. Go and look for somebody
who will give you a job, who will employ you (as a cook, servant,
errand-boy, washerwoman, etc.), if you are out of work (if you have
no position, if you are unemployed).

_pangágas_, Freq. of ágas. The healing process of smallpox, measles,
etc.; to heal, form scabs.

_pangagát_, Freq. of kagát--to bite, snap, etc.

_pangágaw_, Freq. of ágaw. Usurpation, forceful appropriation,
expropriation, dispossession; to take by force, usurp, etc.

_pangágda_, Freq. of ágda. To invite, etc.;
invitation-card. Magpabálhag ka sing mga pangágda. Have some invitation
cards printed.

_pangághà_, Freq. of kághà--to grieve, be in sorrow, etc.

_pangági_, Freq. of ági--to go or pass by, etc.

_pangágsa_, Tenancy, tenantry, tenure, lease, leasehold, tenure by
lease; to work or till land belonging to another for part of the
produce, to be a tenant or leaseholder. (cf. ágsa).

_pangágtang_, Form or shape of one's forehead, etc. (cf. ágtang,
panahî).

_pangágtò_, (B) See pangádto--to go, etc. from kádto, kágtò, ágtò.

_pangáhas_, Freq. of káhas--to dare, be impertinent, audacious, bold.

_pangahás_, Freq. of ahás--to dare, etc. (cf. pangáhas).

_pangáhig_, Freq. of káhig--to scratch with the feet as chickens
looking for food.

_pangahíg_, (B) Freq. of kahíg. Shape, form and use of one's legs,
especially applied to game (fighting) cocks. Iníng sulúg maáyo sing
pangahíg. This cock has fine legs, is strong or expert in the use of
its legs, can use its legs to good purpose.

_pangáhoy_, Freq. of káhoy. To fetch or gather firewood, collect
fuel. Mangáhoy (magpangáhoy) kamó dídto sa bakólod. Go and gather
firewood there on the hill.

_pangaingín_, Freq. of kaingín--jungle fire, etc.

_pangáka_, Freq. of káka--to gather, scrape together.

_pangáka_, Freq. of áka--to be much resorted to or much in demand.

_pangâkâ_, Freq. of kâkâ--to be full to the bursting point.

_pangakáak_, Freq. of kakáak--to cackle.

_pangák-ak_, Freq. of ák-ak--to tear or strip off.

_pangákak_, Freq. of kákak--to cackle. (cf. pangakáak).

_pangakás_, Freq. of kakás--to pull or tear down, tear in pieces.

_pangákig_, (H) The Freq. of ákig--to be or become angry, etc. Nangákig
(Nagpangákig) silá. They got angry, grew angry, waxed hot.

_pangákò_, Freq. of ákò--to be able, to undertake a work and its
responsibility.

_páng-al_, Plain, ugly, distorted, dark and marked with smallpox,
etc., said of the face. Páng-al siá sing guyá. He has an ugly face.

_pangalába_, Prayer, oration; to pray, beseech, ask in prayer, to
call upon in prayer. Freq. of alába.

_pangalabáhan, pangalabahán_, Place of prayer, oratory;
altar. (cf. pangalába; halarán).

_pangalág_, To steal garden--and farm--produce during the night
preceding All Souls' Day, the thieves pretending to be souls of the
departed. Many ignorant people believe that the souls in purgatory
walk abroad at that time to visit their former haunts. Pangalagá
lang ang íya mga ságing. Steal his bananas on the eve of All Souls'
Day. Pinangalagán níla kagáb-i ang ákon kalubihán. Last night they
visited my coco-nut-plantation and stole coco-nuts, etc. (kalág).

_pangaláging_, Freq. of kaláging--to arrange well; to drill.

_pangalág-kalág_, Freq. of kalág-kalág. Also: to examine, search,
try to find, look over a room, road, etc. for lost articles or the
like. Pangalágkalagón mo ang kwárta nga nadúlà. Look for the lost
money. Try to find the lost money. Pangalágkalagán mo ang dálan, básì
pa lang nga makítà nímo ang síngsing nga nawígit (nagkawígit). Keep
a sharp lookout on the way (look everywhere on the road), perhaps
you will find the ring you dropped. (cf. pangítà, panulúktúluk).

_pangaláhà_, To cook, hold the pan, have "an iron in the fire", have
"an axe to grind", have something to gain. (cf. kaláhà).

_pangaláhas_, To wear jewels (jewelry, jewelery). (cf. aláhas).

_pangalámpay_, To look for, or gather, river-crabs; to go in search
of pleasure. (cf. kalámpay).

_pangaláng-aláng_, To hesitate, doubt, be--undecided,--in
doubt,--uncertain, not to know exactly what to say or do. (alángálang).

_pangálap_, To go in search of an amulet; to wear a talisman,
amulet, charm in the superstitious belief that it will protect the
wearer in danger, preserve him from disease, keep him out of harm,
etc. (cf. antíngánting, pinangálap).

_pangalápkap_, To cling to, adhere to, creep up, wind or circle around
as a vine or creeper. (Freq. of kalápkap, kápkap; cf. pangabúd).

_pangalapkápan_, Grip, hold; influence, power, sway. (cf. pangalápkap).

_pangalápton_, Grasp, grip, handle, heft; business, occupation. Maáyo
siá sing pangalápton. He is a good--, an experienced--, worker. He
is an old hand

_pangalátay_, To tremble, shake; suffer from the gapes (the disease
"alátay" (arátay)) that often causes great havoc amongst poultry.

_pangaláw_, Freq. of aláw--to treat visitors, offer them smokes,
etc.; to be hospitable, entertain a guest.

_pangaláwat_, Freq. of kaláwat--to go to--, to receive--, Holy
Communion.

_pangálay, palangálay_, Freq. of álay--to be stiff, tired,
etc. Rigidity, stiffness, tiredness (of limbs, etc.) through
overexertion, or the like; to be or become stiff, etc.

_pangaláyo_, Freq. of kaláyo. To attend to
the--fire,--hearth,--cooking. Kamó lang ang matánum, kay akó sing
ákon mangaláyo. You go and plant rice, I for my part will look after
(attend to) the cooking.

_pangálhit_, See pangalihít--to throw aside, shelve, etc.

_pangalíg-on_, Security, bond, bail, surety; assurance; to be or give
security, stand bail, etc. (cf. líg-on, palíg-on).

_pangalíhid_, Freq. of alíhid--to go along the side or edge of,
pick one's way along the margin (edge, border) of.

_pangalihít_, To throw aside, shelve, put in the corner, discard; pay
no attention to, neglect, disregard. (cf. lihít, ahígahíg, ihígihíg).

_pangalíkog_, Freq. of kalíkog--to poke, probe (a wound, etc.).

_pangalikóg_, A probe; a sponge. (cf. kalikóg).

_pangalíma_, (B) To handle, grasp or take with the hand, to actually
lay hands upon. Sín-o siníng mga makáwat ang nagpangalíma (nangalíma)
sang pílak? Which of these thieves did actually take the money,
did the actual stealing of the money, did personally lay hands on
the money? Maáyo siá mangalíma. He has deft hands, knows how to use
his hands well. (cf. pangamót).

_pangalímug_, (B) The way one speaks, quality of one's voice (in
speaking); to speak. (cf. límog, pangatingúg, paníngug, paningúg;
panlímug--quality of one's voice in singing).

_pangalimúg_, To wash or rinse out one's mouth, to gargle. Pangalimúg
(magpangalimúg, mangalimúg) ka ánay sing túbig. First wash out your
mouth. Ari ang túbig nga inogpangalimúg (ipangalimúg). Here is the
water for rinsing out the mouth with.

_pangalíntak_, To click the tongue. Indì ka magpangalíntak. Don't
click your tongue. Pinangalintakán akó níya. He clicked his tongue
at me. (cf. líntak).

_pangalípay_, To amuse oneself, rejoice, exult, be glad, joyful,
jolly, cheerful, merry, gay. (cf. lípay, kalípay, palangalipáyan).

_pangalísbong_, Freq. of alísbong--odour, smell, etc.; to
emit or exhale an odour, smells, scents, odoriferous vapours,
etc. Nagapangalísbong ang mga mahumút nga búlak sa pamulákan. The
fragrant flowers are filling the garden with their odours (sweet
smell, sweetness).

_pangalisúd_, Freq. of lisúd, kalisúd. To worry,
grieve, sorrow, to be--in distress,--in trouble,
have--difficulties,--worries,--troubles,--a hard time of it, be hard
put to it.

_pangalít_, Freq. of kalít--to do at once, quickly, by anticipation,
promptly, to take time by the forelock, avail oneself of an
opportunity.

_pangalmidón_, Freq. of almidón. To starch. Sagád siá mangalabá
kag mangalmidón sang mga panápton. She is an expert at washing and
starching clothes.

_pangalókos_, Freq. of kalókos--to tuck up.

_pangalós_, Freq. of kalós--to scratch. Ang kuríng nagapangalós. The
cat (is scratching) scratches. (cf. pangarós, which is more commonly
used).

_pangálot_, Freq. of kálot--to scratch lightly, to relieve an itch
by rubbing or scratching.

_pangalót-kálot_, Dim. of pangálot. Nagapangalótkálot siá sang íya
ólo. He is scratching his head.

_pangáloy_, Freq. of áloy--to pretend to be sick, etc.

_pangálpò_, To grow old and pass away, to leave the world, to die,
succumb. Nangálpò siá nga walâ makakítà sing áwto. He grew old and
passed away without ever having so much as seen an automobile.

_pangálpot_, Freq. of álpot. Prostitution, harlotry, whoredom;
the meretricious conduct, arts and wiles of bawds and lewd women;
to practise prostitution, etc.

_pangálsa_, Freq. of álsa--to raise, lift, hoist, heave; to receive
or take on credit.

_pangalúgmò_, Freq. of kalúgmò--to cover oneself with, enwrap oneself
in. (cf. pangulúmbut, pangulámbut).

_pangalúmbut_, Freq. of kalúmbut. To wrap oneself up in (a blanket,
etc.). (cf. pangalúgmò, panimúlon).

_pangalúpò_, To be retiring, timid, shy, bashful, reserved, aloof,
to keep away from social gatherings or entertainments as one having a
cold or feeling indisposed. Indì ka magpangalúpò (mangalúpò) sa mga
katipúnan. Don't be too retiring at social gatherings. (cf. lupô,
likáw).

_pangályaw_, To visit or go to another place in search of work,
to emigrate, etc. See pangáyaw id.

_pangamálus_, An uneasy sensation in the skin (that inclines one to
scratch the affected part), itch; to itch (as of a healing wound,
etc.). (cf. málus).

_pangáman_, Freq. of áman. Preparation, caution, circumspection,
foresight, forethought, prudence; to prepare, get ready, be
cautious or circumspect, make previous arrangement for, be careful,
etc. (cf. panghíkot, panghímos, panigáon).

_pangáman_, Freq. of áman--to add, throw in without charge, allow
for discount, etc.

_pangamátis_, To gather tomatoes; to become as red as a ripe tomato,
to blush. (cf. kamátis).

_pangámbon_, Freq. of ámbon--to gather clouds around, be covered
with clouds. Nagapangámbon ang mga búkid. The mountains are covered
with clouds.

_pangámias_, Freq. of kámias--to make a scratching or clawing motion
with the hands or paws, as a dog jumping on its master and caressing
him with its paws, etc.

_pangamíhan_, To go or travel--north,--northward,--northwards,--towards
the North,--in a northerly direction. Nagapangamíhan ang mga
gál-um. The clouds are travelling northwards. (cf. amíhan, amínhan).

_pangámion_, Freq. of ámion--to be odoriferous, spread agreeable
scents or diffuse pleasant odours.

_pangámlot_, Sense of touch; to touch. (cf. kámlot).

_pangamóma_, Freq. of amóma--to regale, treat, give food to, serve
with, serve out to, be hospitable, entertain; present with, make a
gift of (fruits, eatables, etc.).

_pangamós-kamós_, Freq. of kamúskamús--to live from hand to mouth,
to have barely enough to live on. (cf. abátabát).

_pangámot_, Freq. of ámot--to contribute towards a fund, etc.

_pangamót_, Freq. of kamót. To handle, grasp or take hold of with the
hand, to take in hand, to manage; quality or use of one's hand. Maáyo
sing pangamót iníng tigduág, magsusúlat, etc. This painter, writer,
etc. is skillful in the use of his brush, pen, etc. (cf. pangalíma).

_pangámpò_, Freq. of ámpò. Request, petition; surrender; to ask, pray,
beg, beseech, supplicate, intercede for, implore, plead, entreat,
petition; to ask for mercy, yield, surrender. Kon walâ silá mangámpò
áyhan naúrut silá magkalamatáy. If they had not surrendered they
would probably have been killed.

_pangamúyò_, Prayer, orison, invocation; to pray, invoke, say--, offer
up--, a prayer. Pangamúyò ka (Magpangamúyò, mangamúyò ka). Pray. Say
a prayer. Say your prayers. Offer up a prayer. (cf. pangadî).

_pangámyon_, See pangámion--a sweet smell, etc.

_panganák_, Delivery, birth; to give birth to; to beget, procreate,
bring forth, have--offspring,--a child,--issue; to be godfather or
godmother to a child at baptism or confirmation. (cf. anák).

_pangánaw_, Freq. of kánaw--to glisten, shine, etc. Freq. of ánaw--to
flood, deluge.

_panganáw-kánaw, panganáw-kanáw_, Dim. of pangánaw. Also: to
fill to overflowing, become brimful, to brim, brim over (of
tears). (cf. kanáw-kanáw).

_pangánay_, First-born; firstling, first-fruits. (ánay). (cf. subáng).

_panganáy-kánay_, Freq. of kanáy-kánay--to blow softly, gently;
to abate, get mild or even-tempered.

_pangandúhoy_, To moan, sigh, grieve, wail, mourn, groan, lament,
keen, whimper, whine. (cf. dúhoy). Also noun: a moan, etc.

_pangánga_, Caus. of ngánga--to open (the mouth).

_pangánggà_, To cart, transport or convey by cart, to be a
carter. (cf. kánggà). Also: Freq. of ánggà--to pet, fondle.

_pangánghon_, From pangánga. Pangángha siá sang íya bâbâ. Let him
open his mouth.

_pangángkang_, Freq. of kángkang. To open one's hand with the
fingers spread wide apart; to sprawl, spread the legs or open
the--claw,--pincer,--pincher, said of crabs, lobsters, etc.

_pangángkon_, To be godfather or godmother. Ang pinanángkon ni
Fuláno. N.N.'s godchild. (cf. anák, ángkon). Also: Freq. of ángkon--to
acquire, etc.

_pangángkat_, (B) Freq. of ángkat--to get on credit; to get loose,
separate; to challenge, defy.

_pangáni_, Freq. of áni--to harvest rice, to cut rice with the
kayóg, etc.

_panganínaw_, Freq. of anínaw. To look into a mirror and see the
reflection; to picture to oneself, practise crystal gazing, seem
to foresee, have prescience--foreboding,--foreknowledge,--second
sight,--forewarning. Daw ginpanganínaw ko nga dáan ang maabután siníng
bátà. I seemed to know beforehand what was in store for this child.

_pangánit_, Freq. of ánit--to flay, skin, etc. Kon mangánit kitá sa
ibán, anítan man kitá. If we flay others, we shall be flayed ourselves
i.e. The evil done by us to others will recoil on ourselves.

_pangánod_, Freq. of ánod--to float, etc. Also: Cloud. (cf. gál-um,
ámbon, alopó-op, dámpug).

_panganógon_, Freq. of kanógon--to bewail, be sorry for, to exclaim
"kanógon"--"What a pity!".


_pangánta_, Freq. of kánta--to sing. Freq. of ánta--smell of burnt
food.

_pangánti_, To act like a weather-cock or dog-vane. (cf. kánti).

_pangánti_, To long, crave, desire vehemently,
be--anxious--eager,--avid,--keen, for a fight and the
like. Nagapangánti siá sa pakigáway, pagdúmug, etc. He longs for a
fight, is anxious to wrestle, etc. (cf. the following pangánti).

_pangánti_, (Probably from the Sp. ante) To show off, wish to be
first or foremost, like to be in the front rank; to exert oneself,
make great efforts. (cf. palangánti).

_pangántod_, (H) Freq. of ántod--the smell of burnt food; to burn
and emit a corresponding smell.

_pangáon_, Freq. of káon--to eat, take food,
etc. Nagapangáon--or--nagapangináon silá. They are taking food,
are having a meal. Ang mga gál-um nagapangináon pa. The clouds are
eating still, i.e. are gathering or increasing in size (a sign of
coming rain).

_pangápas_, Freq. of ápas--to follow, call back. (cf. pangábat, sunúd).

_pangápay_, Freq. of kápay--blanket. To use a blanket, wrap oneself
up in a blanket.

_pangapáy_, To use wings; cover oneself as with wings. (cf. kapáy).

_pangápin_, Freq. of ápin--to help, assist, protect, defend, be a
partner, take sides with.

_pangápkap_, To grope, feel one's way like a blind man. (cf. kápkap).

_pangáplag_, Freq. of áplag--to spread, disperse.

_pangapó_, To have grandchildren; be a grandfather, grandmother. (apó).

_pangápò_, To draw near, come close to, in order to be noticed or
petted as a dog coming near its master.

_pangárà_, (B) Freq. of kárà--to vituperate, scold, chide in rude
language, etc.

_pangaráb-kárab_, Freq. of karáb-kárab--to flame, flare up, burn
lustily; to crackle (of fire).

_pangaragóy_, To wail, sigh, moan, groan, fret, say
"aragóy"--oh! ah! ow! in complaining of pain or grief. (cf. pangháyhay,
pangharóy, pangandúhoy).

_pangarâ-kárà_, Dim. of pangárà. Also: to twitter, utter tremulous,
broken sounds.

_pangaránda_, Freq. of karánda--to do quickly; to scamp, to perform
carelessly, etc.

_pangaráng_, To warm oneself, etc. See panarán, panaráng id. (aráng).

_pangarangál_, To shout; bark; cry out aloud; to talk nonsense,
prattle. (cf. úwang, sínggit, únggal; ngálngal, ngásal, lásang,
lamádà).

_pangarángkang_, Freq. of kalángkang--to spread out one's fingers,
to extend the fingers convulsively, etc.

_pangarás_, To scratch as a cat, chicken, etc. (cf. pangalós,
pangarós, karós).

_pangaráskas_, Freq. of karáskas--to tear, pull off, etc. Also: to
exert oneself very much, strive with might and main. Nagapangaráskas
silá sa pagsákà sa maáyo sing sóhol nga palangakóan. They are making
great efforts to attain (rise to) a well-paid position. (cf. káskas;
panikasúg, pamarúg-ot, etc.).

_pangarímo_, Freq. of arímo--to lean--, rely--, upon.

_pangarítos_, To wear earrings. (arítos).

_pangaromána_, (B) To be shy, restrained in one's behaviour, feel
ill at ease (as a stranger in unknown surroundings). (cf. pangirákirá).

_pangaróskos_, Freq. of karóskos--to scratch, use claws or nails in
tearing, etc.

_pangárot_, See pangálot.

_pangaróy_, Freq. of karóy--to starch yarn, etc. previous to weaving.

_pangaróy_, Freq. of aróy. To complain of pain, say
"aróy". (cf. pangaragóy).

_pangása, pangasá_, Freq. kása--to hunt.


_pangasá_, Extraordinary, wonderful, uncommon, astonishing,
exceptional. (cf. tanhágà, pasahî, makatilingála).

_pangasábà_, To engage in a legal fight, have a case in court, appeal
to the law, carry on a legal prosecution. (cf. kasábà).

_pangasáwa_, Marriage, wedlock, matrimony, nuptials, wedding; to
take--, marry--, wed--, a wife, to marry, wed, be joined in matrimony,
be--, get--, married. (cf. asáwa, asawá).

_pangasáy-kásay_, Freq. of kasáy-kásay--to convalesce, get better,
improve in health.

_pangásì_, An intoxicating drink prepared from rice, rice-beer. The
pangásì is usually sipped by means of a small tube and served only
on special occasions as at a marriage-feast, etc. Superstitious
practitioners (babáylan) use the pangásì at their yearly assemblies
near their "sacred places" called by them the "halígi sang kalibútan".

_pangasíg_, To abominate, abhor, loathe, exclaim "asíg" of which the
English equivalents are ugh! faugh! foh!

_pangasíng-kásing_, Heart, condition or quality of one's heart, mind,
feeling, sentiments, aspirations. (cf. kasíng-kásing, panagiposóon).

_pangásoy_, Freq. of ásoy--to explain, expose, make clear, expound,
elucidate.

_pangát_, A dish prepared from dried and cut-up dágmay-leaves mixed
with crabs, shrimps, chili, etc. Himói akó sing pangát. Prepare me
a dish of pangát. Nakakáon kamí dídto sing pangát (pinangát). We ate
there a dish of pangát. (cf. pinangát).

_pangátay_ Freq. of kátay--to form in line, etc.

_pangatí_, Freq. of atí--to raid, rob, plunder, ransack.

_pangáti_, Freq. of káti--to provoke; to lure, entice, allure, catch
birds, etc. by means of a lure (katián). Ginbutangán níla ang siáy sing
katián sa pagpangáti sing iláhas. They put a lure into the siáy-trap,
in order to catch wild chickens.

_pangatingúg_, Freq. of tíngug--voice; to voice, speak, etc.

_pangáto_, Freq. of áto. To see the point, to understand; to look
for the end or key of a thread, rope, etc.

_pangatóp_, Freq. of atóp--to make a roof, to roof in, put a roof on.

_pangátsi_, (H) Freq. of átsi--to sneeze. Dî mo akó
pagpangatsihán. Don't sneeze at me. (cf. bahaón, pamahaón).

_pangatúbang_, Freq. of atúbang. To confront, face, stand--in front
of,--before,--in presence of, present oneself before. Mangatúbang
ka sing maísug sa mga kalisdánan sang pagpangabúhì. Bravely face the
difficulties of life. Nangatúbang siá sa támpad sang íya káaway. He
confronted his enemy face to face.

_pangáwà_, Freq. of áwà. To be compassionate, have mercy, take pity
on, sympathize with, commiserate with, condole with, to pity, to
take--mercy--,--compassion--, on (upon).

_pangáwas_, Freq. of áwas--to overflow, flow out over the rim, flow--,
run--, well--, brim--, pour--, spill--, over the edge (brim, rim).

_pangáwas_, Freq. of káwas--to go or step over the side of, etc.

_pangawát_, Freq. of awát--to keep occupied, hinder, detain, etc.

_pangáwat_, (H) Freq. of káwat--to steal, etc. (cf. panákaw, tákaw,
paníkas).

_pangawátan_, Adultery; to commit adultery, (cf. láyì, pangláyì;
kawátan--lover, correspondent, adulterer).

_pangáway_, (H) Freq. of áway--to fight, quarrel, etc.

_pangawhi_, Freq. of káwhi. To pick one's ears, use a piece of smooth
bamboo, etc. to clean one's ears of wax.

_pangáwit_, (H) Freq. of káwit--to gather with pole and hook, etc.

_pangáwit_, (B) Freq. of káwit. To hook, seize with a hook, crook,
pole and hook; to catch, tear, lacerate, rend, said of thorns, briars
and the like catching in one's clothes in passing, etc. (cf. paníngit).

_pangawô-káwò_, To perform light work, etc. See pangawótkáwot id.


_pangawót-káwot_, Light work, an easy job, as various household
duties, etc.; to perform household duties, do some easy (light)
work, be busy, be occupied, be neither idle nor engaged in heavy
work that requires great physical exertions. Nagapangawótkáwot siá sa
sulúd sang baláy. She is occupied with her household duties. Walâ siá
pagpangawótkáwot. She does nothing. She is idle (lazy). Pangawótkáwot
man. Do something. Occupy yourself with some easy work. Be not so idle.

_pangáyaw_, A temporary resident, sojourner, migrating, migratory,
wandering; to migrate, sojourn or dwell in a place temporarily or as a
stranger, go to live somewhere else with the intention of coming back
within a longer or shorter period to one's old place of abode. Píspis
nga pangáyaw. A migratory bird. A bird of passage. Ang mga pumulúyò nga
pangáyaw. Temporary residents. Visitors. Travellers. Guests. Madámò
nga mga mamumugón ang nagapangáyaw sa tuígtúig sa Négros nga
Nakatúndan. Many workmen go yearly to Occidental Negros for a
season. Ginapangayáwan man lang siníng mga táo ang áton bánwa. These
people are staying here in our town only for a time. (cf. pangályaw).

_pangáyaw_, Freq. of áyaw--to be sufficient, to satisfy, etc.

_pangáyò_, To ask, beg, request, solicit. Mangáyò (Magpangáyò) ka
kag pagahatágan ikáw. Ask and you shall receive. Pangayóa sa íya ang
ímo kinahánglan. Beg of him to grant you what you need. Ginpangayóan
akó níya sing isá ka gántang nga humáy. He asked me for a ganta of
rice. Anó ang ginapangáyò mo? What are you asking for? What do you
want? (cf. ayô).

_pangáyo_, (H) Freq. of áyo--to be or get well, etc.

_pangayô-kayô_, To live--, behave--, act--, like a drone or
parasite. (cf. kayô).

_pangayô-káyò_, To haggle, higgle, bargain, ask, request (help, money,
etc.; cf. kayô, ayô).

_pangayóngkong_, To contract the limbs convulsively, spasmodically,
as people suffering from cramps, epileptic fits, etc.

_pangayúgpus_, Freq. of kayúgpus--to shrivel, shrink.

_pangayúmkum_, Freq. of kayúmkum--to dwindle,
shrivel. (cf. pangayúgpus).

_pangayúpus_, See pangayúgpus--to dwindle, etc. (cf. kúpus).

_pangbuút_, Freq. of buút--to will, etc. See pamuút.

_pangdakúp_, Freq. of dakúp--to catch, arrest, etc.

_pangdalasâ_, Freq. of dalasâ--to run over, collide with, etc.

_pángdan_, The screw pine. See pándan id.

_pangdánghos_, Freq. of dánghos. To strive after, look for, seek, try
hard to obtain, be anxious about, be very busy or occupied. (cf. sákò,
dúlup).

_pangdápit_, Freq. of dápit--to invite. Ang mga pinangdápit. The
(invited) guests.

_pangdóhol_, Freq. of dóhol--to reach, hand, etc.

_pangduhá-dúha_, Freq. of duhá-dúha--to doubt, etc.

_pangduhól-duhól_, Freq. and Dim. of dóhol. To reach up, to reach
or pass to others, spread, hand over, retail. Ang kartéro amó ang
nagapangduhólduhól sang mga sulát sa kabalayán. The postman delivers
the letters from house to house.

_pangdúhoy_, To sigh, etc. See dúhoy, pangandúhoy.

_panggábut_, To eradicate, pull out, uproot. (cf. gábut).

_panggámbay_, To lay or put one's hand upon. Panggambayí ang íya
abága. Put your hand on his shoulders.

_pánggas_, To plant, sow, especially to plant seeds by hand in holes
made by a stick, etc. Ipánggas ang maís. Plant the corn. Panggasí sing
maís ang talámnan nga naányan na. Plant corn in the field from which
the rice has been harvested. Ang mga ginikánan dápat magpánggas sang
bínhì sang maáyo nga pamatásan sa lanúbò nga tagiposóon sang íla mga
bátà. Parents should sow the seed of good conduct (manners) in the
young hearts of their children. Walâ kamí sing humáy nga pinánggas,
kóndì tinánum lang. We have no rice grown directly from the seeds,
but only rice from transplanted seedlings. Ang pamánggas ángay sa
mga bánglid, ápang ang panánum sa saláma nga wayáng. Seed-planting
is suitable on slopes, but seedling-planting on level plains.

_panggasód_, Freq. of gasód--to retort, give a rough answer.

_pánggid_, To secure, fasten, tie, bind. Kon magsinutíl ikáw liwán
ipánggid ko ikáw sa bánkò kag hanóton. If you are naughty again
I'll tie you down on a bench and give you a whipping. (cf. higót,
góos, gápus).

_panggínggi_, A game at cards; to play panggínggi.

_pangginggíhan_, Place (room, house, table, etc.) where panggínggi
is played.

_panggoî_, To catch fish, crabs, etc. by means of one's apron or skirt
(a primitive method of fishing in rivers and shallow waters).

_panggó-pánggo_, Uneducated, illiterate, ill-bred, low, mean, base,
rude, unlettered, unschooled, uncultured, a term of contempt applied
chiefly to white men. Ang ibán nga mga bukáy nga nagabút dirí sa áton
mga panggópánggo gid lámang. Some of the whites that have come here
to us are really very low-class people. A, panggópánggo lang siá. Ah,
he is only an ill-bred white, a low-cast white man.

_pangguâ_, See panggwâ--to go outside, etc.

_panggúsnit_, Freq. of gúsnit--to tear, rend, etc.

_pangguyáhon, pangguyahón_, Face, countenance, physiognomy, cast or
expression of face. Magayón siá sing pangguyáhon. Her face is (was)
beautiful. (cf. guyá, nawóng).

_panggwâ_, Freq. of gwâ--to go outside, etc.

_pangh_--, The same as panh--in words beginning with "h",
e.g. panghímos--panhímos (hímos); panghápit--panhápit (hápit). See
pan--.

_panghábal, panghabál_, To swell; to ripen, change colour. (cf. hábal,
habál).

_panghágyò_, Freq. of hágyò--to gesticulate; swing one's arms.

_panghaláwhaw_, Freq. of haláwhaw--to be taken unawares, to express
surprise or astonishment.

_panghamót_, Freq. of hamút. To be odoriferous, perfumed,
sweet-smelling, scented, aromatic, to have a sweet
smell, etc., to give--, give off--, breathe--, exhale--,
emit--, diffuse--, a sweet--, pleasant--, delicious--,
smell,--odour,--aroma,--scent,--perfume. (cf. pangámyon).

_panghamóy_, Freq. of hamóy. To wash one's face, to move the palm of
the hand down one's face as after a swim or bath.

_panghanarúngan_, Vindication, justification, argument, defence,
self-defence; to vindicate, justify, prove to be right. (cf. tárung,
matárung, katarúngan).

_panghangdál-hángdal_, Freq. of hangdálhángdal, handálhándal. To go in
search of a buyer, to visit from house to house in order to dispose of
a pawn or of something for sale. Dúro gid ang panghangdálhángdal ko sa
pagbalígyà sang ákon báka. I had to go from place to place in trying to
find a buyer for my cow or ox. Ipapanghangdálhángdal mo ang ímo báboy,
básì may mabakál. Try to dispose of your pig, perhaps someone would
like to buy it. Pinanghangdálhangdalán ko ang madámò nga mga baláy,
ápang walâ sing may lúyag sa pagbakál sang ákon umá. I have been to
many houses in search of a buyer, but there is none who wants to
buy my land. Nagapanghangdálhángdal silá sing pílak nga ilimós sa
minatáy. They are looking for money to pay the funeral fees for the
person that died.

_panghánglas_, To go in search of, look for, try to find, get or obtain
whatever one needs by going from house to house, etc. Nagapanghánglas
siá sing kwárta, kán-on, wásay, etc. He is in search of money, rice,
a hatchet, etc.

_pangharóy_, To moan, sigh, complain, ejaculate, say or shout "haróy"
(alas!). (cf. haróy).

_panghásò_, To trick, cheat, fool, bamboozle, cozen. (cf. hásò).

_panghatúd_, Freq. of hatúd--to deliver, hand over.

_pangháw-ad_, Freq. of háw-ad--to take out of, snatch away from.


_pangháwak_, Form or shape of a person's waist or hips. (cf. háwak).

_pangháwan_, Freq. of háwan--to make clear of obstacles, etc.

_pangháwas_, See pangháw-ad. (háwas--háw-ad).

_pangháyhay_, Freq. of háyhay--to sigh, moan, say "háy",
"aháy". "Heigh-ho!" in pain or distress.

_panghibuláhan_, To congratulate, felicitate, wish good luck, call
blessed, praise. (buláhan).

_panghigád_, (H) To make for the edge or side of; to edge away from,
go aside or away from. (higád).

_panghíkap_, To touch, feel; grope one's way. (cf. híkap).

_panghíkog_, Freq. of híkog--to commit suicide (by hanging, etc.).

_panghíkot_, Freq. of híkot--to prepare, get ready, make arrangements
for. (cf. panghímos).

_panghilamón_, To weed, weed out, pull up weeds, clear of
weeds. (hilamón).

_panghilám-os_, (H) To wash one's head and face. (Freq. of lám-os).

_panghiláw-hílaw_, To do something coldly, half-heartedly, merely
to keep up appearances, particularly applied to a forced smile or
laugh. (cf. hiláw, pakuláhaw).

_panghiláw-hílaw_, Freq. and Dim. of hiláw. Also: to change colour,
betray--fear,--shyness,--disgust.

_panghilód-hílod_, Freq. of hilód-hílod. To wriggle, stir, writhe;
to wriggle and twist in rubbing off dirt whilst bathing, etc.

_panghilóod_, See panghimalóod--to loathe, etc.

_panghimaáyo_, (H) Blessing, congratulation; to bless, invoke a
blessing upon, call blessed, praise, exalt; to congratulate, wish
another--joy,--happiness,--well. (cf. maáyo; pakamaáyo--to approve,
etc.).

_panghimaláut_, (H) Curse, imprecation; to curse, invoke a curse upon,
call cursed, imprecate, execrate, condemn, wish evil to. (cf. maláut,
panóloy).

_panghimál-i_, (H) The imperative passive of panghibaló (Freq. of
hibaló)--to know, understand, but used in the same meaning as pamál-i,
which see. Panghimál-i ni Pédro sang panglútò sing pagkáon. Peter
knows nothing about cooking, has no inkling as to how prepare a
meal. (cf. kalibutáni).

_panghimalóod_, Loathing, abomination, detestation; to loathe,
abominate, abhor, detest. Ginapanghimalóod níya ang batásan ni
Fuláno. He abominates N.N.'s conduct. Nagapanghimalóod siá siníng
pagkáon. He detests this food. (cf. lóod).

_panghímos_, Freq. of hímos. To prepare, get ready, provide, see to
beforehand, make arrangements for; preparation, previous arrangement,
provision.

_panghimurús_, To make great efforts, do one's best, struggle hard,
exert oneself, strive with might and main. (cf. purús, himúd-os,
paningúhà).

_panghimútà_, To clean the eyes of mucus. (cf. mútà).

_panghináw_, (H) To wash one's hands, etc. Freq. of hináw.

_panghingalít_, To make use of an opportunity, do at once, take
advantage of, make "hay while the sun shines". (cf. kalít).

_panghingáp-us_, To commit suicide, hang oneself;
suicide. (cf. hingápus, híkog).

_panghípus_, Freq. of hípus. To be silent, taciturn, quiet, etc.

_panghísà_, Freq. of hísà--to envy, spite, grudge, bear ill-will;
to beat, thrash, hurt.

_panghiwángì_, To clean the mouth of remnants of food after a
meal by means of the tongue. Kay walâ kitá sing túbig nga ilímnon
magapanghiwángì lang kitá. As we have no drinking water, let us clean
our mouths with our tongue.

_panghokóm_, Freq. of hokóm--to judge, etc.

_panghubág_, (H) Freq. of hubág--to swell, become bloated, swollen;
a swelling.

_panghubáy-hubáy, panghubáy-húbay_, To be in the neighbourhood of,
loiter, linger, tarry, stand around. (cf. hubáy-hubáy).


_panghúgas_, Freq. of húgas--to rinse, wash. To clean one's feet,
etc. with water.

_panghúgum_, To soak, steep in. (cf. húgum).

_panghulám_, Freq. of hulám--to borrow, etc. Walâ siá madagtaí sang
mga pinanghulamán nga batásan sang mga dumulóong. He was untouched by
(kept himself aloof from) customs borrowed from foreigners.

_panghunâ-húnà_, Freq. of hunâhúnà--thought; to think, reflect,
consider, deliberate, etc. Ang panghunâhúnà nga binanwahánon. Civic
spirit, public opinion, political thinking (speculation).

_panghúnong_, Freq. of húnong--to quiet, calm, placate, abate,
mitigate, allay, soothe, pacify, assuage.

_panghunúng_, To swell up, get flabby or bloated. Nagpanghunúng ang
íya guyá. His face--became bloated,--became swollen,--swelled up.

_panghuráp-us_, Freq. of huráp-us--to solicit help, etc.

_panghúsay_, Freq. of húsay--to arrange, set in order, square up,
settle; to comb the hair.

_panghúyab_, Freq. of húyab--to run off quickly, scamper off, run
about pell-mell.

_panghúy-ab_, Freq. of húy-ab--to yawn, gape, open the mouth drowsily
or lazily.

_panghuyús_, To be or become pale, pallid, wan; to change colour,
be surprised, taken aback. (cf. huyús).

_pángi_, A kind of plant (tree) with medicinal properties. Atsára
nga pángi. A kind of pickles prepared from the pángi-plant.

_pangiáy-kíay_, To strut, walk pompously or ostentatiously, swagger,
walk with a lofty, proud gait or with affected dignity. (cf. kiáykíay).

_pangibá-ibá_, (B) To behave like a stranger, be shy, timid, quiet,
bashful. Kon magdúaw ka sa íla índì ka mangibáibá. If you pay them
a visit, don't act as if you were a stranger, as if you were not on
familiar terms with them.

_pangíban_, To diminish, decrease, take away from. (cf. íban).

_pangibánibán_, (H) See pangibáibá.

_pangíbok_, Freq. of íbok--to move, stir, writhe, twist, squirm,
twitch; to root (of pigs).

_pangíbug_, Freq. of íbug--to desire, crave, lust after, have a
passion for, covet.

_pangibuláhan_, Congratulation, best wishes; to congratulate,
felicitate. (cf. pangibúlan, panghibuláhan, panghimaáyo).

_pangibúlan_, To congratulate. Nagapangibúlan akó
sa ímo--or--ginapangibuláhan ko ikáw. I congratulate
you. (cf. pangibuláhan, panghibuláhan).

_pangídlis_, Freq. and Caus. of ngídlis. To shock, surprise; be
shocked, surprised, taken aback, in fear or terror.

_pangigí_, Freq. of kigí--strip (hemp, etc.).

_pangíhì_, To urinate, make (pass) water. (cf. íhì).

_pangikláhag_, Freq. of ikláhag--to stumble, etc.

_pangilábò_, To eat sliced coconut-meat soaked in toddy. Nangilábò
silá sa íla nga píknik. At their picnic they ate sliced coconut-meat
mixed with toddy. (cf. kilábò).

_pangílag_, Freq. of kílag--to look about curiously, etc.

_pangilála_, Freq. of kilála--to be acquainted with, etc. May
napangilál-an akó dídto. I have an acquaintance there.

_pangiláng-kílang, pangilán-kílan_, To shine, sparkle, glisten,
twinkle. (cf. kilángkílang, kilánkílan, bádlak, sílak, sílì, ínggat,
etc.).

_pangilás_, Freq. of kilás. To make a sudden jerk or movement as if
electrified, shake, tremble, receive a shock through fear, excitement,
etc. Nagapangilás ang íya láwas. He (His body) is shaking all over
with fear.

_pangilát_, Lightning, flashes of lightning; to lighten. May
pangilát. Nagapangilát. There is lightning. Lightning is flashing.


_pangílay_, Form or shape of one's eyebrows. (cf. kílay).

_pangiláy, pangiláyay_, To raise the eyebrows, give the hint, wink at,
signal to another by moving the eyebrows. Nagapangiláyay silá. They
are--winking at each other,--signalling to each other with their
eyebrows. (cf. kílay).

_pangílid_, Side, edge, border, rim, margin, brink, verge; to be or
go at the side of. (cf. kílid).

_pangílkig_, To scrape or rub with a rough fish-skin, to rub and
make smooth with the skin of a crocodile, etc., to smooth as with
glass paper; to cause a creepy, uncanny sensation, to shock, take
aback. Pinangilkigán siá kag nagbátyag sing dakô gid nga kahádluk. A
creepy sensation stole over him and he felt great fear. (cf. kílkig).

_pangilódò, pangilódo_, To zigzag, stagger, reel, totter, as a drunken
man. (cf. panayódò, panayódoy, dulíngdúling).

_pangilô-ilô_, To show signs of joy and pleasure, welcome with delight,
receive with gladness; to strive to please or be of service, as an
inferior or a (contrite) culprit, try to placate, as an offender the
one offended. (cf. aráyaráy).

_pangilóm_, Freq. of ilóm--to darken, blacken, etc. (cf. panagíl-om,
pangitúm).

_pangilóng_, Form or shape of nose, way of carrying one's nose. Hímpit
siá sing pangilóng. He has a perfect type of nose. The shape of his
nose is beautiful. (cf. ilóng).

_pangíloy_, To offer flowers to the Blessed Virgin during the month
of May; the offering of such flowers.

_pangilóy_, Motherhood, maternity, matronhood; to be a
mother. (cf. ilóy).

_pangímon_, Freq. of ímon--to be jealous, envious. Magapangimonáy
silá. They are jealous of each other.

_pangin-_, A prefix expressing mostly the idea of becoming, or being
changed into, what the root implies. For magapangin- and magpangin-
"mangin- is often used and for nagpangin- "nangin-". Pagpanginímol--to
become poor. Nanginímol siá. He became poor. Iníng diótay nga tanúm
manginkáhoy (magapanginkáhoy) kunína. This small plant will finally
grow or develop into a tree. Indì ka na maginúm, kay manginhubúg
ikáw. Don't drink any more, or you will become fuddled. Manginmatáy
siá ánay sang sa magbúhat sinâ. He would rather die than do that. He
prefers death to doing that. Nanginsúbung siá sa (sang)----. He
became like----.

_panginahán_, To ask for assistance, help, recommendation,
etc. Manginahán kitá sa kay Fuláno, agúd madángat ta ang
áton ginakinahánglan sa pangúlopuód. Let us ask for N.N.'s
recommendation, so that we may obtain what we want from the Provincial
Governor. (cf. pangarímo).

_panginám-kínam_, Freq. of kinámkínam. To smack one's lips; try the
taste of. Kon íya makítà iní manginám-kínam siá gid. When he sees
this he will smack his lips (with pleasure).

_pangináon_, Eating, feasting (of many); to feast, banquet,
eat. (cf. káon).

_pangínhas_, To gather or collect shell-fish. (cf. pakinháson).

_panginhásan_, Place where shell-fish (pakinháson) are often found.

_panginhawák_, To put the arms akimbo, i.e. with the
elbows pointing outwards, and the hands resting on the
hips. (háwak). (cf. paninghawák).

_pangínit_, Freq. of ínit--to wax hot, get angry, have one's blood
boiling with rage or passion. Kon makabatî siá sinâ, magapangínit
gid ang íya láwas sa kaákig. If he hears of it, he will be boiling
with rage.

_panginláman_, To be apprehensive of danger, be wary and cautious,
fear. Nagapanginláman siá nga----. He is full--of apprehension
that----,--of fear, lest----.

_panginmatáy_, To die, do away with oneself, choose to die, give
one's life willingly. Manginmatáy akó, ápang dílì gid akó magbúhat
sinâ. I will rather die than do that. (cf. patáy, matáy).

_panginpalús_, To slip out, escape. (cf. palús, panimúdlus).

_panginsálà_, To put the blame on, hold responsible, make answer for,
accuse, lay the guilt upon. Ginapanginsálà níla sinâ yádtong mga ponoán
nga----. They put the blame for it on those officials that----. Ikáw
gid ang ákon pagapanginsaláon, kon----. I'll hold you responsible,
if----. I'll call you to account, if----. (cf. sumálà).

_panginsapó_, To take out from a hidden recess, get from a known hiding
place. Panginsápwa lang dídto ang agás. Just get the petroleum from
where you know it is kept. (cf. sapó).

_panginsawâ, panginsáwà_, Disappointment, chagrin, vexation, annoyance;
to be grieved, hurt, disappointed, displeased, vexed, annoyed; to be in
a complaining or bad humour. Nagapanginsawâ ang kálag níya, kay walâ
magdúaw sa íya si Fuláno. He complains (is in a bad humour), because
N.N. has not visited him. Manginsawâ siá kon índì mo siá pagagdahón. He
will feel hurt, if you do not invite him. (cf. panaginsáwà).

_panginwálà_, To deny, disown, repudiate, say "no", contradict,
disavow, belie, refuse to admit an imputation, or the like; denial,
disavowal, repudiation, etc. (cf. wálà, walâ).

_panginyáwat_, To be avaricious, covetous of more, be (inordinately)
eager to increase one's possessions, to be selfish or greedy;
to be anxious to take advantage of, to avail oneself of an
opportunity. (cf. pangunyádî, himulús).

_pangipî-kípì_, Freq. of kipí-kípì--to tuck up, gather round, etc.

_pangípol_, See panagíp-ol id. (cf. pangímon).

_pangípot_, To evacuate, void the bowels. (cf. ípot, pamús-on).

_pangirá-kirá_, To be shy, bashful, self-conscious, ill at ease, to
move about restrainedly, appear to be under some restraint. Iníng táo
kon magsákà sa baláy walâ sing pangirákirá. When this man comes for
a visit, he moves about quite freely, unrestrainedly, makes himself
at home. Kon magdúaw ka sa íya índì ka mangirákirá, kay índì siá
kaúyon sang pangirákirá. When you pay him a visit, be at your ease,
for he does not like a shy, bashful or self-conscious behaviour.

_pangísdà_, Freq. of isdà. To fish, catch fish, ply the
trade of a fisherman, go out fishing. Mangísdà kitá. Let us go
fishing. Nagapangísdà silá sa báybay. They are out fishing on the
beach. (cf. panágat).

_pangisó_, Freq. of kisó. To wrinkle, crease, form plaits or folds
in garments, etc.

_pangisó-kisó_, Dim. of pangisó. Also: to hang down, fall down in folds
(of drapery, dresses, etc.).

_pangísug_, Freq. of ísug. To be brave, fearless, dauntless, bold,
violent, strong, unyielding, vehement. Nangísug (nagpangísug) silá
sa pagtámpad sa mga kaáway. They were full of courage to face their
enemies. Mangísug (Magpangísug) ka kag dílì ka magpatubalíng. Be
brave and don't give way (don't yield).

_páng-it_, To gnaw, nibble, bite off piece by piece. (cf. kíbkib;
kítkit, áp-ap, áb-ab, páng-os, háng-it).

_pangitâ_, Corner angle, ridge. Atpi ang pangitâ. Cover the ridge
with some roofing material.

_pangítà_, Freq. of kítà. To seek, look for, search for, try to
find; to get a livelihood, work or do business for one's living;
livelihood, sustenance, means or mode of one's life, business,
employment, engagement, occupation. Mangítà ka sing manók. Look for
some chicken. Pangitái akó sing páhò. Try to get some mangoes for
me. Ginpangítà níya ang nadúlà nga síngsing túbtub nga íya nakítà. He
sought for the lost ring till he found it. Anó ang íya pangítà? What
does he do for a living? How is he employed? What is his business? Ang
mangítà makakítà. Those who seek shall find.

_pangití_, Freq. of itî--droppings; to void the bowels (of birds,
etc.).

_pangítik_, Freq. of ítik--to tickle.

_pangítok_, Freq. of ítok--to tickle.

_pangitúm_, To darken, blacken, etc. (cf. itúm, pangilóm).

_pangiyáw_, To economize, curtail--, check--, curb--, cut down--, one's
expenditures, to refrain from spending as much as usual; to avoid, turn
away from, keep aloof from. Nagapangiyáw siá karón sa paghinguyáng,
kay maíwat kaáyo ang kwárta. He spends little at present, for money
is very scarce. Ginapangiyawán lang námon karón ang pagtíg-ang, kay
nakulángan kamí sing humáy, kag ang tigaláni malayô pa. We are cooking
only a little rice at present, for we have run short and the harvest is
still far off. Magpangiyáw (mangiyáw) ka sa pagpatúyang mo sing pílak,
kay kon dílì mapúto ka sa dílì madúgay. Refrain from spending money
so freely, for otherwise you will be bankrupt before long. Pangiyawí
siá. Keep aloof from him. Nagapangiyáw siá, kay may útang siá sa
ákon. He avoids me, because he is in debt to me. (cf. paúmud, likáw).

_pángkà_, Frog, toad. (cf. pakâ, pánkà).

_pángkot_, To ask information, question, interrogate, inquire. Pangkotá
siá kon diín ang íya agálon. Ask him where his master is. Napángkot na
siá sing makadámò, ápang walâ siá pagsúgid sang ginpángkot sa íya. He
has been asked (already) many times, but--does not tell what is asked
of him,--has not answered the questions put to him. Anó ang igapángkot
mo sa íya? What are you going to ask him (about)? (cf. pamángkot,
pamangkotánon, pakiána, pangutána).

_pangl_--, Pangl--very often stands for panl--in the frequentative
forms of words beginning with the letter "l", so much so that both
are used indiscriminately for the same word, e.g. panglibák, panlibák;
panglápas, panlápas; panglángbas, panlángbas, etc.

_panglabíton_, To cry, weep, wail, sob, lament, complain, mourn or sigh
aloud; to cry out, say or speak in a loud voice. (cf. panalambíton).

_panglábnot_, Freq. of lábnot--to draw, pull out.

_panglághap_, Freq. of lághap--to seek, look for, search for, etc.

_panglághit_, To throw down in disorder, strew, spread,
sow. (cf. lághit).

_panglagúlad_, To travel up and down a country, wander, journey,
go sight-seeing or on business through a district, etc. (cf. lagúlad).

_panglagúyaw_, Freq. of lagúyaw--to divert oneself, beguile the time,
travel, spend a holiday, take a vacation.

_panglaguyáwan_, Diversion, vacation, holiday, travel; to spend a
holiday or travel for recreation.

_panglahús_, Freq. of lahús--to pass through, filter, etc. Also:
to put in an appearance, pay a visit, call on a friend, come just
for a chat or gossip, or the like. (cf. panumbálay).

_panglakát_, To go--by foot,--on foot,--afoot, to foot it, to march,
walk, hike, tramp, trudge, wend (one's way); way or manner of one's
walking. (cf. lakát).

_panglakátan_, (H) March, way, path, course, track, journey, road to
be travelled over; to travel, to be on one's way, march on, proceed
on one's journey.

_panglalás_, To tear or pull down, tear in pieces. (cf. lalás).

_panglámbas_, To inundate, overflow, overrun. (cf. lámbas).

_panglánas_, See panglámbas. (lánas--lámbas).

_panglapáw_, To be--, go--, pass--, reach--, over, to overflow,
inundate, to rise higher or above. (cf. lapáw).

_panglapús_, To pierce, pass through, perforate, transfix, make a
hole through. (cf. lapús).

_panglaráwan_, To make pictures, portraits, photos, to
take--photos,--likenesses, to follow the profession of a
portrait-painter or photographer; the art--, calling--, of a painter,
photographer, etc. (cf. laráwan).

_panglárip_, To gather, collect, put together, assemble. (cf. lárip).

_panglatón_, Freq. of latón--to spread, infect, etc.

_pangláwas_, Form or shape of one's body. See panglawasón.

_panglawasón_, Form, shape, size or growth of one's body. Maáyo siá
sing panglawasón. He is well built. He has a well developed body. He
is well developed. (cf. láwas).

_pangláya_, To catch fish with a net called "láya".

_pangláyì_, Adultery; to commit adultery. (cf. láyì, pangawátan).

_pangleksyón_, To give lessons, instruct, teach, hold
class. (cf. leksyón, toón, panoón).

_panglibád-libád_, To look around with curiosity, turn the eyes in
every direction. (cf. lisílísi).

_panglibáng_, Freq. of libáng. Also: Diarrhoea; to have diarrhoea,
suffer from looseness of the bowels.


_panglibángan_, Lavatory, privy, W.C.; cess-pool.

_panglibáng-libáng_, Dim. of panglibáng. Also: to do odd jobs, to
have nothing to do in particular and consequently to while away the
time in various occupations of little moment.

_panglibód-libód_, Dim. of panglíbod, the Freq. of líbod--to peddle,
etc.

_panglíbut_, Freq. of líbut--to go, (pass) round, etc.

_panglígad_, Freq. of lígad--to go (pass) by, etc.

_panglígbos_, To gather or look for mushrooms called "lígbos";
to be in consternation, be affrighted, get a shock, have one's
hair stand on end. Nagapanglígbos ang íya láwas. He is full of
consternation. Nanglígbos (Nagpanglígbos) siá kag nagpalaníndog ang
íya bohók. He was affrighted and his hair stood on end.

_panglíghot_, Freq. of líghot--to seek, search for, look for, try to
find or get hold of. (cf. panglághap, pangítà).

_panglihô-lihô_, To be a loafer, idler, vagabond; to idle, stroll,
roam about, rove. (cf. landólándo, lagáwlágaw, lihôlihô).

_panglimúg_, See pangalimúg--to rinse out or wash one's mouth, etc.

_panglingáw-língaw_, Diversion, amusement, distraction; to divert--,
amuse--, distract--, oneself, to beguile--, while away--, the time,
go out in search of amusement or recreation. (cf. lingáw, lingáwlíngaw,
paliwálíwa).

_panglíntak_, To smack one's lips or click one's tongue. See
pangalíntak id.

_panglíntì_, Freq. of líntì--lightning. To lighten, to flash lightning;
to curse, swear, etc.

_panglitáw-lítaw_, To go or wander from place to place, walk about
aimlessly. (cf. litálíta).

_pangliwá-líwa_, Freq. of liwálíwa. (cf. paliwálíwa).

_pánglot-diótay_, November. (cf. nobiémbre).

_pánglot-dakô_ December. (cf. disiémbre).

_panglugás_, To rummage, disturb, disorder, disarrange, throw
into disorder, toss about papers, books, clothes, etc. in trying
to find or get hold of what one wants. Indì ka magságad panglugás
sináng mga pagkítan. Don't be always throwing those papers into
disorder. (cf. pangabúkay, balúskay, balúkhay).

_pangluhúd_, Freq. of luhúd--to kneel, etc. See panluhúd.

_panglúka_, To overturn, lay low, blow down, uproot. (cf. lúka).

_panglumáw-lumáw_, To be or become wet, moist, soaked, soiled,
stained. (cf. lumáw, lumáwan, palumáwlumáw).

_panglún-ad_, To grow pale, turn pale, blanch, etc. See lún-ad. Sang
pagkabatî níya sinâ nanglún-ad (nagpanglún-ad, nagpalanglún-ad)
siá. When he heard that he grew pale. (cf. palanglúspad, lápsì).

_panglutá, panglutálutá_, Freq. of lutá--to dislocate. (cf. lúak).

_panglútò_, To cook; cooking. (cf. lútò).

_panglútos_, To overcome, subdue, vanquish, keep down,
oppress. (cf. lútos).

_panglúya_, To weaken, become weak, feeble. Nagapanglúya na siá. He is
getting weak. Tigúlang na siá kag nagapalanglúya ang íya mga túhud. He
is old now and his knees are getting weak. (cf. lúya).

_panglúyà_, Freq. of lúyà--to tire, become tired, grow tired, weary,
fatigued.

_pangluyáw-lúyaw_, Freq. of luyáw. To divert oneself, take a holiday,
travel for recreation. (cf. panglagúyaw, paliwálíwa, dayándáyan,
panglingáwlíngaw).

_pangmatá_, Freq. of matá--the eye; to wake, awake, etc. Also: Form,
shape, colour, of one's eyes; the expression of the eyes. Matalúm
ang íya pangmatá. Matalúm siá sing pangmatá. He has sharp eyes. His
look is penetrating. Malúya na ang íya pangmatá. His eyesight is now
weak. (cf. pamatá).

_pangmatáy_, Freq. of matáy. To kill, etc. (cf. patáy).


_pángog_, Foolish, stupid; a fool, ass, stupid fellow; to be a fool
or act like one. (cf. kalúndong, bulálo, búngaw, tampuháw, bat-ólan,
kólò, kolôkolô, balingág, tipangág, mangô).

_pangóga_, To listen, be an eavesdropper. (cf. paníngad).

_pangógbos_, To form new shoots, new leaves, etc. See ógbos.

_pangógo_, See pangóga and both probably derived from an expert
eavesdropper called "Ogo"--Hugo.

_pangóhong_, To gather mushrooms. (cf. óhong).

_pangokót_, Freq. of kokót--to shell beans, etc. Mangokót kamó sing
kadiós sa panyága náton. Shell some cadios-peas for our dinner.

_pangólo_, Freq. of ólo. Head, head-master, ruler, leader,
chief, commander; to be master, to rule or govern. Sín-o
ang nagapangólo dirí? Who is master here? May mga púngsud nga
ginapangolóhan sang isá ka hárì. There are nations ruled over by a
king. Pangólo-bánwa. Municipal President. Pangólo-puód. Provincial
Governor. Pangólo-púngsud. National Governor or President,
Governor General, President of a Nation. Pangólo-kasapulán. Board of
Directors. Directing (Governing) Board. Pangólo'ng mga dinalán. Leading
article, leader, head-lines; editorial.

_pangolohán_, Government, administration, management. (ólo).

_pangomérsyo_, Trade, commerce; to engage in trade or commerce,
be a merchant or trader. (From the Sp. comercio).

_pangóntra_, (Freq. of the Sp. contra) Opposition, resistance, enmity;
opponent, antagonist, rival; to resist, oppose, make opposition
to. Nagapangóntra silá. They are enemies. They are opposed to each
other. Indì mo silá pagpangontrahón. Do not oppose them. Don't go
against them. Iníng manók walâ sing pangóntra. This cock has no
rival. (cf. súmpung, bátok, pamalábag).

_pangóot_, Freq. of kóot, kúut--to grope, put one's hand in, etc.

_pangórte_, The cut or make of clothes, tailoring; to cut out clothes,
to tailor. Iníng manugtábas maáyo gid sing pangórte. This tailor is
an expert at cutting out (clothes). (From the Sp. corte).

_páng-os_, To bite or gnaw off bit by bit (piece by piece), especially
applied to nibbling sugar-cane stalks. Pang-osá ang tubó. Eat the
sugar-cane by biting off a bit at a time. (cf. páng-it, háng-it).

_pángos_, Spoilt, rotten, putrid, musty, rancid (of foodstuff). See
pán-os id.

_pangós_, Very flat-nosed. (cf. kurapâ).

_pángot_, To touch, establish physical--, come in--, contact
with. Napángot ang duhá ka bóla (pálo). The two balls (masts) touched
each other. (cf. ángot, angót, doót).

_pangót_, Touching, in contact with (as balls in the game of billiards,
etc.).

_pangótkot_, Freq. of kótkot--to dig, etc.

_pángpang_, To gather, collect, heap together, assemble (beginning
with the objects that are nearest). (cf. típon).

_pángpang_, River bank, river side; edge, border, rim, any steep
bank. (cf. bíbì, bígki, binít, kílid).

_pangríbay_, (B) To go along the bank of a river, the ridge of a
mountain and the like. (cf. panaláytay, panalíbay, panaríbay).

_pángsot_, The smell of urine; to smell like urine. (cf. ángso,
pánsot, id.).

_pangsulî_, To turn upside down, upset; perplex, confuse. (cf. sulî).

_pangúbung_, Freq. of kúbung. Also: To walk very carefully or gingerly
(as over sharp stones or the like). Nagapangúbung lang siá, kay
matalíwis ang mga bató kag naánad siá sa sapátos kag índì man siá
makabatás maglápak sang súra. He is walking very carefully, for the
stones are sharp and he is accustomed to wear boots and he cannot
bear stepping on the young and prickly cogon-shoots.

_pangúbung_, To grasp or hold another's hand, walk hand in
hand. Nagapangúbung silá, kay madánlug ang dálan. They are walking
hand in hand, because the road is slippery.

_pangúdlit_, Freq. of kúdlit--to make a line or stroke, sign, mark
with a pencil, pen, brush, pointed instrument, etc.

_pángug_, See pángog--foolish, etc.


_pangugá_, Freq. of ugá--to dry, be or become dry, etc.

_pangúghad_, Freq. of kúghad, úghad--to hawk and spit. Indì ka
mangúghad, kay maláw-ay. Don't hawk and spit, for it is unbecoming,
ugly, a dirty habit.

_pangúhà_, Freq. of kúhà--to take, etc. Pinanguháan (ginpanguháan)
akó níya sing tátlo ka mángmang. He took three pesos away from me.

_pangúhit_, Freq. of kúhit--to nudge, etc.

_páng-ul_, Inexperienced, stupid, dull, backward. (cf. pángog, pungág).

_pangulámbut_, (H) To cover oneself with, or wrap oneself up in,
a blanket, etc. (cf. kulámbot, panimúlon).

_pangulápia, pangulápya_, To request a favour, oblige oneself, ask
for help or assistance. (cf. líhog; pakitábang (from paki--and tábang).

_pangúli, pangulí_, To use toilet paper. (cf. úli, ulí).

_pangúlo_, See pangólo.

_pangulúmbut_, See pangulámbut.

_pangúma_, Agriculture, tillage, tilth, husbandry, cultivation,
culture, farming; a piece of land, especially corn--or rice-land;
to till, cultivate--, labour--, the soil, be a farmer. Walâ siá
sing pangúma karón nga túig. He has no corn-land (rice-land) this
year. Nagapangúma (Mangungúma) siá. He is a farmer. Yádtong mga bakólod
saráng pa mapangúma. Those hills can be cultivated yet. (cf. umá).

_pangúmhan_, Farm, field, ground, land, soil fit for
tillage. (cf. palangúmhan).

_pangúmpay_, To look for--, fetch--, (green) fodder for horses,
cattle, etc. (cf. kúmpay).

_pangumpíti_, (Probably from the Sp. competir). To strive,
contend, compete with, vie; insist on, be determined or
resolute. (cf. paindísíndis, panikasúg).

_pangúmus_, Freq. of kúmus--to squeeze, compress with the
hand. Pinangúmus nga sulát, papél, etc. A crumpled letter, a piece
of crumpled paper, etc.

_pangúna_, Freq. of úna--to do--, come--, go--, first, before, in
front, to head, precede, lead; be--ahead,--in advance,--in the van;
the article (grammar). Ang pangúna nga "ang". The article "ang".

_panguná-uná_, Dim. of pangúna. Also: To start, begin, commence.

_pangúnhan_, To go ahead, lead, be in front, precede; the one in front,
what is before or ahead, the forepart. Ang tiíl nga pangúnhan sang
báka. The forelegs or front legs of the cow.

_pangúnop_, To wear or put on a cloak or coat; to cover,
cloak. (cf. kúnop).

_pangunyádì_, (B) To be very selfish or greedy, seek
one's own advantage, to overreach. Dî mo siá pagpangunyadían
(pagpanginyawátan). Don't overreach him. Don't cheat him out of money,
goods, etc. (cf. panginyáwat).

_pangupúd_, Freq. of upúd--to go along with, accompany, etc.

_pangúrab_, Caus. of ngúrab--to growl, grumble, murmur.

_pangurábut_, (B) To clutch, grasp, seize, take hold of. Pangurábtan
mo ang hilamón kag gabúton. Take hold of the grass and pull it up.

_pangurínot_, To wrinkle one's brow, etc. (cf. kurínot, kurinót).

_pangúrub_, Caus. of ngúrub--to show the teeth, to snarl, gnarl (of
dogs, etc.). Pangurúba ang idô kon maglígad silá. Make the dog show
its teeth when they pass by.

_pangúrug_, Freq. of kúrug, kúdug--to tremble, shiver,
quake. (cf. palangúrug).

_pangurús_, To make the sign of the cross or bless oneself. (cf. krus).

_pangúrut_, (H) Freq. of úrut--to finish, make an end of, etc.

_pangurútay_, Freq. of kurútay--to call the chickens together.

_pangusám-kúsam_, Sense of taste, taste; to taste. (cf. kúsam).

_pangusísà_, Freq. of usísà. Investigation, examination, search,
research; to investigate, examine, search.


_pangúsug_, To be firm, robust, strong, brave, valiant; to use or
apply force, insist on. (cf. kúsug).

_pangusúg_, Freq. of kusúg. To make great efforts, exert oneself,
strive, apply force, show strength; to grow stiff. Nagapangusúg siá
sa paghíwat sang amó nga kasadyáhan. He is making great efforts in
preparation for that solemnity, festivity, rejoicing. (cf. palangusúg).

_pangusúg-kúsug_, Dim. of pangúsug, pangusúg.

_pangútà_, To arrest, put in prison, put in a place of safety or
security. (cf. kútà).

_pangútan_, (H) To gather--, fetch--, look for--,
vegetables. (cf. útan, panuláon).

_pangutána_, To ask information, ask questions, question,
interrogate, inquire. (Pangutánha) Pangután-a siá. Ask
him. Inquire of him. (Pangutánhi) Pangután-i siá. Question him. Ask
him. (cf. pamángkot, pakiána).

_pangútang_, To contract debts, run into debts, borrow. (cf. útang).

_pangútut_, To sting (of insects, etc.). (cf. kútut).

_panguyáb_, Freq. of kuyáb--to fan, to wave a fan; to fan oneself.

_pangúy-ab_, To yawn, gape. See panghúy-ab.

_panguyábut_, To grasp, take hold of, hold on to, etc. See
panguyáput. (kuyábut--kuyáput).

_panguyáhon_, See pangguyáhon.

_panguyápad_, To scamper off, run, etc. (cf. kuyápad).

_panguyáput_, To hold on to, cling to, grasp, grip, clutch, take hold
of, encircle with the fingers. (cf. kuyáput, kapút, kápyot, búyot).

_pangúyat_, Freq. of úyat--to hold, grasp, etc. Nahúlug siá, kay walâ
siá mangúyat (magpangúyat) sa gabayán sang hágdan. He fell down the
stairs because he did not hold fast to the handrail.

_panguyúm, panguyúm-kúyum_, Freq. and Dim. of kuyúm--to shrivel,
contract, wither.

_panguyúpò_, To shrink, shrivel, dwindle; to cower, be scared or
cowed down. (cf. pangayúgpus, kúpus).

_panguyús_, To get a shock, be astounded, surprised, be taken unawares,
have the hair standing on end. (cf. hanguyús, kuyús, pangyós).

_pangúy-uy_, Freq. of úy-uy, óy-oy--to guffaw, laugh heartily,
etc. (cf. talángkaw, háha, arík-ik, arók-ok, halák-hak).

_pangyakát_, Freq. of yakát--to entertain; to invite, urge.

_pangyám-id_, Freq. of yám-id--to pout, etc.

_pangyamíg_, Freq. of yamíg--to be or grow cold, etc. Also: Cold fever.

_pangyós, pángyos_, To be shocked, etc. See panguyús.

_pangyuhúm-yúhum_, To smile; to simper, smirk. (cf. yúhum, yuhúm).

_pangyúyò, pangyôyô_, To weaken, slacken, grow weak or
feeble. (cf. yúyò).

_pánhay_, A gentle slope; sloping; even, smooth; to even,
smooth. (cf. bánhay).

_pánhop_, (B) Coconut meat used for rubbing the hair with. The
coconut meat is usually chewed first and then applied by hand to the
hair. (cf. pamánhop).

_paniága_, Dinner; to dine, have (take) dinner. Nakapaniága na
ikáw? Have you had your dinner? Maniága (Magpaniága) kamó ánay. First
have your dinner. Papaniagáhi silá. Prepare dinner for them. Get dinner
ready for them. Papaniagáha silá. Let them take their dinner. Give
them time or a chance to take their dinner. (cf. panyága, ígmà).

_paníbà_, Freq. of síbà--to devour, gulp down, gobble up, swallow,
tear to pieces and eat up.

_panibarô_, (B) To stand on end, stand erect. (cf. silabô, tinggarô,
paníndog).

_panibít_, Freq. of sibít. To use a needle or pin; to wear a pin,
brooch, badge or any similar ornament fastened by a pin; to vaccinate;
to remove a thorn or prickle by means of a pin or needle or anything
resembling a needle. Magpanibít ka sang mga tunúk. (Síbta ang
mga tunúk). Remove the thorns by means of a needle. Madámò ang mga
kabatáan nga pinaníbtan (ginpaníbtan) sang manogbúlung. Many children
were vaccinated by the doctor. Ipanibít níya ang íya sibít nga may
batóngmaídlak sa pándut sang bánwa. At the town-feast she will wear
her brooch set with precious stones.

_paníbin_, To wipe (clean) with a towel. (cf. síbin).

_panibí-tibí_, To balance oneself with difficulty, be scarcely able to
keep one's balance or equilibrium; to be on the point of--committing
oneself,--telling some news,--betraying a secret,--letting "the cat
out of the bag". Nagapanibítibí ang íya mga bibíg sa paghámbal. He can
scarcely detain himself from telling the news. He is simply bursting
to tell the news. (cf. tibí).

_paníb-ong_, Freq. of tíb-ong--to raise, lift, etc.

_paníbong_, Freq. of tíbong--to carry on the shoulder, etc.

_paníbsok_, To fall down--headlong,--head foremost. (cf. tíbsok,
tibusók).

_paníbud_, To be involved, complicated, intricate, requiring much
patience or fatigue. Freq. of síbud.

_panibúut_, Good breeding, civility, politeness, docility, will,
intention, willingness, readiness, discretion, prudence, tact,
circumspection, discernment, address. (cf. buút, panimúot, panagibúut).

_pánid_, Leaf, sheet, board (as of paper, cloth, wood, etc.).

_paníd-paníd_, To take up leaf by leaf, count every leaf or
sheet. Panid-panirá (--idá) ang mga papéles, tabákò, etc. Count the
papers, the tobacco-leaves, etc. leaf by leaf. Take them up leaf
by leaf.

_panídsid_, Freq. of sídsid. Edge, rim, border; to edge, border, etc.

_panidsíran_, Edge, border. (cf. sídsid, panídsid).

_paniémpo_, Times, period, season. Sa karón nga paniémpo. In these
present circumstances. Nowadays. At present. (cf. tiémpo, panahón,
dág-on, túig, panúig, tinúig).

_paníga_, (Sp. fanega) A measure of grain, half a bushel (pásong);
also a measure for land (about 1.59 acre).

_paníg-a_, Hardening; to harden. Paníg-a sang solóksolók. A hardening
of the stomach. (cf. tíg-a).

_panigádlum_, To possess or wear the charm "tigádlum" (supposed to
make its possessor (owner, wearer) invisible).

_panigáon_, Foresight, thought, wise forethought, prudence;
to have foresight, be prudent, resourceful, to manage well, be
careful or circumspect. Maáyo siá sing panigáon. He knows how to
manage things well. He is a good manager. He is full of resources
or tricks. He is a man of resource. He thinks of many expedients. Sa
walâ sing panigáon----. Thoughtlessly----. Unexpectedly----. Without
bestowing a thought on it----. Imprudently----. Sa sinâ nga butáng
kinahánglan gid ang panigáon. This matter requires great prudence
(careful handling). Makúsug siá, ápang nadaúg siá sa dúmug, kay
índì siá makahibaló magpanigáon. In spite of his strength he was
defeated in wrestling, because he is too simple, too careless or
incautious. (cf. tigáyon, pangáman, hunâhúnà).

_panígpaw_, To catch fish with the "sígpaw"--a small fishing net.

_panígput_, Freq. of sígput--to end, complete, finish; pick up all
the particles left, gather the remnants of. Ginpanígput níla ang
mga kán-on nga nagdokót sa túbò. They gathered (with their fingers)
the rice sticking to the bamboo plate. (cf. hingápus, pamíngkong).

_panigúlang_, To grow old, to age. Nanigúlang siá sa pagkapolís,
pagkasologoón, etc. He has grown old in the police force, as a servant,
etc. Nagpanigúlang siá sa pagkaímol, kay matámad (siá). He grew old
in his poverty, because he was too lazy to work. (cf. tigúlang).

_paniguná, panig-uná_, To be first, foremost; try to excel, to
lead, outdo others; to vie, compete with, strive with, contend
with. (cf. pangunáuná).

_panigúro_, Freq. of segúro. To be sure, certain, confident; assurance,
positiveness, confidence. Nagapanigúro akó nga maabút gid siá. I am
sure he will come. (cf. panálig).


_panihág-síhag_, Freq. and Dim. of sihág--to separate from, become
loose, go astray, etc.

_panihápon_, Supper; to sup, have--, take--, supper. Nakapanihápon
na ikáw? Have you had your supper? Panihapónan mo silá. Sup with
them. Take supper at their house. Papanihapónan mo silá. Give them
supper. Prepare supper for them. Papanihapóna silá. Let them have
supper. Give them time or a chance to have their supper. Sán-o kamo
magpanihápon kag anó ang ipanihápon nínyo? When will you have supper
and what will you have for supper? (cf. hápon; paniága--dinner).

_paníhay_, Freq. of síhay--to deviate, leave the main or straight road;
to disagree, fall out, differ, be at variance.

_panihól_, Freq. of tihól. To whistle, blow a whistle; to crack
jokes. Paniholí silá. Whistle for them. Blow the whistle that they
may hear.

_paníid_, Freq. of tíid. To watch or observe well, keep--an eye
on,--a watch on,--under observation. Pinaniíran níya sing maáyo ang
mga batásan ni Fuláno. He observed well N.N.'s conduct (habits).

_paníkad_, Freq. of síkad. To spread one's legs, plant them firmly
on the ground; to lie down and push with the legs; to kick. Panikádi
(panikári) silá túbtub nga magbúgtaw. Push them with your legs (Kick
them) till they awake.

_panikáng_, Freq. of tikáng--to step, take steps, stride, walk, pace;
one's way or manner of walking or stepping.

_paníkas_, Freq. of tíkas--to steal, pilfer, thieve, sneak, purloin,
filch, appropriate secretly. (cf. tákaw, takáb, káwat).

_panikasúg_, For panikusúg id. To make great efforts, to apply oneself
with force or earnestness, try to obtain by all means. (cf. himúlat,
paningúhà, himúd-os, himúg-os).

_paníkma_, To blow the nose. (cf. síkma).

_panikód-tíkod_, To stamp one's heels on the ground, push or kick
with one's feet. (cf. tikód).

_panikól_, To elbow, push (backwards) with the elbow. (cf. sikól).

_paníksik_, Freq. of síksik--to part the hair and hunt for lice,
flees, bugs or other vermin.

_paníktik_, To spy upon, observe closely the doings of others,
act as a detective, to snoop, pry; the calling (office) of a
detective. (cf. tíktik).

_paníktik_, Freq. of tíktik. The ticking of a watch (clock); to tick.

_paníktot_, Freq. of síktot--to bend low, stoop.

_paníkup_, Freq. of síkup--to gather, collect, scrape together;
glean. (cf. panígput).

_panikusúg_, Great effort, exertion, striving; to exert oneself,
strive hard, make great efforts. (cf. kusúg, panikasúg, paningúhà,
himúd-os, himúg-ot).

_panílag_, Observation, watching; to observe, watch, be on the watch,
notice with care (carefully), pay attention to, await developments,
study, examine, dog (one's steps). Panilágan ko pa ánay inâ. I shall
watch that. I'll wait to see how it will turn out. Napanilágan ko
nga maáyo iníng palatikángan (talapuánan). Pinanilágan ko iníng
palatikángan (talapuánan) kag maáyo galî. I have observed that this
is a good Business (company, society). Túyò ko ang panílag sang íya
mga gího kag húlag. I intend to dog (watch) his steps. (cf. bántay,
paníid, pangusísà, sílag).

_panílap_, Freq. of dílap--to lick. Ang idô nagapanílap sang
pínggan. Ang pínggan ginapanilápan sang idô. The dog is licking
the plate.

_paniláw_, Freq. of tiláw--to taste, try, experience.

_panílhig_, Freq. of sílhig--to sweep, etc.

_panilí_, To drive away a dog by shouting "silí".

_panílo_, (Sp. pañuelo) Cloth, cloth-band, collar, neckcloth; the
strip of cloth or leather used for fastening the sheath of a bolo to
the hip. (cf. balióg; pányo).

_panílong_, Freq. of sílong. To take shelter or refuge, take
to--cover,--a safe place. (cf. pasilongán; dangúp).

_panimáan_, Idea, thought, knowledge, inkling; to know, be aware
of, note, observe, experience, take note of. (cf. máan, timáan,
panimád-on).


_panimád-on_, Experience, observation, knowledge, intelligence,
common sense, practical knowledge or wisdom; to observe, study,
watch, take notice. (cf. panimáan, pinaniíran, álam, kinaádman,
tinún-an, pinanilágan).

_panimáhò_, To smell, scent; scent, the sense of smell. (cf. báhò,
bahô).

_panimaláy_, House, household, family; race, lineage, stock. Inanák
siá sang isá ka panimaláy nga lutáw kag dunggánon. He is a descendant
(scion) of a prominent and respectable house or family. Ang isá ka
panimaláy nga maáyo amó ang tuburán sang dîmaísip nga mga kaayohán. A
good family is the source of uncounted (untold) blessings. (baláy).

_panimalús_, Freq. of timalús--revenge; to avenge.

_panímba_, Freq. of símba--to go to church, assist at Mass. Way and
manner of assisting at Mass. Ang mga pumulúyò siníng bánwa mapísan
magsímba, ápang ang mga nagadalá sing bátà sa simbáhan masúnsun nga
lingáw ang íla panímba. The inhabitants of this town are good (active)
church-goers (are assiduous in going to church), but those that take
small children along to church are often very distracted. Ang íya
panímba matinahúron kaáyo. He assists at Mass very reverently.

_panímbà_, Freq. of tímbà. To draw water from a well by means of a
bucket. Nagaanó siá?--Nagapanímbà. What is he doing?--He is drawing
water from the well.

_panímbang_, Freq. of tímbang. Also: a counterpoise, counterweight,
balance; to balance, apply a counterweight; to manage with
prudence. (cf. panimbángon).

_panimbángon_, See panímbang. Kon mamádlus ang hángin kag dílì
maáyo ang panimbángon makulúb gid ang sakayán. When a stiff breeze
is blowing and the boat is not kept on an even keel (When the wind
blows violently and the boat is not under good management), it will
certainly capsize (be overturned). Iníng táo maáyo gid manimbángon
sang paráw. This man knows very well how to steer an outrigger
(called paráw). (cf. binangî).

_panimbáng-tímbang_, Dim. of panímbang. Sa but-ánan nga
pagpanimbángtímbang matáwhay na ang íya pangabúhì. By careful
management he can now pass his days free from anxiety. If he manages
wisely (If he is a wise, prudent, administrator), he can now live
at ease.

_panímod_, Freq. of tímod--to economize, practise economy, live
economically, spend wisely, live frugally or thriftily.

_panimód_, See panimúd.

_panimókò_, To cross one's arms over the chest, to hug oneself,
as people often do when they feel cold.

_panimoláng_, Freq. of timoláng--to use insulting language, rail at,
revile, insult verbally, abuse with invectives.

_panimón_, To be a steersman or helmsman; to sit at the helm (rudder),
to direct or guide the course of a ship, etc. (cf. timón).

_panimúd_, Freq. of simód--to sniff at; nibble at, eat, be greedy,
voracious.

_panimúdlus_, To escape the grasp or grip of, slip out, glide
away. Nanimúdlus siá sa íya mga bútkon. He contrived to free himself
from the clasp (clutch, clench, clinch) of his arms. (cf. púdlus,
palús, panginpalús, pádlus).

_panimúdsimúd_, Dim. of panimúd.

_panimúlon_, To roll; wrap oneself up in a blanket, cloak, etc.

_panimúot_, See panibúut, panagibúut--Good breeding, etc.

_panimúron_, See panimúlon. (cf. pangulúmbut, pangulámbut).

_panimúslut_, See panimúdlus. (púslut--púdlus).

_panindáhan_, To go to market, visit a market in order to buy or
sell. Manindáhan (mapanindáhan, magapanindáhan) pa kitá ánay sing
diótay nga tión kag ugáling mapaúlì. We shall first go to the market
for a moment and then return home. (cf. tínda, tiénda, tindáhan).

_paníndak_, To kick. (cf. tíndak; paníkad).

_paníndog_, To stand up, stand erect; construction, make, build,
form; way (manner) of standing. (cf. tíndog). Also to stand on end
(of hair, etc.). (cf. panibarô).


_panindógan_, Stand, stand-point, position. (cf. tíndog, tindógan).

_panindógon_, The way or manner of one's standing. Tádlong gid siá
sing panindógon. He stands very upright, very straight. (tíndog).

_panindóg-tíndog_, Dim. of paníndog. Also: to stand about idly, have
nothing to do, loiter, linger, tarry. (cf. pumuágpuág, haráyháray).

_paningâ_, Freq. of tingâ--death-rattle, etc.

_paníngad, paningád-tingád_, Freq. of tíngad, tingád-tingád--to
overhear, listen in, be an eavesdropper. (cf. pangógo).

_paningádlum_, To be--, become--, make oneself--invisible; to possess
or wear the charm called tigádlum.

_paningád-singád_, See paníngad.

_paníngal_, To open one's mouth (by force). (cf. tíngal).

_paningála_, To wonder, be astonished; surprise, astonishment, wonder,
admiration. (cf. tingála).

_paningasúg_, To strive hard, make great efforts, etc. See
panikasug. Ginapaningasugán níla karón ang pagbukás sing bág-o
nga dálan. They are at present making great efforts to open a new
road. (cf. paningúhà, panikasúg, panikusúg).

_paníngding_, To build a partition or side-wall, etc. (cf. díngding).

_paningdingánan_, Wall, partition, side (of a room, etc.). Sa
támpad sang paningdingánan. Over against the wall. In front of the
wall. (cf. díngding).

_paníngga_, To remind, warn, advise, inform. (cf. tíngga).

_paníngga_, To carry on a pole. (cf. tíngga).

_paninggarô_, To stand erect, stand on end. (cf. tinggarô).

_panínggil_, Freq. of tínggil. To say "tínggil", etc.

_panínggit_, A loud outcry, shout; to shout. (cf. sínggit).

_paninggóhot_, To move about in all directions, as people coming out
of a theatre, a church, an assembly hall, or the like. (cf. linggóhot,
lininggóhot, sarumbálì, surumbálì).

_panínggol_, To move, affect, stir, scare, deter; to listen to,
pay attention to, desist, yield, be scared or deterred. Inâ walâ
makapanínggol sa íla. That did not move or deter them. That made no
impression on them. Indì na siá manínggol (magpanínggol) sang dakô
nga kapíot kag kalisdánan. He does not allow himself any longer to
be deterred by the great hardships and difficulties (involved). Walâ
silá magpanínggol sang dakô nga túgnaw. They did not desist in spite
of the great cold. (cf. tínggol, dîmanínggol, patubalíng, patubaríng,
paubág, pasúpil).

_paninghawák_, To put the arms akimbo. (cf. háwak, panginhawák).

_panínghot_, The sense of smell; to smell, scent, experience or try
the smell of. (cf. sínghot, panimáhò).

_paníngit_, (H) Freq. of síngit--to gather with pole and hook.

_paningkálas_, To stir, move, be active, be energetic, struggle
hard, be up and doing. Magpaningkálas ka na, agúd magbáskug ang
ímong láwas. Stir yourself and do something that you (your body)
may become strong. Ang idô nagapaningkálas sa sulúd sang hulút nga
maggwâ. The dog is moving about inside the room trying to find a way
out. Maningkálas na kitá, agúd dílì kitá magútum. Let us now bestir
ourselves or we shall go hungry.

_paningkáras_, (B) See paningkálas.

_paningkáw-síngkaw_, To move, stir, take physical exercise, do manual
work, show signs of life by movement. (cf. húlag, gího, banátbánat,
bayátbáyat, paningkálas, paningkáwtíngkaw).

_paningkáw-tíngkaw_, See paningkáw-síngkaw.

_paningkáy-síngkay_, Freq. of singkáysíngkay--to show off, strut,
parade ostentatiously, move the shoulders coquettishly, etc. Also:
to stir, move, (cf. kisáykísay, paningkáwsíngkaw).

_paningkulúng_, To recline the head on one's hands, think deeply,
ponder, muse, be pensive or dejected. (cf. búog, painóíno).


_panínglan_, From paníngal, tíngal--to force the mouth open.

_paningô-síngò_, To sob, blubber; to snuff, snuffle, blow air through
the nose. (cf. singô).

_paníngsing_, To wear a ring; to form a ring. Ipaníngsing mo ang
malahálon nga síngsing nga hinátag sa ímo ni tátay. Wear the precious
ring that father gave you. (cf. síngsing).

_paníngug_, (H) The quality of one's voice. Matahúm siá sing
paníngug. He has a beautiful fine voice. (cf. tíngug).

_paningúg_, (H) To sound, utter, voice, express, speak out, give
expression (utterance) to. (cf. tingúg, pangatingúg).

_paninguhâ_, See the following panigúhà.

_paningúhà_, To strive, try hard, make great efforts, do one's
best, exert oneself. (cf. tingúhà, panikasúg, paningasúg, himúd-os,
pamurúg-ot, pamurús).

_paningusúg_, To make great efforts, struggle hard, strive, be active
or energetic, etc. See panikasúg, panikusúg, paningúhà, paningkálas,
himúd-os, himúg-ot).

_panínlò_, Purification, act of purifying; to purify, remove any
pollution or defilement, be clean, keep clean, love cleanliness. Madámò
ang mga buluhatón sang mga Hudíyo sa íla panínlò. The Jews had many
purification rites. Magpanínlò kamó sa tanán nga mga bágay, agúd dílì
kamó pagdunggoón sang balatían. Keep yourselves clean in every way
so that you may not contract disease. (cf. tínlò).

_panínoy_, (Sp. padrino) Godfather. (cf. manínay--godmother
(Sp. madrina)).

_paninsóro_, To catch fish by means of a large drag-net called sinsóro
(Sp. chinchorro). Nagapaninsóro silá sa dágat. They are out at sea
fishing with the drag-net.

_panínuk_, Freq. of sínuk--to pay a surprise visit, take unawares,
investigate, inspect without previous warning or notice.

_panípà_, Freq. of sípà--to kick. (cf. paníndak, paníkad).

_panipáy_, To gather (look for) sea-shells. (cf. tipáy, panlampírong).

_panipís_, Caus. of nipís. To make thin, etc. Panipisá ang tápì. Thin
the board. Make the board thinner (thin). Utda ang tápì sa nanipisán
kag panipisá pa gid. Cut the board where it is thinnest and make it
much thinner yet.

_panípit_, Freq. of sípit--to carry under the arm (pressed to the
side).

_panipít_, Anchor; to anchor. (cf. sipít, sinipít).

_panípit_, A constellation of stars.

_panípon_, Freq. of típon--to gather, collect, bring together,
assemble.

_panipón-típon_, Gathering, meeting, assembly, collection; to gather,
collect, assemble, etc. See panípon. Nagapanipóntípon silá sing mga
kawáyan nga igapatíndog sang íla baláy. They are (gradually) collecting
(gathering) bamboos for the erection of their house. (cf. típon).

_panipúslut_, To slip away, escape from, etc. See
panimúdlus. (cf. palús, panginpalús, pádlus, púdlus, púslut).

_panirá_, Freq. of sirá, será--to close (a door, etc.).

_panírhan_, For panirahán from panirá.

_paniríngan_, (B) To wet the ground under the eaves of a house from
the eaves, i.e. to rain only a little. Naniríngan gid lang kaína ang
ulán. There was a little rain a short while ago. (cf. siríngan).

_paniróng-siróng_, (B) A loafer, parasite; to go out visiting
and eating at other people's expense. (cf. sílong, panumbálay,
panudángsudáng, panalósaló).

_panisál_, Bread, the ordinary, common bread. (cf. pandisál, tinápay).

_panisíg_, Freq. of sisíg--to sift, clean rice by means of a sieve.

_panístis_, Freq. of tístis--to harm, spite, do maliciously, etc.

_pánit_, Skin, hide, pelt, leather, bark, rind, peel, cover, shell,
husk, integument, tegument, exterior covering; to skin, peel. Paníti
ang patátas. Peel the potato. (cf. úpak).


_panít_, A kind of fish; a nearly full-grown bantaláan.

_panít-panít_, A kind of mange or skin disease, which causes the skin
to come off in scales.

_panítsit_, Freq. of sítsit. To emit a sharp hiss in order to
draw attention. Ginpanitsitán níya akó sang paglígad (paglubás)
ko sa íya baláy. When I passed his house he drew my attention by
hissing. (cf. panagótsot--to say "tut, tut" in discontent, etc.).

_paniwáding_, To reel, stagger, be very unsteady on one's legs, be
unable to stand or walk straight, as a drunken person. Paniwáding
supposes a greater degree of unsteadiness than dulíngdúling.

_paníwang_, Caus. of níwang. To make lean, thin, etc.

_pánkà_, Frog, toad. See pakâ, pángkà.

_pánko_, A stall, table or selling booth in a market. (cf. tapángko).

_pánkò, pánko_, (Sp. panco) A kind of coasting vessel smaller than
a lorcha and larger than a paráw, but without outriggers.

_panlabakára_, (Sp. lavar, cara) To wash one's face. Manlabakára
ka. Wash your face. Papanlabakaráha si Hosé. Make José wash his
face. (cf. panghilám-os).

_panláhid_, To hint at, advert to, mention, allude to; to
criticize. (cf. láhid).

_panlaktánon_, March, walk, hike, journey, travel; to march, hike,
travel (especially on foot). (cf. lakát, panglakát, panglakátan).

_panlampírong_, To collect or gather sea-shells called
"lampírong". (cf. panipáy).

_panlibáhod_, To include all, embrace all, reach everywhere, be enough
or sufficient for all, be enough to go round. Ang isá ka pitsíl nga
tubâ índì makapanlibáhod sa íla. One pitcher full of toddy will not
be sufficient for all of them. Ang mga abáno nga íya natigána walâ
makapanlibáhod sa madámò nga dumulúaw. The cigars he had got ready
were not enough for the many visitors. (cf. tápud, tóptop, túptup,
kámpod, taláptap).

_panlímug_, (B) Quality of one's voice (in singing). (cf. pangalímug).

_panlugáhit_, To search, look for, try to find or discover. Panlugahíta
ang sulúd sang baláy, básì makítà ang síngsing nga nadúlà. Search
the house, maybe the lost ring will be found. (cf. sághap, lághap,
pangítà).

_panluhúd_, Freq. of luhúd--to kneel. Also: to be witness at a
marriage, kneel near the altar behind the bride or bridegroom during
the nuptial mass.

_panlúka, panglúka_, To uproot, overturn, lay low. (cf. lúka)

_panlutáhit_, See panlugáhit--to search, look for, etc.

_panóhol_, Freq. of sóhol--to pay wages; salary; etc.

_panóhol_, Freq. of dóhol--to reach, hand over, etc.

_panohót-sohót_, Dim. and Freq. of sóhot--to slip or creep in, to
prowl, introduce oneself as a spy, or the like.

_panóklò_, To pilfer, steal, abstract stealthily or secretly,
purloin. (cf. tóklò).

_panokó_, Freq. of tokó. To put up straight supports or props. Panokohí
(panokoí, panókwi) ang soléras, kay madámò ang mga bisíta. Put props
under the floorbeams, for there are (will be) many visitors.

_panokól_, Freq. of dokól--to knock, knuckle. (pandokól id.).

_panókol_, Freq. of sókol--to measure. (cf. panakús).

_panokót_, Freq. of sokót--to demand payment, etc. Panókta silá. Demand
payment of (from) them. Collect the debts they owe.

_panóksò_, Freq. of tóksò--to ask questions.

_panóksok_, Freq. of sóksok--to squeeze in, etc.

_panóktok_, Freq. of tóktok--to mince, to cut up--, chop up--, small;
to knock at a door.

_panoktoróok_, Freq. of toktoróok--the crow of a cock; to crow.


_panolô_, (B) To use a lamp or torch, etc. Also: to catch fish at
night by lighting torches or kindling fires on board the fishing
smacks. (cf. solô).

_panólong_, The two triangular ends of an ordinary native
house-roof. (cf. panapá--the trapeziform side of a roof).

_panóloy, panolóy_, Freq. of tóloy--to imprecate, call down--,
invoke--, evil upon, curse, wish evil to. Indì mo pagpanolóyon ang
ímo láwas. Don't curse yourself. Ginpanóloy níya ang íya kaáway sa
pagsilíng nga maáyo kon mapatáy siá. He cursed his enemy saying,
that it would be--best for him to die,--a good thing if he died.

_panóng_, Crowd, mass, throng, group, herd, troop, drove, flock, shoal,
swarm, covey, pack, horde, bevy, knot, many, multitude. (cf. madámò,
sosón, kabón, búnghay, rakô).

_panoób_, To diffuse--, fill with--, odours, smoke, etc. Also: to
disinfect; disinfection. (cf. toób).

_pán-os_, Rotten, tainted, bad, contaminated, spoilt, putrid, said
especially of foodstuffs; to rot, go bad, get spoilt, etc. Nagpán-os
ang kárne. The meat was tainted. Napan-osán kamí sang ísdà kag tungúd
sinâ walâ kamí sing súd-an sa panihápon námon. Our fish went bad and
consequently we had no side-dish for our supper. (cf. bángog, bagéu,
báng-aw, pángos, lúb-uk, hurô).

_panôsô_, Freq. of sôsô--to squash, smash, squeeze or beat to pulp.

_panóso_, Dishonesty, cheating; to cheat. (cf. tóso). Form or shape
of the breasts, etc. (cf. sóso).

_panót_, Bald, bald-headed; old. (cf. bungád, upáw, ugís).

_panótoy_, To call the puppies together, to gather, collect,
assemble. (cf. tótoy).

_panrabáho_, Freq. of trabáho--to work, labour,
toil. (cf. pangabúdlay).

_panrehístro_, Freq. of rehístro. Also to investigate, examine, search,
inspect. Náno ang ginpanrehístro sang mga polís sa kabalayán? Ang
idálum sang pántaw, kay may kasogoán sinâ nga tapokán. What (Why) are
the policemen investigating (in) the houses? They are investigating
the ground under the kitchen-balconies, because there is a law to
the effect that it should be covered (with earth).

_pánsal_, Noise, boisterousness, etc. (See gánsal, gáhud, galúng).

_pánsit_, A kind of maccaroni made of flour in the form of small flakes
or wafers; to prepare or make that kind of food. Sagád siá maghímò sing
manámit nga "pánsit". She is an adept at cooking "pánsit". Maáyo siá
magpánsit. She knows how to prepare "pánsit" well. (cf. míki--similar
to pánsit, but the disks (discs) or flakes are thinner than those of
pánsit; míswa--a kind of very slender Chinese spaghetti or vermicelli;
sutánghon--similar to míswa, but not so slender; bíhon--a sort of
yellow slender vermicelli).

_pansitería, pansiteríya_, A shop, store or booth, where "pánsit"
and other refreshments are served.

_pánsit-lánglang_, A kind of pánsit.

_pánsot_, (H) To smell of urine; the smell of urine. (cf. ángso,
pángsot).

_pansútut_, See pánsot.

_pántag_, To be or become tranquil, peaceful, stable, free from worry,
or the like. Walâ gid sing napantagán ang íla pangabúhì. They are not
leading a tranquil or peaceful life. Their life is full of worries,
troubles, excitement, or the like. (cf. kapantagán, katawháyan).

_pántag_, To explain, clear up, understand. Sádto ánay walâ gid
mapantagí ang íya sinâ nga kahálit. In former days the damage caused
by that was not understood. Sa walâ mapantagí nga kabangdánan--. For
an unexplained reason----. (cf. sáyod, hibaló, hangúp, áto).

_pantalán_, Wharf, pier, jetty, landing stage. (cf. lulusarán).

_pantalón, pantalónes_, (Sp. pantalón) Trousers, pants, breeches,
especially riding breeches. (cf. delárgo, sárwal, poróy, bahág).

_pantálya_, (Sp. pantalla) Lamp-shade; stage-light; person or object
impeding the view, cover, screen; scape-goat. (cf. tapalán).

_pántaw_, (H) A terrace or kitchen balcony, mostly roofless and
railless and used for all kinds of work in connection with preparing
food, washing dishes, etc. (cf. támbì).


_pántaw_, Visible from a great distance, prominent; to stand out
prominently, be visible from afar. Pántaw gid ang kampanáryo sang
simbáhan. The belfry of the church is visible from afar. Nagpántaw
na ang íya baláy, kay natapás ang mga kawáyan. His house can now be
seen from a great distance, because the bamboos have been cut down.

_panteón_, (Sp. panteón) A mortuary niche, mausoleum; also used as a
verb. Ginpanteonán níla ang minatáy. They provided a mortuary niche
or mausoleum for the dead person.

_pánting_, A fish-vender, fishmonger, a seller of, or dealer in,
fish. (cf. labasíro).

_pántog_, Testicle.

_pántok_, To be or become diligent, energetic, active, assiduous,
industrious. Karón, kay nagímol, nagpántok na siá. Now, that he has
become poor, he has grown diligent. Napantokán akó sa íya. I consider
him diligent.

_pántot_, A game at cards, in which the players sometimes exchange
cards; to play that game; to play cards in general. (cf. sugál).

_pantótan_, A card-table, gaming table, card-room, gaming house,
especially where the game called "pántot" is indulged in.

_pantúpla, pantúplo_, (Sp. pantufla, pantuflo) Slipper, comfortable
house-shoe. The plural pantúplas is often used as a singular in
Visayan. Ihátag sa ákon ináng pantúplas. Give me that slipper.

_panúay_, To quarrel, etc. (cf. súay).

_panuáy-súay_, Quarrelling, altercation, etc. (cf. súay, panúay).

_panúba_, Freq. of túba. To catch fish by putting something into
the water that makes them torpid or even kills them; bark of páyhud,
lágtang, etc. are often used for the purpose.

_panubâ_, Freq. of tubâ. To look for or fetch tubâ; to cut down
banana-plants, etc.

_panubád_, Freq. of subád--to devour, gobble up, swallow down.

_panúbay_, Freq. of súbay--to divide the produce of the land between
the owner and the leaseholder, etc.

_panubáy_, Freq. of tubáy. To attend to--, entertain--, visitors,
etc. Sarcastically: Panubáy ka sináng búang. Don't pay any attention
to that fool. (cf. sahót, sapák, tátap, bangá).

_panúbig_, Freq. of túbig--water. Also: The bursting of the placenta
and the flowing off of the uterine liquid; to discharge the uterine
liquid.

_panúbla_, Freq. of dúbla. To roll cigars, cigarettes, etc. Maáyo siá
magpanúbla sing tabákò. She knows well how to roll cigars. (pandúbla
id.).

_panúblag_, Freq. of túblag--to disturb, etc.

_panúblì_, Freq. of súblì. To inherit, be heir to, come into, acquire
by inheritance or bequest. Nagpanúblì siá sang (Ginpanúblì níya ang)
mánggad sang íya tíyò. He inherited his uncle's property. Iníng
malápad nga palangúmhan pagapanublión, konó, ni Pédro. They say that
Peter is going to inherit this large farm.

_panublíon, panublión_, Heritage, inheritance, what is left one by
testament, bequest or legacy, things inherited or to be inherited. Salâ
nga panublíon. Original sin. (cf. súblì, panúblì).

_panúbò_, Freq. of túbò--to grow.

_panubô_, (H) To lower, make low, lessen the height of. (pa, nubô).

_panúbung_, Acting thus, in such a way; to act thus, do the like,
behave in such a way. (cf. súbung, panúlad).

_panubús_, Freq. of tubús--to redeem, reclaim, free from.

_panudáng-sudáng_, Freq. of sudángsudáng--to go out visiting, to
go abroad, etc. (cf. panumbálay, paniróngsiróng). Also: to listen,
be an eavesdropper. (cf. paníngad).

_panúdlak_, Freq. of túdlak. Also: to begin planting, start building
a house, etc. by putting a few seeds into the soil, setting up one
post, etc. and then waiting a few days or even weeks before planting,
building, etc. in real earnest. There is a superstition connected
with this practice.


_panudós_, Freq. of tudós, todós--to squash, swat (flies, fleas, etc.).

_panuélo_, (Sp. pañuelo) Handkerchief. (cf. pányo).

_panugál_, Freq. of sugál--to gamble, game, play cards for money, etc.

_panugálon_, Quality or manner of gambling, etc. Maáyo siá sing
panugálon. He knows how to gamble well. Hanás siá sing panugálon. He
is an expert gambler. (sugál).

_panúg-an_, Freq. of túg-an--to promise, make a promise, to engage
to do. Ginpanug-anán akó níya sing mahál nga sóhol. He promised me a
good salary or good wages. Ang madalás sa panúg-an mahínay sa pagtúman
sang íya nga ginpanúg-an. He who promises in a hurry is slow to redeem
his promise.

_panugápà_, To grope, feel one's way. (cf. panagápà).

_panúgbung_, Freq. of túgbung--to take to (the) market, go to (the)
market, buy fish, etc.

_panúgdà_, Freq. of túgdà--to fasten, tie with a knot; to add to,
lengthen.

_panúgdò_, Freq. of túgdò--to sprout, etc.

_panughalínan_, Cause, reason, liking, pretext, convenient excuse
(for leaving or going away). Walâ man ikáw sing panughalínan. You
have no reason for leaving. (cf. halín).

_panúgid_, Freq. of súgid--to tell, relate, report, etc. Way or manner
of one's telling a story, making a report, giving out a statement,
or the like. Maáthag siá sing panúgid. Maáthag ang íya panúgid. His
statement is (was) clear. He narrates (tells a story, etc.) in a clear,
distinct way.

_panugíp-ol_, To be envious, jealous, bear a grudge. See panagíp-ol id.

_panugíron_, (H) Report, tale, story, conversation; to report, tell,
bring out in conversation. Ang íya nga panugíron butíg. His report
is a lie. Nagapanugíron siá nga----. He told the story that----. He
said that----. (cf. súgid, sugilánon, hámbal, mítlang, bungát, tikáb,
silíng, hambárò, pakigpulóngpúlong, etc.).

_panúgon_, Freq. of túgon--to order, etc. Way or manner of giving an
order, etc. Hutúhut gid ang panúgon níya sa ákon nga hagáron ikáw sa
pagpamándut. He told me most sincerely (not to forget) to invite you
to come to the feast.

_panugô-sugô_, Dim. and Freq. of sógò--to order, command, etc. Ang
tanán nga ginapanugôsugô sa íya ginatúman níya sa gihápon sing may
kapísan kag kaíd-id. Everything he is ordered to do he executes with
diligence and exactitude.

_panúgpa_, Freq. of túgpa--to pursue, etc.

_panúgpò_, To challenge, provoke; to crow (of cocks). (cf. túgpò).

_panúgud_, Freq. of súgud--to begin, etc.

_panugurán_, Commencement, beginning, start, front, top, head,
opening. Sa panugurán siníng mga dinalán----. At the head (opening)
of these lines----. (cf. súgud, ginsugúran).

_panúgyan_, Freq. of túgyan. Recommendation, advice; to entrust to,
advise, recommend, commend. (cf. panugyánon).

_panugyánon_, Recommendation, advice, commitment, commendation,
message. (cf. panúgyan).

_panuhóy_, Freq. of tuhóy. Malediction, curse, imprecation; to curse,
imprecate, execrate, wish evil to. (cf. panóloy).

_panúhug_, Freq. of tóhog--to perforate, pierce, etc. Panuhúga silá
sa ilóng kag hígtan sing kalát. Put rings in their noses and tie them
with ropes (hitched to the rings).

_panúhut_, Freq. of súhut, sóhot--to slip in, enter, etc. Also: the
way or manner--, the amount--, of fish entering, and being caught in,
a fish-corral (punút), etc.

_panuhúton_, Slipping, creeping, crawling, going in; to slip in,
etc. (cf. panúhut).

_panuhút-suhút_, See panohót-sohót--to prowl, etc.

_panúig_, Period of time, year, years, ages, times; times, season,
circumstances of times (whether good, bad, or the like). (cf. túig,
panahón).

_panuígon_, Season, year, time; yearly. (cf. panahón, tuígtúig,
panuigón).


_panuigón_, Age, oldness; to have an age of----, be----old, be
aged----. Nagapanuigón siá sing duhá ka púlò kag limá. He is twenty
five years----old,----of age. His age is twenty five. He has got to
(reached, attained) the age of twenty five. Anó ang ímo panuigón? What
is your age? (cf. túig, panúig, panuígon, katigulangón).

_panúka_, Freq. of súka--to vomit. Ang panúka kag panglibáng. Vomiting
and diarrhoea. Cholera.

_panukâ_, Freq. of tukâ--to peck grain, pick up with the bill or beak
(as birds).

_panúkad_, Freq. of súkad--to scoop out, ladle out, etc.

_panukád_, Freq. of tokád--to ascend, go uphill.

_panúkap_, Freq. of tókap--to cover, patch, mend.

_panukáp_, Freq. of tokáp--to clap the hands, applaud.

_panúk-ap_, Freq. of tók-ap--to brush--, knock--, flick--, off (with
a towel, handkerchief, etc.).

_panúkbit_, Freq. of súkbit, sókbit--to gird on a bolo, etc.

_panúkmà, panukmáon_, See panúknà, panuknáon.

_panúknà_, Freq. of súknà--to call to account, expostulate with.

_panuknáon_, Expostulation, remonstrance, interview; to tax with,
call to account, etc. See panúknà, súknà.

_panukúb_, Freq. of tukúb--to pounce upon, tear to pieces.

_panúla_, Freq. of túla--to cook vegetables; fetch or gather
vegetables.

_panúlad_, Freq. of túlad. To resemble; imitate, mimic; act thus
or in like manner. Sagád siá magpanúlad sang bisán anó lang nga íya
makítà ukón mabatián. He is an adept at mimicking everything he sees
or hears. (cf. panúbung).

_panuláon_, (B) The gathering of vegetables; to gather, or go in
search of, vegetables. Nagapanuláon siá sing mónggo, balátong,
kadiós, etc. He is plucking (gathering) mónggo, beans, kadiós-peas,
etc. Metaphorically: Nagapanuláon na siá sing ininglés, sing
mga sugilánon nga walâ sing pulús, etc. He is picking up a little
English, is gathering good-for-nothing stories or senseless chatter,
etc. (cf. túla, panúla).

_panulát_, Form, manner, method, way of writing; to write. (cf. sulát).

_panulátan_, Writing (as a profession); publications, press,
periodicals, books, letters. (cf. panuláton, kasulátan).

_panuláton_, Writing, writings; to write. (cf. sulát, panulát).

_panúlay_, Freq. of súlay--to brave the rain, etc.

_panúlay_, Freq. of súlay--to prop up, support by (leaning) posts or
props (set at an angle). Panuláyi ang baláy, kay magabágyo. Prop up
the house with some posts, for a storm is coming. Manukó kag manúlay
na kitá, agúd índì mapúkan sang hángin ang áton mga pulúy-an. Let us
put up additional props and posts, that the wind may not be able to
blow down our houses.

_panuláy_, Freq. of suláy--to tempt. Temptation, provocation; to tempt,
try to seduce. Pronounced in anger "panuláy" is a curse. Panuláy gid
iní! This is a damned nuisance! Damn it all! Curse it! Panuláy gid
iníng táo! This man is a great nuisance!

_panúlin_, Recommendation, injunction, order, commendation, precept;
to commend, recommend, give or leave orders, etc. (cf. túlin).

_panulíp-súlip_, To squeeze or slip through, introduce oneself
surreptitiously (as a spy or secret agent); to prowl, rove in search
of prey or plunder. (cf. súlip, panohót-sohót).

_panúltul_, Freq. of túltul--to know or find one's way, know the road;
to pommel, knuckle, beat, box. (cf. himát-on; tapúngol).

_panúl-ub_, Freq. of súl-ub--to inundate, overflow, wash. (cf. súr-ub).

_panulúd_, Freq. of sulúd--to enter, etc.; to put in, etc. Ginpanulúd
níla sa tabíg ang mga ulutanón. They put the vegetables in the basket.

_panulúd_, Freq. of tulúd--to push, etc.


_panúluk_, Freq. of túluk--to look, see. Also: Sight, look, vision,
mien, eyesight.

_panúlung_, Freq. of dúlung. To proceed to, go towards or in the
direction of, direct one's steps towards. (pandúlung id.).

_panúl-ung_, Freq. of dúl-ung--to transport, convey, etc.

_panúlung_, Freq. of súlung--to challenge; to pay duty, etc.

_panulúng_, Freq. of sulúng--to look at; to shine through, etc.

_panúmbag_, Freq. of súmbag--to box, strike with the fist.

_panumbálay_, To pay visits for the sake of conversation or
merely to while away the time, go from house to house to gossip,
etc. Indì kamó magpanumbálay sing daláyon. Don't be always going
from house to house. Iníng pamatán-on angayán gid lang magsáot kag
magpanumbálay. This young man is only fit for dancing and wasting
time visiting. (baláy).

_panumbalík_, To come back, to return to the place from where one
started, find one's way back. Nagpanumbalík (nanumbalík) siá sa dáan
níya nga palangitán-an. He returned to his old calling (his former
occupation). (bálik).

_panúmbok_, Freq. of túmbok--to stamp, press upon, etc.

_panumbók-túmbok_, Dim. of panúmbok.

_panúmbong_, Freq. of súmbong. Accusation, charge; to accuse, report
something evil, tax with, charge with the commission of a fault or
crime. Ginpanúmbong níla ang makáwat sa hukóm. They accused the thief
before the judge. Ginpanumbongán níla kamí sang maláut nga búhat ni
Fuláno. They reported to us N.N.'s evil deed.

_panumbúngon_, Accusation, charge; to accuse. (cf. panúmbong).

_panúmdum_, Freq. of dúmdum. To remember, recollect, bear in mind,
call to mind, recall, call up, bring to mind, to mind.

_panumdúman_, Memory, remembrance, reminiscence, recollection. Ang
ihibaló, kabubút-on kag panumdúman amó ang tátlo ka igaláhum sang
kalág. Intellect, will and memory are the three powers (faculties)
of the soul. (cf. panúmdum).

_panúmong_, Freq. of súmong--to reel, stagger (as a drunken person),
etc. Also: to resist capture, make efforts to evade (or even kill)
the captors, as desperadoes do.

_panúmpà_, Freq. of súmpà--to swear, take an oath.

_panúndug_, Freq. of túndug--to bring or send food to one working
in the fields, etc. Also: to follow in the steps of, imitate,
be like, have a resemblance to. Manúndug inâ sa----. That is
like----. Manúndug silá sa aninípot nga----. They are like fire-flies
that----. Nagapanúndug iní sa hurubáton: "----." This is according
to the saying: "----." (cf. túlad, súbung, ílog, sunúd, halimbáwà,
kahalimbáwà, katúlad, anggídánggid).

_panúngab_, Freq. of túngab--to light, set fire to. The phrase: "Kon
manúngab kitá sa bukál" means "never" (literally: When we can light
(a cigar, etc.) with boiling water).

_panungáw_, Freq. of sungáw. Exhalation, evaporation, leakage; to
evaporate, escape (of gas, steam, odour, etc.).

_panúngay_, Freq. of súngay--to push with the horns. Also: Form or
shape of horns. Iníng karabáw pakô sing panúngay, yanáng báka tíndog
sing panúngay. This buffalo has horns bent down like the wings of a
bird, that ox (cow) has horns standing up erect.

_panúnggud_, Freq. of súnggud--to frown, sulk, etc.

_panunggúron_, Frown, scowl, angry look; to be angry, offended,
to sulk, scowl, be sullen. (cf. súnggud, kulumúron).

_panúngkad_, Freq. of túngkad--to fathom, etc.

_panúngon_, Freq. of súngon--to frown, etc. (cf. panúnggud).

_panúok_, The wisdom tooth. (cf. ángkod, sígmit, bág-ang, sámpaw).

_panúop_, See panúok.

_panupâ_, Freq. of tupâ--to fall or light on, etc.


_panupút_, Freq. of supút--to gather, collect, etc.

_panúrsi_, Freq. of súrsi. Sewing, stitching; to patch, mend, sew
(clothes).

_panúr-ub_, See panúl-ub--to inundate, overflow.

_panurúk_, (B) To collect the charred remnants of a jungle-fire
(kaingín) and burn them again till the land is cleared for tilling.

_panurúmpo_, Freq. of torómpo, trómpo. The spin around (as a spinning
top); to gesticulate, move about excitedly (in anger, etc.).

_panúsop_, Freq. of túsop--to bite, gnaw at.

_panôsô_, See panôsô--to squash, smash, squeeze.

_panútò_, To say "tútò" (darling boy); to behave like a good boy,
be obedient, diligent, etc. (cf. tútò, tótò).

_panutó_, Freq. of tutó, totó--to pound, strike (with a
pestle). Hináyon mo lang ang panutó, agúd índì magkalatádtad ang
sug-úton. Pound gently or the fibres will break.

_panútsa_, (Sp. panocha) A panicle; a kind of sweet bread.

_panútud_, Freq. of tútud--to burn, etc. Paninguháon nínyo gid, agúd
ang tanán nga mga ságbot mapanípon kag mapanútdan. Buckle to and get
together and burn all the rubbish.

_panuyô_, To plot against, intend to kill, wreak one's vengeance
upon. (cf. tuyô).

_panuyô-duyô, panuyô-dúyò_, Dim. and Freq. of dúyò--to lounge, loaf,
stand about idly, to loiter, etc. Indì kamó magpanuyôduyô dirí sa
atubángan sang simbáhan. Don't loiter here in front of the church.

_panwítik_, To be--, act like--, imitate the tricks of--, a pickpocket
or thief. (cf. swítik).

_panyága_, Dinner, mid-day meal. See paniága.

_panyagahón_, Food for dinner. (cf. palanyagahón, irigmáon, panyága).

_panyápon_, Supper. See panihápon.

_pányo, pányò_, (Sp. paño) Handkerchief; cloth, kitchen-cloth, rag,
wrapper (of cloth). (cf. panuélo).

_paón_, Bait, lure, enticement; to bait, lure, allure, attract,
entice. Nagpaón siá sing lalágo sa ísdà. He used a worm as a bait for
the fish. Ginpán-an (ginpaonán) níya ang ísdà sing sirúmsirúm. He
caught the fish by using a cricket as bait. Paón gid lang inâ sa
íla. That is only a lure for them.

_paóng-ong_, Caus. of óng-ong--to sip, drink (out of a bottle, etc.).

_paóplok_, To dodge, etc. See paíplok.

_paoróm-oróm_, (B) To stay or remain long, tarry, linger. Ngáa nga
nagpaoróm-oróm ka dídto sa subâ, sa tiendáhan, etc.? Why did you
remain so long there at the river, at the market, etc.? (cf. lúsgò,
paorós-orós).

_paorós-orós_, (B) See paoróm-oróm id.

_paós-os_, See paús-us--cause to slip down, etc.

_pápà, pâpâ_, Hammer; to hammer, strike with a hammer; to strike, slap
(with the hand). Pàpaá (Papáa) ang lánsang. Hammer the nail. Pàpai
(Papái) akó sing áhos, kay ilakót ko sa tinóla. Crush (by hammering)
some garlic for me and I shall mix it with the side-dish. (cf. pípì,
pîpî).

_pápa_, (Sp. pápa) The Pope, Roman Pontiff. Ang Sánto Pápa. The Holy
Father. Ang Sánto Pápa amó ang salíli ni Hesukrísto kag ílis ni San
Pédro. The Holy Father is the Vice-gerent of Jesus Christ and the
successor of S. Peter.

_papá_, (Sp. papá) Dad, daddy, dada, da, papa, pa, poppa, pop,
father. (cf. amáy, tátay).

_papaáng-páang_, To make hot, sultry; to expose oneself to
heat. (cf. páang).

_pápag_, A bamboo stretcher; a bamboo platform used for treading
out rice and the like, any square bamboo frame made in the form of
a hurdle or of a table-top. (cf. liyálíya; linasán; bayáw-báyaw).

_papák_, To strike with a flat piece of wood, the palm of the hand
or the like; to beat cotton. Papaká ang íya abága. Slap him on the
shoulder. Ginpapák níya akó. He struck me with his open hand. He
slapped me.

_papálì_, Caus. of pálì. Also: to apply a remedy to a wound in order
to heal it.

_papámbo_, Caus. of pámbo--to bleed from the nose.

_papánding_, To do something that provokes criticism, to disgrace
oneself, to commit a fault or misdemeanour others will talk about
and remember for a long time. Paúlì ka na; índì mo ipapánding sa mga
táo ang ímo kahulúgbon. Go home now and don't let the people see that
you are drunk. Indì ka magpapánding sa mga táo. Don't give the people
just cause for censure (criticism). (cf. pandinganán).

_pápas_, To ruin, destroy, demolish utterly, extirpate, get rid
of. Papása ang mga ságing sa pamulákan. Get rid of the bananas in the
flower-garden. Ginpápas sang kaláyo ang baláy. The fire consumed the
house utterly. Napapásan iníng lugár sang mga lubí. The coconuts in
this place were utterly destroyed.

_papás_, To beat down, cut down, assault, attack. (cf. papák, pápas).

_pápay_, Food, fodder, nourishment; emoluments, material
benefits. (cf. pagkáon, pangabuhián, pangítà, palanginán-an).

_papáya_, (Sp. papaya, papayo) Papaw. (cf. kapáyas).

_papél_, (Sp. papel) Paper, written document. (cf. pagkítan).

_papéra_, (Sp. papera) Mumps; goiter, goitre. (bayóok).

_pápha_, Wide open, large (of a wound, etc.). (cf. bábha, wáwha,
wángwang).

_pápha_, See hánghang--steps or notches (cut in a coconut-palm, etc.).

_papílì_, To let--, make--, order to--, elect or choose,
be a candidate, offer oneself for a post, etc. Sánday sín-o
ang mga nagapapílì? Sánday sín-o ang mga palapilián? Who are
the candidates? Ang mga manogpapílì nagapalamákud na sang íla
pagpapílì. The candidates for election are strengthening their
candidatures. Pilía. Choose. Kon akó ang papilíon----. If I were
allowed to choose----. Papilía siá kon anó ang íya lúyag. Let him
select (choose) what he likes. (cf. pílì, pumilílì, palapilián,
piniliáy).

_papilíta_, (Sp. papeleta) A slip of paper, ticket, card, invitation,
program, visiting card, or the like. (cf. papél, pagkítan).

_papinohán_, Refinery. Papinohán-kalámay (Papinohán sang kalámay). A
sugar refinery. (cf. píno (Sp. fino)).

_papíntas_, Caus. of píntas. To make cruel, etc.

_papísan_, Caus. of písan. To make diligent, etc.

_papisáw-pisáw, papisáw-písaw_, To blink, twinkle, to open and close
the eyelids quickly and repeatedly; to wink. (cf. pamisókpisók).

_papíyo_, A primitive whistle made of rice-straw, or the like; to blow
such a whistle. Indì ka magpapíyo sa malapít sa ákon. Don't blow that
whistle in my presence. Don't disturb me with your whistle.

_pápnaw_, To disappear, vanish. Napápnaw lang ang ákon panápton nga
hinaláy. My clothes just vanished from the line. (cf. limúnaw).

_pápò_, Great-grandfather, great-grandmother, ancestor. (cf. ápoy).

_papulá_, To redden, make red; look at with blood-shot
eyes. Ginpapulahán akó níya sang íya mga matá. He looked at me with
(turned on me his) angry, blood-shot eyes. (cf. pulá).

_papúro, papurópúro_, To do something thoroughly, heartily, earnestly;
to make pure or perfect. (cf. púro).

_papuút_, Caus. of puút--to stop, cease, etc. Papút-a na ang amó nga
gamó. Stop that row. Put an end to that excitement.

_papuyô_, Caus. of puyô--to live, stay, etc. Papúy-a akó sa ímo
baláy. Let me stay in your house.

_para_--, See pala--id.

_pára_, (Sp. parar) To stop, come to a--stand,--standstill,
to halt, pull up, bring up (to), bring to a
standstill. Pára! Stop! Halt! Stand! Paráha (Paparáha) ang áwto. Stop
the automobile. (cf. dúlug).


_pára_, (Sp. para) For, on behalf of, in order to, that. (cf. sa,
agúd, agúd nga, sa ikaáyo).

_paráda_, (Sp. parada) Parade, review, civic procession; stand,
station. (cf. kátay, prosisyón; dululugán).

_parág_, (B) To send or drive off (away), forbid to enter, order to go
away, cause to leave (the house). Paragá siá. Order him off. Forbid
him the house. Forbid him to come to your house. (cf. tábug, paíway,
pahalín).

_paragáw_, Thin, weak, faint, feeble, exhausted (of voice); to be or
become feeble, etc. (cf. harawaháw, pagáw).

_parágpag_, (B) Dishevelled, etc. See págpag, palágpag, búkag,
bukágkag.

_paraíso_, (Sp. paraiso) Paradise, Eden, garden of Eden, heaven;
a shrub with beautiful flowers. (cf. edén).

_parák_, (H) A lump, mass, compact piece (of sugar, etc.). (padák id.).

_parakóg_, Stick or bat used in the sáto-game. See palakóg id.

_parakól_, An axe, hatchet, chopper. (cf. wásay).

_parál_, (Sp. parál) A stile, post, pole or cross-beam, especially
at a gate, to prevent animals from passing.

_parálisis_, (Sp. paralisis) Paralysis. (cf. pagkamatáy or pagpalamatáy
sang láwas).

_paralíyo_, One who is always borrowing money; a troublesome or
quarrelsome person, a nuisance, bother. (cf. lío, líyo).

_paramidyáan_, Fingerboard. See pamidyáan, palamidyáan.

_paramírot_, See palamílot--to close the eyes partially, to wink.

_paranák_, The cat, the small wooden pieces used in the game of sáto
or tipcat. (cf. palanák).

_paraná-o_, (B) Liberal, generous. (cf. palanghátag, maálwan,
matáhud, taó).

_paranáwan_, (B) Way, road, trip, march, route, journey, walk, hike,
tramp; distance to be travelled on foot. (cf. pánaw; laláktan).

_paranáwon_, (B) Travelling or walking on foot; march, way to be
covered on foot. (cf. pánaw, lalákton, paranáwan).

_parapák_, (B) See palapák--hammer, etc.

_pará-pará_, To flutter and struggle as a chicken caught and
trying to escape; to hasten, be anxious or in a hurry to do
something. Nagaparápará siá sa pagpaúlì, sa pagdáro, etc. He is in
a flutter (anxious) to go home, to plough, etc.

_parapát-rápat_, To lash, beat, scourge, flail, punish
with many strokes in quick succession, thrash, flog or whip
soundly. (cf. tarítári).

_parapatúnto_, (B) A game at cards similar to amôámò; to play that
game.

_pararúdhan_, (B) Caprice, whim, fancy, humour, crotchet, fad,
freak, vagary, whimsical desires or longings. Kadámò sang ímo
mga pararúdhan! How many queer wishes (whimsical desires) yon
have! (cf. luyáglúyag).

_páras_, Vertebra. See pádas id.

_parás_, (H) Harsh of speech, etc. See padás id.

_paratkónon_, (B) Riddle. See paktákon.

_paratúdhan_, (B) See pararúdhan id. (cf. patuhádtúhad).

_paráw_, (B) To end, stop, etc. See paláw.

_paráw_, A boat propelled by sails and oars and fitted with outriggers;
an outrigger.

_páray_, (B) Unhulled rice, rice (in the ears or in the
field). (cf. pálay, humáy).

_paráyan_, (B) Rich in rice, one that has extensive rice-lands,
a rich rice-farmer. (cf. humáyan).

_parayán_, (B) Rice-land, rice-farm; a small shed for storing rice,
rice granary. (cf. humáyan, tambóbo).

_párdo_, (Sp. pardo) Leopard. (cf. leopárdo).


_párdo_, (Sp. fardo) Bale, batch, bundle, pack, package, parcel,
fardel, bottle--, truss--, of hay. Isá ka párdo nga tabákò. A bundle
of tobacco containing about thirty "manóso", which see. Isá ka párdo
nga bunáng. A bundle of yarn containing about thirty "ágpang".

_paréha_, (Sp. pareja) A pair, couple, brace, match. (cf. dapíg).

_parého_, (Sp. parejo) Equal, alike, same, identical, exactly similar;
to be alike, treat alike or in the same manner. Parého lang. It's all
the same. It makes no difference. Parého gid lang iní sa ákon. It is
all the same to me. It makes no difference to me. Parého silá sing
batásan. Parého ang íla batásan. Their ways or manners (conduct)
are the same. Parehóa (Parehóha) silá nga tanán sang patrabáho
(pagpatrabáho). Make them all work without distinction. (cf. amó,
súbung, katúlad, kaángay, túpung, tupúng).

_parî_, To fool, flatter, say something out of mere politeness,
bestow adulation upon, make promises as a mere matter of formality,
cheat, take in, deceive. Ginparî lang níya akó. He made a fool of
me. He deceived, cheated, fooled me. (cf. odót, unís, utís, hásò).

_párì_, Priest, Father, Reverend; Parish Priest, Rector; to become
a priest. Si Párì Albérto. The Rev. (Reverend) Father Albert. The
Rev. Albert. Fr. Albert. Sógò inâ sang Párì. Such is (was) the order
of the Parish Priest. Those are (were) the Father's orders. Nagpárì
na si Fuláno. N.N. has become a priest. (cf. Sp. pádre).

_paribánaw_, (B) To wash one's hands, etc. See libánaw, ribánaw,
hunáw, hináw. Paribanáwi (Paribánwi) ánay ang kamót mo. Wash your
hands first. Paparibanáwa (Paparibánwa) akó sa planggána mo. Let me
wash my hands in your wash-basin.

_pariénte_, (Sp. pariente) Relation, relative, related--,
allied--, connected--, by blood; to be related,
etc. Nagaparientéhay silá. They are related to each
other. They are--connected,--relatives,--relations,--allied by
blood,--connections. (cf. himatâ, kadúgò, kalíwat, kakilíran).

_parígwis_, (B) To cut to an angle or point, to taper. See palígwis,
palágwis.

_párik_, To return, come--, go--, turn--, back. See bálik.

_párik_, To flutter, upset, confuse; to be fluttered, excited, in
a hurry, to bustle about. Anó ang ginapárik mo? What is upsetting
you? Why are you in such a hurry?

_parík-párik_, Dim. and Freq. of párik. Also: to move about in every
direction, walk to and fro excitedly.

_parílya_, (Sp. parillas) Gridiron.

_parî-párì_, A pretended or false priest, a religious impostor.

_páris_, (Sp. par, pares) Pair, couple, two, twin, twain
(poetical). Isá ka páris nga sapátos. A pair of boots. (cf. paréha--a
pair, couple, match (of both men and beasts).

_parís_, (From Paris) Wire nails, French nails. Lánsang nga
parís. Common wire nails.

_parók_, See palók--having large, prominent eyelids.

_pároko, parokó_, (Sp. párroco) Parish Priest, Rector. (cf. Kúra
Pároko).

_parókpok_, (B) The blossom or flower of the mango tree; to
flower, blossom, bloom, be in bloom (blossom), said of the mango
tree. Nagaparókpok (Nagapamúlak) na ang páhò. The mango tree is
flowering, is in blossom, is in bloom. (cf. polókpok, porókpok).

_parókya_, (Sp. parroquia) Parish.

_paról_, (Sp. farol) Lantern, light, street-lamp, hurricane
lamp. (cf. solô, sugâ).

_paróng_, (H) The crest--, caruncle--, of a cock, cock's
comb. (cf. padóng, pirahón).

_parórò_, (B) To stay long, tarry, linger. See paorómoróm, lúsgò.

_paróros, parorós_, (B) To concede, grant, etc. See palónos.

_parót_, Lost, vanquished, no good, out of a game or race, defeated;
to be defeated, lose, run foul of the rules, or the like. Nagkaparót
(Naparót) siá. He lost (the game, election, etc.). Daláyon gid lámang
siá (sang) parót. He always loses. He is always an also-ran. He is
always one of the losers.

_parótpot_, A small fish having an extraordinary number of small bones.


_párpara, parpará_, (Sp. párpado) Eyelid; a fringe, ornamental edging,
decorated margin or extremity of a garment, etc. Párpara sang púnda,
pakô, etc. The fringes of a pillow-slip, of a sleeve, etc.

_párte_, (Sp. parte) Part, portion, share, division; to divide, share
out, partition. Partehón nínyo ang humáy. Divide the rice. Distribute
it in portions. Ginpárte na níla ang mga háyop nga pinanúblì níla. They
have divided amongst themselves the domestic animals which they
inherited. Pilá ang ímo párte? What is your share? Pilá ka párte ang
ímo? How many portions belong to you? (cf. báhin, huláy).

_partéra_, (Sp. partera) Midwife. (cf. manugpaanák).

_partída_, (Sp. partida) Entry, record; certificate (of baptism,
etc.); part, share, an assortment of goods or merchandise. Also
verb. Namartída siá sa Ilóngílong. He bought an assortment of goods
in Iloilo. (cf. párte).

_partído_, (Sp. partido) Party, a political party. (cf. búnghay).

_partílya_, (Probably from the Sp. partida or fritilla) A part of
the intestines attached to the gizzard in poultry. (cf. pretílya id.).

_parumátay_, (B) To be as if dead, etc. See palumátay.

_parumúy-rúmuy_, Laziness, indolence; to be lazy, indolent, to idle
away the time in useless diversions or amusements. (cf. ligóy, támad,
tinamád, haráyháray).

_parútput_, A kind of small fish. (cf. parótpot).

_pasá_, (Sp. pasar) To pass; to become tainted or spoilt (of meat,
overripe fruits, etc.); to lose flavour or taste. Walâ gid akó
pagpasahí sang páhò. I am always fond of mangoes. I am never tired
of eating mangoes.

_pasábak_, Caus. of sábak--the lap, the bend or hollow formed at
the junction of the body and legs when sitting down. To cause to--,
order to--, put in one's lap, request to be taken on the knees
of another. Pasabáka siá sang bátà. Let her take the baby on her
knees. Pasabáki si tátay. Let father take (Ask, request father to take)
you on his knees.

_pasáblag_, To hinder, obstruct, prevent, impede, embarrass,
forefend, put obstacles in the way, thwart, baffle. Pasablagí ang íya
paglakát. Impede (hinder) his going (away). Prevent him from marching
away (off). (cf. sáblag).

_pasáblay_, Caus. of sáblay--to put clothes on a line, etc.

_pasabláy_, Indian summer, a spell of fine weather that occurs at
about the middle of the rainy season (during the month of August or
September). The pasabláy usually lasts about a fortnight.

_pasablayón_, Half-ripe, applied chiefly to coconuts and indicating
a stage between being quite ripe (láhin) and very young (malasíp-on).

_pasáblog_, To leave, relinquish, abandon. (cf. pabayâ, pahámak).

_pasábnit_, Caus. of sábnit--to snatch, seize.

_pasabúd_, Caus. of sabúd--to coil, twist around, etc.

_pasábud_, Caus. of sábud--to sow. Pasabúra (--úda) na ang ímo
umalágsa. Order your tenant to sow (rice).

_pasábud_, To revolve or turn round, especially in dancing,
to pirouette. Pasábud kamó. Spin around. Turn around in
circles. Ginapasábud níya si Fulána. He is spinning around with Miss
N.N. Also used metaphorically. Tadlungá lang ang ímo hámbal, índì
mo pagpasabúron (pagpasibúdon, pagpasibúron). Talk straightforwardly
and not in circumlocutions. Do not beat about the bush. (cf. pasíbud).

_pasaburák_, See pasaburát.

_pasaburát_, To have no regard or concern for consequences,
do or say something regardless of whether it is good or bad, be
indifferent to. Ginapasaburát mo lang ang dungúg ni Fuláno. You
are apparently unconcerned about N.N.'s reputation. Indì mo
pagpasaburatán ang pagdúplà sa salúg. Don't spit on the floor so
unconcernedly--or--regardless of good manners. (cf. pasabúyat,
pasapayán, pasaburák).

_pasabúyat_, See pasaburát.

_pásad_, To found, establish, erect, lay the foundations
of. Pasára sing maáyo ang baláy. Build your house on a good
foundation. Ginpásad níya ang isá ka bág-o nga ginharían. He founded
a new kingdom. (cf. túkud, pátok).


_pasagáhay_, To charge interest (often 50%). See
sagáhay. Ginpasagaháyan (pinasagaháyan) níya ang humáy nga ákon
ginútang sa íya sing napúlo ka gántang ang pásong. For the rice I
borrowed from him he charged me ten gantas interest on every bushel.

_paságì_, A rectangular oblong quadrangle; lumber in square pieces;
squared logs and beams ready for sawing. (cf. kasílo--a square).

_pasagúmboy_, Caus. of sagúmboy--to drag, draggle, trail on the ground.

_pasáhi_, (Sp. pasaje) Passage, fare, ticket; passage (of a book);
incident, anecdote (of one's life). Pilá ang ibáyad mo sa pasáhi? How
much do you pay for the ticket (fare)? Madámò nga mga pasáhi ang
ginagíhan (ginágyan) ni Fuláno. Many are the experiences that N.N. has
met with. (cf. hinákay, ági).

_pasahî_, Extraordinary, remarkable, notable, exceptional, uncommon,
noteworthy, unwonted, outstanding, excelling, not common; to be
extraordinary, do something in an extraordinary way, etc. Ginpasahî
gid ni Fuláno ang pagpabúnyag sang íya bátà. N.N. had his baby baptized
with extraordinary solemnity. Ginpahimánsag níla ang kaadláwan sang íla
pándut sa pasahî nga mga kasadyáhan. They celebrated their feast-day
with extraordinary manifestations of joy.

_pasahíro_, (Sp. pasajero) Traveller, passenger, fare
(person). (cf. sumalákay, umalági, dumulóong, dumulúaw, etc.).

_pasákà_, Causative of sákà. To ascend, go--, come--, up, etc. Also:
Irrigation. May pasákà ang ímo talámnan? Have you irrigation on your
land? Pasakáan mo sing túbig ang ímong umá. Get an irrigation system
for your fields. Irrigate your lands.

_pasakâ_, To be on a ladder or stair and come up, to ascend, come
up a flight of stairs, or the like. Mga sín-o yanáng nagapasakâ? Who
are those people that are coming up the stairs? (cf. sákà).

_pasákit_, To cause or give mental pain, to pain, hurt, wound, afflict,
distress, grieve. Indì ka magpasákit sang ímo ginikánan. Indì mo
pagpasakíton ang ímo ginikánan. Don't grieve your parents. Don't give
your parents pain. (pa, sákit).

_pasakít_, To cause physical pain. Iníng bulúng nagapasakít sang ákon
hubág. This medicine makes my ulcer smart, hurt, pain. (pa, sakít).

_pasákup_, Caus. of sákup. To be or become subject to, enlist,
enroll, submit to, enter a society or corporation, etc.; to
admit or receive as a member or subject, let join or order to
join. Nagpasákup--or--napasákup siá sa mga konstabuláryo. He joined
the constabulary, became a member of the constabulary. Ipasákup mo
ang ímo anák sa isá ka maáyo nga talapuánan. Let your son join a good
society or company.

_pasalâ_, To cause to err, lead astray, etc. Ginpasalâ sang mananábang
ang mga sinúgid sang mga sáksi. The lawyer caused the witnesses to
make erroneous statements. (cf. patálang, salâ).

_pasála_, Caus. of sála--to be delirious, talk nonsense.

_pasálà_, Caus. of sálà--to filter, etc.

_pasálà_, (B) To remain, stay at home, be left--, stay--,
behind. Pasálà ka lang dirí, índi ka magupúd sa ámon. Stay here,
do not come with us. (cf. pabílin).

_pasalámat_, Thanks; to thank, give--, return--, thanks, be
grateful for, be much obliged for; to receive a gift, to accept
without payment. Magpasalámat kamó sa Mahál nga Diós. Pasalamátan
nínyo ang Mahál nga Diós. Give thanks to God. Pasalamáti lang
iníng diótay ko nga iamóma sa ímo. Please accept this little
present (treat). Ginpasalamátan níya sing madámò ang mga páhò nga
pinadalá mo sa íya. He was very grateful for the mangoes you sent
him. (cf. salámat, bálus, kabaláslan).

_pasálig_, Freq. of sálig. Also: Surety, bond, pledge; title, diploma;
testimony, assurance; to assure, cause to have trust or confidence,
etc. (cf. palíg-on).

_pasalikâ_, Caus. of salikâ--to straddle, etc. Bulígi kamí sa
pagpasalikâ sa íya sa gahúm. Help us to put him in office (power,
into the saddle).

_pasalipákpak_, Heedlessness, carelessness; thoughtlessness; to be
heedless, careless, do or perform thoughtlessly. Ginpasalipakpakán
lang níya ang paghámpang sang ahedrés kag napiérde siá. He played
chess carelessly (without attending to the game) and lost. Indì mo
pagpasalipakpakán ang ímo mga sulát. Don't write letters without
thinking of what you are putting down. (cf. pasapayán, pasaburák,
pasipákpak, taláktalák).

_pasalipótpot_, To steal--, sneak--, run--, away from work or duty,
to leave secretly, play truant, shirk work, abandon one's duty. Indì
ka magpasalipótpot sa (sang) ímo mga buluhatón. Don't shirk your
duties. Sang nasápwan siá nga íya pinasalipótpotán ang pagtúman sang
íya katungdánan dáyon siá ginpahalín sang íya agálon. When it was
found out that he was in the habit of leaving work undone his master
sent him away at once. Sang nabúksan ang gangháan pumasalipótpot
siá kag nagpalágyo. When the door was opened he stole out and
fled. (salipótpot).

_pasalipúdpud_, To hide oneself behind, take shelter. (cf. palipúd).

_pasálò_, To pass along from hand to hand. Ipasálò lang iníng báso
sa mga bisíta, kay kúlang kitá sing mga báso. Just let the visitors
pass the glass round, for we are short of glasses.

_pasalô_, Caus. of salô--to catch a ball, etc. Pasál-a (Pasaloá)
ang bátà sang bóla. Let the boy catch the ball.

_pasalóksalók_, To annoy, disgust, bother, molest, be ready to pick
a quarrel for the slightest reason. Dál-a sa ibábaw iníng hubúg, kay
nagapasalóksalók siá sa ámon dirí. Carry this drunken fellow upstairs,
because he is annoying us here.

_pasamák-sámak, pasamák-samák_, To annoy, irritate, exasperate,
oppose. (cf. pasalóksalók, pasámok).

_pasamál_, Caus. of samál--to secure--, grasp--, hold--, firmly,
etc. Pasámla (Pasamalá) ang pínggan. Hold (grasp, secure) the plate
firmly (so that it may not slip or fall down).

_pasamáno_, (Sp. pasamano) Handrail, banister. (cf. alobaybayán,
gabayán).

_pasamíyang_, To dispose of freely, be free to act as one likes, please
oneself, do to one's heart's content, have one's own way, make oneself
comfortable. Pasamíyang ka lang dirâ sa bág-o nga baláy. Pasamiyángi
lang ang bág-o nga baláy. Make yourself comfortable (at home) in the
new house. Dispose of the new house as you like. Make any arrangements
you please in the new house. (cf. patúyang, pagusá).

_pasámok_, Caus. of sámok--to disturb, trouble, etc.

_pasamók-sámok, pasamók-samók_, Dim. of pasámok. Also: to vex, nettle,
irritate, exasperate. (cf. pasamák-sámak, pasalóksalók).

_pasámpal_, Caus. of sámpal--to push, impel, strike or beat
against. Dílì mo pagipasámpal sa hángin ang masakitón nga bátà. Don't
expose the sick child to the wind.

_pasámpok_, Caus. of sámpok. Also: To make or let cocks fight without
spurs (buláng) in order to prepare them for a real encounter in
the cockpit. Dáyon gid lang silá nagapasámpok sang íla manók. They
are always training their cocks for the cock-pit. Ipasámpok ang ímo
manók sa ákon nga manók. Let your cock try its strength against my
cock. Pasampokón ta ang áton mga manók. Come, we'll let our cocks
fight each other.

_pasámsam_, Caus. of sámsam--to taste, try.

_pasamústra_, (Sp. pasar, muestra) Only for appearances, coldly formal,
not wholeheartedly or sincerely. Pasamústra lang ang íya pagtámbong
dirí, ang íya pagágda sa ákon, etc. His attending here is a mere
formality, his invitation to me is far from hearty, etc. (cf. alakápa,
dílì hutúhut, pakuláhaw).

_pasámwad_, Caus. of sámwad--to extend, prolong, progress, etc.

_pás-an_, To carry--, bear--, on the shoulders, to shoulder,
undergo. Pas-aná lang iníng kawáyan. Carry this bamboo on your
shoulder. Papas-aná (Papas-aní) ang bátà sing káhoy. Let the boy
carry some wood on his shoulders. Si Hesús nagpás-an sang mabúg-at
nga krus. Jesus bore (carried) the heavy cross. (cf. dalá, pangabága,
ántus, batás).

_pasánag_, To make light, enlighten, brighten, shed light upon, to
light or clear up, illuminate. Pasanági ang kwárto, kay madulúm. Let
some light into the room, for it is dark. Pinasanágan níya ang
ámon pagpanáug sa hágdan. He lighted us down the staircase. Kon
saráng nímo kamí mapasanágan sinâ pagapasalamátan námon. If you can
make that clear to us we shall be grateful. (Note the accent in the
following). Nasanagán na nga----. It is proved that----. Kon masanagán
ang íya salâ silótan siá sing nagakaígò. If his fault can be proven
(brought to light) he will be punished accordingly. (pa, sánag).

_pasánaw, pasanáaw_, To brighten, make clear, illuminate. (cf. sanáaw,
sánaw, pasánag).

_pasánaw_, See pasánay.

_pasánay_, Caus. of sánay--to ooze out, trickle, etc.

_pasándig_, To lean or let lean against, rest against, lean or
rely upon, hold or support oneself by. Ipasándig ang kawáyan sa
díngding. Lean the bamboo against the wall. Pasandigá ang masakít sa
ulúnan. Let the sick man lean against the pillow. Ipasándig mo ang
pagsúgid sang ímo mga salâ sa mga sógò sang Diós. In telling your sins
follow the order of the commandments of God. Ang mga ímol nagapasándig
sang íla pagláum sa kaló-oy sang Diós kag sang íla isigkatáo. The
poor have their hope set on (lean, rest their hope upon) the mercy
of God and of their fellowmen. (cf. sándig).

_pásang_, Very busy, much occupied, giving much work; to be (keep)
very busy, have much to do, etc. Pásang gid karón ang pagpamánggas sing
maís. At this time the planting of corn is in full swing. Nagapásang
gid ang áni sa súbung siní. Just now the rice harvest is--in
full swing,--at its height. This is the busiest time of the rice
harvest. (cf. sákò, himásang).

_pasánghid_, To test by, compare with, liken to; to have examined,
tested. Pasanghirá ang platéro sang ímo buláwan, agúd mahibál-an mo
kon matáas ukón manobô. Have your gold tested by the goldsmith that you
may know whether it is of high or low value (grade). Pasanghirá siá sa
(sang) imo mga buluhatón kag masáyran mo kon may ikasángkol siá ukón
walâ. Test him by putting him to work at what you have in hand and you
will find out whether he has any capacity for it or not. Ipasánghid
mo siá sa kay Fuláno. Compare him with N.N. Have him examined by N.N.

_pasángkad_, To widen, broaden. (pa, sángkad). Kon may pílak lang kitá
nga hilinguyángon mahapús kaáyo ang pagpatigáyon sing mga kaayóhan
kag saráng man náton mapasángkad kag mapatahúm ang mga dálan sang
bánwa. If only we had the money to spend, it would be quite easy
to make improvements and we could then also widen and embellish the
streets of the town.

_pasáng-pásang_, Dim. and Freq. of pásang. Nagapasángpásang na
ang pagtánum. Rice-planting is now getting pretty well under way,
(providing employment for a considerable number of people).

_pasáog_, Caus. of sáog--to crawl, creep.

_pasá-pása_, To hand over from one to another, to extradite, to deliver
under custody from one place to another; to pass repeatedly from one
person or place to another. (cf. pasár).

_pasapatílya_, To provide with slippers or shoes, etc. Pasapatilyahí
siá. Buy her or provide her with slippers. (sapatílya).

_pasapayán_, To do something with complete indifference as to the
outcome, be regardless of consequences. Nagapasapayán lang siá sang
paggámà sing kawáyan sa búlan sa Húlyo. He cuts down bamboos with the
utmost unconcern during the month of July. Indì mo pagpasapayanán ang
ímo pagtoón. Don't be easy-going about your studies. Ginapasapayanán
gid lang níya ang tanán nga mga pagtoloóhan. He regards all creeds
with indifference. (pa, sapayán).

_pasapórte_, (Sp. pasaporte) Passport; free license; furlough.

_pasapút_, To give shelter or lodging to, to shelter, lodge, let
stay or remain under one's roof. Sa panahón sang gáling si Fuláno
nagapasapút sing madámò nga mga mamumugón sa íya baláy. At the
season of sugar-milling N.N.--gives lodging in his house to many
workmen,--lodges many workmen in his house. (pa, sapút).

_pasapút_, To cover or line with cloth, dress with cloth. Pasaputá
siá sang lungón. Let him cover the coffin with cloth (stuck or nailed
to the wood). (cf. sapút).

_pasár_, (Sp. pasar) To pass, go by or through, be successful in
an examination, etc. Nakapasár siá sa eksámen--or--napasarán níya
ang eksámen. He passed the examination. Papasará--or--papasahá siá
sa eksámen. Let him pass the examination. Indì ka makapasár dirâ,
kay masíot gid ang dálan. You cannot get through there, for the road
is densely overgrown. Daw sa índì siá makapasár, kay matámad siá
magtoón. He will scarcely be able to pass, because he is so lazy at
his lesson. (cf. ági, lubás, lígad; luás).

_pasaríring_, (B) To do little by little, a little at a time, pay
slowly, by instalment, not at once, not in a lump sum, not cash
down. Ginapasariríngan lang níya akó sang íya nga hinákay, walâ
siá magabáyad sing tingúb. He pays me the rent or lease in small
instalments, not in a lump sum.

_pasát-um_, Caus. of sát-um--to guess, fathom, understand.

_pasáut_, Caus. of sáut--to dance. The phrase "mapasáut siá sa bokóg"
(Literally: He can be made to dance on a "bokóg" (fish-bone, rib,
or the like) means: He has no will or reason of his own, he is ready
to believe or to execute whatever he is told to.

_pás-aw_, To thwart, frustrate, balk, obstruct, cross, bring to
nought or naught, bring to nothing. Napas-awán siá kag naparót sa
íya nga katuyoán. He was thwarted and his plans were--brought to
naught,--rendered of no avail. (cf. lugáw-an, gamón, pamalábag).

_pasáw_, A kind of plant with a large red bud and flower.

_pasáy_, All, one and all, every one, only, nothing else. See pulús id.

_pasáy_, To take a meal without rice or bread, eat only good
side-dishes, especially meat and fish. Indì ka magpasáy sang súd-an,
kóndì magkáon ka man sing kán-on. Don't eat side-dishes only, but
take some rice as well. Indì mo pagpasayón ang manók. Don't eat only
chicken. (cf. páskon).

_pasáyan_, A shrimp, small lobster.

_pasayáng_, To display, show off, walk about in public, strut about, go
about ostentatiously, parade oneself; to waste, squander. (cf. paámpag,
patúyang, pabugál, pakitâkitâ).

_pasayáng-sayáng_, Dim. and Freq. of pasayáng. Dílì gid ángay kag dílì
siá dápat magpasayángsayáng sa pagtámbong sa amó nga katipúnan. It
is not proper and she must not parade herself by going to that
party. Ginbátyag níya ang dakô nga kahangáwà sa pagpasayáng-sayáng
sang íya mga panghunâhúnà kag katuyoán. He was very much afraid
(that he might be led) to show (betray) his thoughts and plans. Indì
mo ipasayáng-sayáng ang ímo pagkasampáton. Don't parade your
accomplishments.

_pasáylo_, Shifting, displacement, removal; pardon, forgiveness; to let
or order to pass over--, shift--, move--, transfer--, to somebody else
or to some other place; to forgive, forget, pardon. Pasaylohá lang ang
íya sayúp. Pardon his mistake (fault). Pasaylohá siá sa isá ka síya
dídto. Let him take one of the chairs over there. (cf. sáylo; patáwad).

_pasáyod_, Caus. of sáyod--to know, etc. Also noun: Aviso, advice,
information, news, communication, intimation, announcement.

_pásdà_, Donation, gift, prize, premium. (cf. regálo, dúlut, bugáy,
hátag, pádya, prémyo).

_paseár_, (Sp. pasear) To take--, go for--, a walk, take a
constitutional, to go out for--a walk,--the sake of recreation,
to take--, go for--, a stroll. Mapaseár kitá. Let us go for a
walk. Pasearí si Fuláno buás sa ága. Walk over to N.N. tomorrow
morning. Ginapasearán sang mga pamatán-on ang baybáyon. The young
folks are strolling on the beach. (cf. lágaw, paliwálíwa, lagúyaw,
pahangínhángin).

_paséo_, (Sp. paseo) A walk, stroll, constitutional; to walk, take a
walk, go for a walk. Nagaanó kamó dirí? A, nagapaséo lang kamí. What
are you doing here?--Oh, we are just taking a walk. Magpaséo kamó
ánay kag ugáling magpanihápon. Go out for a walk first and then have
supper. (cf. paseár, etc.).

_pasi_--, See under nasi--, nasig--. (pasig--).

_pási_, A kind of tree.

_pásì_, Unhulled rice mixed with hulled rice after pounding.

_pasíbag_, To let or cause to quarrel, fight, etc. Pasibága lang
silá. Just let them fight it out (quarrel). Ipasíbag si Fuláno sa
kay Hosé. Get N.N. to pick a quarrel with José. (pa, síbag).

_pasibángdan_, See pabangúd id.

_pasibangúd_, See pabangúd id.

_pasíblong_, (B) To stare at, gaze, look sideways. Pasiblongí
siá. Stare at him. Anó ang ginapasíblong mo. What are you staring
at? (The simple síblong seems to be out of use). (cf. pamúdlat,
lárong).

_pasíbò_, To fit, make fit, adapt, join well, etc. Pasibóa ang tápi
sa lásyo sang pagtúod. Fit the plank well into the grooves of the
upright. (pa, síbò).

_pasibô-síbò_, Dim. and Freq. of pasíbò. Also: to consider, ponder,
study or investigate a question from all angles. Pasibôsibóa iní sing
maáyo. Ponder this well.

_pasíbud_, To entangle, complicate, tangle, ravel, involve. Causative
of síbud.

_pasibúd-síbud_, Dim. and Freq. of pasíbud.

_pasibút-sibút_, To find fault with, criticize, hold--, nurse--,
entertain--, a grudge, harbour a resentment or ill-will, be sullen
or discontented, morose, inclined to quarrel; to complain, grumble,
murmur; to vex, nettle, provoke, exasperate. Ginpasibútsibút
níya sa olíhi si Fuláno sa pagsilíng nga may dalá nga
pagpamuyáyaw:----. He finally exasperated N.N. by using insulting
language saying:----. Nagapasibútsibút siá, kay may katuyoán siá
sa paghalín sa íya agálon. He shows discontent, because he wishes
to leave the service of his master. Nagpasibútsibút siá, kay walâ
siá pagbahíni sing ángay sang palanublíon sang íya ginikánan. He was
nursing a grudge, for he was not given a fair share of the inheritance
left by his parent. (cf. síb-ut, pasingít, pasalóksalók, pasisíng-al,
pasosóng-ol).

_pasidungúg_, To honour equally with--, in company with--, others,
etc. Tambongán man nínyo kag pasidúnggan ang kaadláwan sang ámon
Patrón. You should also come to assist and give honour to our Patron
Saint. (cf. dungúg, padungúg).

_pasiénsya_, (Sp. paciencia) Patience, forbearance, endurance,
sufferance, toleration; to have patience, be patient with, put up with,
bear with, pardon, forgive. Pasiensyahá lang siá. Pardon (forgive)
him. Pasiensyahí lang siá. Have patience with him. Bear with him.

_pasig_--, See under nasig--.

_pasíga_, Caus. of síga--to shine, give light, etc. Ginpasigáhan akó
níya sang íya mga matá. He looked at me with shining eyes.

_pasiguná, pasig-uná_, To vie or compete with, strive with, contend
with, try to be (come) first. (cf. panguná, paunáuná, paindísíndis).

_pasigúro_, To make sure, assure, insure; assurance,
insurance. Pasigúro sang kabúhì. Life-insurance. Nagpasigúro siá sang
íya baláy. He insured his house. Ipasigúro ang ímo tiénda. Insure your
shop. Pasiguróha ang pánday kon sán-o siá magasúgud sa pagpatíndog
(magpatíndog) sang baláy. Get the carpenter to say definitely when
he will commence (start, begin) building the house. Saráng akó
makapasigúro sa ímo nga----. I can assure you that----. (cf. segúro,
pamatúod, pasálig).

_pasikót-síkot_, Caus. of sikót-síkot. Also: Arrangement, contrivance,
means, machination, resources. Sa madámò nga pasikótsíkot----. By many
(Through various) means----. (cf. pahitôhítò, padihútan, patúga).

_pasíkto_, To expostulate, remonstrate, ask questions, investigate,
demand an explanation, call to account. Pasiktohá siá. Remonstrate
with him. Ask him. Call him to account. (pasúkti id.).

_pásil_, Hardened, etc. See básil. Also: A sand-bank, shallow (in a
river or sea); to be or become shallow.

_pasilabó, pasilabô_, (H) Caus. of silabó--to stand on end, be
erect. Also: to inflame, raise up, encourage, inspire, instigate,
incite, warm up.

_pasilábo_, See pasilabó.

_pasilabút_, To meddle, interfere, intervene, have to do with, take
a hand in, put one's nose in. See pahilabút.

_pasilíng_, Caus. of silíng--to say, etc.

_pasilíng_, Caus. of silíng--to shine, be bright or polished, etc.

_pasilíng--síling, pasilíng-silíng_, Dim. and Freq. of pasilíng.

_pasílong_, (H) To shelter (intransitive), to take--, seek--, find--,
shelter,--refuge,--cover,--protection (against rain, the heat of the
sun, etc.). Pasílong (mapasílong) kitá ánay, kay nagaulán. Let us
take shelter, for it is raining. Papasilónga siá sa ímo páyong. Let
him stand under your umbrella. Ipasílong ang karabáw sa idálum sang
páhò. Put the buffalo under the mango tree for shelter. Shelter the
buffalo under the mango tree. (cf. sílong).

_pasimáng_, Caus. of simáng--to go astray, etc.

_pasímbog_, Caus. of símbog--to mix, mingle.

_pasimpalád_, Hazard, risk, venture; to risk it, chance it, trust
to chance, to stake or try one's fortune (luck), to hazard, venture;
risky, chancy, hazardous. Sugál nga pasimpalád. A game of hazard or
chance. Sa pasimpalád nga paági----. In a risky way----. Trusting to
chance----. (cf. pálad, kapaláran).

_pasímpon_, (H) Caus. of símpon--to join, associate, etc.

_pasímput_, Caus. of símput--to connect closely, bring near together.

_pasinág_, To make transparent, pellucid, translucent. (cf. sinág).

_pasínaw_, Caus. of sínaw. To make clear, clean, bright, transparent.

_pasíndong_, To shelter (intransitive), to seek shelter, go under a
roof, etc. See pasílong.

_pasingádto_, To go, move about, take a direction away from the
speaker. (cf. kádto, pakádto).

_pasingadtoán_, Place to go to or live at; place or position to have
recourse to for relief. Abáw, kasakít sang ákon ngípon kag walâ gid
akó sing pasingadtoán. Oh, how my tooth aches! And I cannot get relief
in any way.

_pasingarí_, To come, arrive, go in the direction of the speaker. Ang
mga táo sa mga dálan sang (dakô) dalágkò nga mga bánwa nagasinumbálì
gid lámang sa íla nga pagpasingádto kag pagpasingarí. People in (on)
the streets of a large town move about in crowds in all directions,
coming and going, passing to and fro. (cf. karí, pakarí).

_pasingáyon_, (B) To request, ask, beg, crave, sue, pray, petition,
solicit, ask a favour. Nagpasingáyon siá sa ákon nga----. He requested
me to----. Ipasingáyon mo akó ánay ikúhà sang ákon maléta dídto sa
baláy ni Fuláno. Please do me the favour of bringing me my handbag
from N.N.'s house. (cf. pangáyo, híngyo).

_pasínggan_, Companion, friend, assistant, one willing and ready to
listen and help. Walâ gid siá sing pasínggan. He had none who would
listen to him, no one to ask or request for help, no one to fall back
upon. (cf. silíng, singganán).

_pasingkálò_, (B) To turn about in all directions, put many questions,
to ply or bewilder with many questions, cross-examine, cross-question,
pump. Ginpasingkálò sang abogádo ang sáksi. The witness was plied
with many questions (cross-examined) by the lawyer. (kálò).

_pasínghot_, To let--, or order to--, smell, etc. Ipasínghot sa íya
iníng búlak. Let him smell this flower. (pa, sínghot).

_pasingít_, To be ill-humoured, morose, ill-natured, ill conditioned,
surly, crabby, crabbed, sullen or discontented, to murmur or complain,
speak badly of. Daláyon gid lang silá nagapasingít. They are always
complaining. Pinasíngtan níya silá. He complained about them. He
spoke badly of them (finding fault with them, or the like).

_pasíngtan_, From pasingít. Also noun: Something to--complain
about,--find fault with, etc. Walâ silá sing pasíngtan. They have
(had) no complaint. They have (had) nothing to complain of (about).

_pasinô_, Caus. of sinô--to sound hollow, etc.

_pasinó_, Thought, idea, opinion; to think, opine. Anó ang
ímo ginapasinó? What do you think? What is your idea or
opinion? (cf. hunâhúnà).

_pasín-o_, To ask one's name, to ask: "Who are you?" Pinadúlug kag
pinasín-o kamí sang polís. The policeman stopped us and asked our
names. Pasinohón mo ang tanán nga mga umalági. Ask all passers-by
their names. Ginpasín-o níya akó. He asked me who I was. (cf. sín-o).

_pasíntak_, To try one's patience, weary another by reluctance or
tardiness in complying with his wishes, ask another for more than he is
willing to give, and the like. Si nánay nagpasíntak lang sa ákon sang
pagpangáyò ko sa íya nga tugútan akó sa pagtámbong sa báyle. Mother
simply tired me out with her objections, when I asked her permission
to assist at the dance. Ang mga bátà sing masamí nagapasíntak sa mga
magtotóon. Children often try or tax heavily the patience of their
teachers. (The simple síntak is out of use).

_pasíntok_, Caus. of síntok. To knock together, strike, crash,
bump, bang, clash, slam, hit, whack, beat, batter, strike together
(with an audible sound). Pasintoká ang íla ólo. Knock their heads
together. Pinasíntok níya ang duhá ka lubí. He bumped the two coconuts
together. Ipasíntok iníng tápì sa sin. Strike this board against the
sheet of roofing iron. (cf. pasúntok).

_pasipád-an_, From pasipála for pasipaláhan.

_pasipákpak_, See pasalipákpak id. Nakahunâhúnà ka áyhan (Nakudúmdum ka
balá) nga íya pasipákpakán ang maáyo níya nga alagarán? Did you perhaps
imagine, that he would fail to consider his (present) good position?

_pasipála_, Insult, blasphemy, discourtesy, disrespect, contumely,
affront, dishonour, indignity, outrage, insolence, an insolent act
or speech; to insult, heap indignity upon, treat vilely, blaspheme,
affront. Indì mo pagpasipaláhan ang ímo ginikánan. Do not insult your
parents. Nagpasipála siá sa Diós. Ginpasipaláhan níya ang Diós. He
has blasphemed God. Anó ang ginapasipála níya sa ímo? How did he
insult you? What insult did he offer you? (cf. tampálas).

_pasíplat_, Caus. of síplat--to get a glimpse of, see accidentally,
etc.

_pasípraw_, (B) Caus. of sípraw--to cast or steal a glance at, see
accidentally. (cf. pasíplat).

_pasisíng-al_, To be ill-humoured, murmur, criticize, find fault with,
be discontented, complain. See pasingít, pasúng-ol, pososóng-ol.

_pasíyaw_, To vie with, contend with, strive with, compete; to
spin whipping tops in competition (to see whose top can spin the
longest). Nagapasíyaw silá sang íla kasíng (trómpo). They are spinning
their whipping tops in competition. (cf. súkat, patáka).

_páskan_, From pások.

_paskín_, (Sp. pasquin) Pasquinade, satire, lampoon; clown; to lampoon,
satirize, ridicule, slander, put to shame by a lampoon in verse,
prose or picture. Ginpaskinán níla si Fuláno. They lampooned N.N.

_páskò_, (B) Easter. Holy Week, Easter Week.

_páskon_, (B) To feast, eat only of good side-dishes without rice
or bread. Indì mo pagpaskonón ang súd-an, kóndì magkáon ka man sing
kán-on. Don't partake of the side-dishes alone, but eat some rice as
well. (cf. pasáy).

_páskua, páskwa_, (Sp. pascua) Feast, banquet, social entertainment
with refreshments; to feast, dine well. (cf. tábad, bádò, bankíti,
punsyón.

_páslang_, Good-for-nothing, useless, dull, stupid, sluggish, inept,
not fit. (cf. pásloy, walâ sing pulús, walâ sing águd, etc.).

_páslaw_, See pasuláw, pasulúng, páslong--to show, exhibit, etc.

_páslong_, A dam, weir, dyke, barrier (across a river, brook, etc.);
to build a dam, weir, etc. (for irrigation or fishing). Paslongá ang
sapâ. Build a dam across the brook. Paslongí ang umá sing túbig. Make
a dam to irrigate the farm. (cf. púnud).

_páslong_, (B) To show, exhibit. See pasulúng id. Ipáslong sa ákon
ang ímo bág-o nga kálò. Show me your new hat.

_pásloy_, Good-for-nothing, etc. See páslang.

_pásmo_, (Sp. pasmo) Spasms, convulsions; stiffness in the limbs with
pain due to overexertion, or to exposure or to having caught a cold;
a slight cold or indisposition.

_páso_, (Sp. paso) Step, stride, pace; gait, walk, pace of a horse
acquired by training; to step briskly. (cf. tikáng).

_pasô_, Burned, scorched; a burn; the place or part that has been
burned. Diín ang ímo pasô? Where is your burn? What part of your body
has been burned?

_pásò_, To scorch, burn superficially or slightly. Napásò (nagkapásò)
ang ákon kamót. My hand has got scorched. Anó ang nakapáso sang ímo
kamót? What burned your hand? (cf. sílab, ílab, irót).

_pasógò_, Caus. of sógò--to order, etc. Indì siá magpasógo. He does
not want to obey. Also: warrant, commission, order, writ.

_pasóg-o_, To oppose, resist, object to, refuse, be stubborn or
refractory. (cf. sóg-o).


_pasóhot_, Caus. of sóhot--to slip in, creep through, etc.

_pasók_, A bamboo receptacle or tube of one joint; the bottom being
closed by a knot; a piece of bamboo of the length that intervenes
between two knots (joints). The "pasók" attached to the fruit
stalk of a coconut palm for collecting the toddy is called a
"salúd"). (cf. talúbtub, bayóng, kawít).

_pások_, To put or wedge in between; hide or bury among. Pasóki or
páski iníng búhò siníng káhoy. Close the hole by driving in this
piece of wood. Ginpások níla ang bakág sa masíot nga tígbaw. They
hid or buried the carrier's basket among dense tigbao-reeds.

_pasolabí, pasolábi_, To prefer, have rather, choose rather, set
above, esteem more highly. Pasolabihá (Pasolabíha) ang matárung nga
pangabúhì sa umalági nga mga kalípay. Prefer an honest life to passing
pleasures. (cf. labí).

_pasolánggà_, A kind of bed-mat. (cf. baníg).

_pasolô_, (B) Caus. of solô. Pasól-i siá. Provide him with a lamp
or light.

_pasólok_, To swell painfully (of breasts containing too much milk,
etc.). Nagapasólok ang íya nga sóso. Her breast is swollen with an
excess of milk.

_pásong_, A bushel (of rice) containing twenty five gantas.

_pasongán_, A measure for a bushel (pásong); manger, crib.

_pasóng-pasóng_, (B) To pant, gasp for breath, breathe heavily,
as one exhausted with running or overexertion. (cf. hápò, hímpok,
hángos, púsnga).

_pasóng-ol_, See pasúng-ol, pasingít, pasosóng-ol.

_pasoób_, Causative of soób--to put on a garment, dress. Ang maáyo
sinâ nga ang amó nga mga laláki magsúklub sing patádyong kag ang íla
mga asáwa pasúb-an (pasoobán) sing sárwal. It would be well, if such
men wore skirts and their wives were permitted to put on trousers.

_pasóop_, To apply a cutting instrument near the ground or root, cut
close or short. Pasoópa ang gúnting sa bohók. Snip the scissors close
to the roots of the hair. Pasoópi ang paggúnting sang ákon bohók. Cut
my hair close or short. Give me a close crop.

_pasó-páso_, Dim. and Freq. of páso. To walk rather briskly. Anó ang
ginapasópáso mo? Why are you stepping out so briskly?

_pasôpasô_, A kind of an ulcerous skin-disease. Its scabs resemble
the scabs of burns. Hence the name.

_pasóso_, To nurse at the breast, give suck to, suckle. Ang ilóy
nagapasóso sang bátà. The mother is giving suck to the baby. Pasós-a
(pasóswa, pasosóha) ang bátà. Nurse the baby at the breast. (cf. pa,
sóso).

_pasôsô_, To insist on an answer, ply with repeated questions in
order to elicit an answer from one who wants to keep silent. Also:
Caus. of sôsô--to press, squeeze, etc.

_pasosóng-ol_, See pasúng-ol, pasisíng-al, pasingít.

_páspas_, To cut down or fell many trees, etc., strike or knock down
with sticks or poles much fruit from branches, etc. Paspasá ang mga
ságing. Cut down the banana-plants. Ginpáspas níya ang mga sangá sang
káhoy. He struck down the branches of the tree. Paspasá ang mga búnga
sang páhò. Knock down the mangoes.

_pásta_, (Sp. pasta) Paste; board-binding; to paste; to bind
books. Pastahí iníng mga papél. Paste these papers together. Líbro
nga napastahán. A book bound in boards.

_pastél_, (Sp. pastel) Pie, cake, pastry; pastel, coloured crayon.

_pastilán_, An exclamation denoting admiration, contempt or dislike;
a curse; fie, whew, pshaw. Pastilán, mapáti akó sinâ? Pshaw, do you
think I believe that? Pastilán si Fuláno. N.N. be damned. Let N.N. go
to--the dickens,--the deuce,--the devil,--hell. (cf. gátud, sárot,
yáwà, líntì, abáw).

_pastór, pastóres_, (Sp. pastor) Pastor, Protestant clergyman;
shepherd. (cf. bántay, manugbántay, magbalántay).

_pastóra_, (Sp. pastora) Shepherdess; doll.

_pasúbà_, Caus. of súbà--to go up river, etc. Buás pasubáon ko si
Fuláno. Tomorrow I'll order N.N. to go up river.


_pasubâ_, To go towards the river, travel in the direction of
the mountains. Nagapasubâ siá. He is on his way--towards the
river,--towards the mountains.

_pasubâ_, A fish trap for catching fish swimming (coming upstream or
from the sea); to catch fish with such a trap. Pasubaán ta ang mga
ísdà. Let us catch fish by the pasubâ-method. (cf. pailíg).

_pasubô_, To sadden, make sad, etc. (cf. subô).

_pasubó_, To harden, steel, make brittle, etc. (cf. subó).

_pasúg-ak_, To cause to spirt, make flow, etc. (cf. súg-ak).

_pasúg-o_, See pasóg-o--to oppose, resist, etc.

_pasúkti_, To ask questions, call to account, etc. See pasíkto.

_pasulábi, pasulabí_, See pasolabí--to prefer, etc.

_pasulangán_, Enclosure within the enclosed space (bunóan) of a
large fish-corral or fish-trap. There is no escape for fish that have
entered the pasulangán. (cf. súlang).

_pasulát_, Caus. of sulát--to write. Also: to enlist, enroll,
register. (cf. palísta).

_pasuláw_, (B) To show, etc. Caus. of suláw--to see, look
at. (cf. páslong, pasulúng, pakítà).

_pasulíp_, Caus. of sulíp. Also: to cast a glance upon, direct one's
eyes upon, see, notice. Pinasulipán silá níya sang íya mga matá. He
noticed them, glanced at them. (cf. pasíplat, pasíblong).

_pasulúd_, To make enter, allow to enter, let come in, fill or
put--in,--into,--inside. Pasúdla ang mga bátà sa simbáhan. Make
the children enter the church. Order the children to come into
the church. Ipasulúd mo iníng láta sa aparadór. Put this tin
in the cupboard. Pasúdli ang sugâ sing agás. Fill the lamp with
kerosene. Madámò nga mga bátà walâ na mapasulúd sa buluthóan, kay
kúlang ang mga hulút kag kúlang man ang mga manunúdlò. Many children
could not be admitted any more into the school, owing to lack of room
and of teachers. (pa, sulúd). The phrase: "ímo lang dirâ ang pasúdla"
means: "Mind your own business". "Look after your own affairs".

_pasulúng_, (B) To show, exhibit, let another have a look at,
etc. Pasúlnga siá sinâ--or--ipasulúng sa íya inâ. Let him have a
look at it. Ginpasulúng (ginpáslong) níya sa ákon ang mga galamitón
nga bág-o lang níya nabakál. He showed me the furniture he had just
bought. (pa, sulúng).

_pasulúng_, (H) To let shine through, make transparent, etc. Ang ínit
nagpasulúng sang dugô sa íya nga písngi. The heat caused the blood to
shine through his cheeks. The heat made his cheeks red. (pa, sulúng).

_pasúlung_, (H) To make pay taxes, etc.; to collect taxes,
etc. Ginpasúlung níya akó sang buhís sang ákon umá. He made me pay
my land-tax. (pa, súlung).

_pasúlung_, (H) To make or let challenge, etc. Ipasúlung mo sa íya si
Fuláno. Let him challenge N.N. Get him to challenge N.N. (pa, súlung).

_pasúmpà_, To make swear, put on one's oath, administer an
oath. (cf. súmpà).

_pasúmpak_, To let splice, etc. (pa, súmpak).

_pasumpíya_, To cause to move up and down. To shake up and down, to
toss, rock, etc. Ang mga balúd nagapasumpíya sang sakayán. The waves
are rocking the boat. Pasumpiyáha ang kabáyo. Gallop the horse. (pa,
sumpíya; cf. pahumbíya id).

_pasúmpung_, To cause to make opposition, etc. Ipasúmpung sa íya si
Fuláno. Put up N.N. in opposition to him. (pa, súmpung).

_pasunáid_, Consideration, thoughtful regard for, appreciation of
conditions or circumstances; to be considerate, have proper regard
or appreciation for. Talamáyon ang táo nga walâ sing pasunáid
kag patugsíling sa íya isigkaparého. Contemptible is the man that
has no consideration and regard for his neighbour. Pasunaíra ang
makaloló-oy nga kahimtángan níya. Have some consideration for
his wretched condition. Papasunaíron mo siá sang kaimolón sang
sádto ánay ábyan níya. Let him consider the poverty of his former
friend. (cf. patugsíling).


_pasúngay_, To let, make, or cause to, push with the horns. (pa,
súngay).

_pasúng-ol_, Aversion, dislike, repugnance, disinclination, opposition
of mind; to have a--dislike for,--repugnance to, etc.

_pasúni, pasúnì_, Report, rumour, assertion, allegation, pretext,
subterfuge; to allege, spread a false report, etc. Sa pasúni
nga----. Under the pretext of----. (cf. súni).

_pasunód_, To let, make, order or cause to follow. Pasúndi ang mga
báka sang mga karabáw. Let the buffaloes follow the cows. Pasúnda
siá sa ímo. Order him to follow you. Ipasunúd ko sa ímo iníng bátà. I
will let this boy follow you--or--send this boy after you. Maáyo ang
pagpasunúd sang bág-o nga mga punoán. The orders of the new authorities
are good. (pa, sunúd).

_pasúntok_, Caus. of súntok. (cf. pasíntok).

_pasúpil_, To give way, give in, yield, throw up the sponge, give up
opposition, withdraw from a controversy, etc. Indì ka magpasúpil. Don't
give in. (cf. patubaríng, paubág, padaúg id.).

_pasúri_, To arrange or adapt with care, examine, go over
again. Ipasúri ang ímo sulát, kay básì may mga sayúp. Have your
letter looked over (Have someone look over your writing); there may
be mistakes. (cf. súri).

_pasúyon_, Caus. of súyon--to be easy, etc. Also: to take things easy,
let things take their course without opposition, wink at, tolerate,
allow to pass or go on. Indì mo pagpasuyónan inâ. Don't allow that to
pass or go on (without notice or opposition). Ginapasuyónan gid lang
sang ginikánan ang maláin nga batásan sang íla nga anák. The parents
wink at (connive, do not interfere with) the bad habits of their son.

_pasúyut_, To please oneself, do what one likes, follow one's own
inclination. Buút siá magpasúyut sang tanán níya nga luyáglúyag. She
wants to have all her whims satisfied.

_pasyár_, (Sp. pasear) See paseár--to take a stroll, etc.

_páta_, (Sp. pata) Leg including the foot (of an animal, of a chair,
table, etc.). (cf. kahíg, tiíl, páa).

_páta_, A kind of fish-trap about three yards long.

_pataás-táas_, To be proud, haughty, stuck-up, uppish, overbearing;
to highten, heighten, raise, elevate, make slightly higher, add a
little to the height of. (pa, taástáas).

_patábà_, To sell land. Ginpatábà níya sa ákon ang íya umá. He sold
me his field or farm. Ipatábà lang sa ákon iníng dútà. Just sell me
this land. (pa, tábà).

_patabák_, To strain, filter or percolate water through ashes, to
make lye. Patabák--or--magpatabák ka sing abó. Prepare some lye. Abó
nga pinatabák. Ashes from which lye has been extracted. Ashes full
of concentrated lye.

_patában_, Caus. of tában--to snatch, etc. Also: to kidnap; elope.

_patábang_, To ask for assistance or help; to let--, order--,
cause to--, assist. Ipatábang mo siá sa kay José. Let José assist
him. Nagpatábang siá sa ákon. He asked my help. He asked me to help
him. (pa, tábang).

_patábas_, Caus. of tábas--to cut (clothes, etc.). Mapatábas akó sa
sástre sing isá ka delárgo. I'll get the tailor to make me a pair of
trousers. Ipatábas ko sa sástre iníng heneró. I will let the tailor
cut this cloth. Patabási si tótò sing puróy, kay dakô na. Let a pair
of short trousers (knickerbockers) be made for the boy, for he is
quite big now. Tatáy, patabási akó sing bág-o nga báyò. Please father,
have a new jacket (dress) made for me.

_patabáyag_, To jump, leap, gambol, skip, frisk, run about,
scamper off, as kids or lambs or frolicsome (frolicking)
children. (cf. patarípad, hinúgyaw).

_patabíd_, Caus. of tabíd--to bind, etc. Ipatabíd ko ang ákon
báka sa ímo karabáw. I will have my cow fastened or tied to your
buffalo. Patabirí iníng búgsok sang higót sang ímo kabáyo. Have your
horse hitched (tied) to this post.

_patábò_, To meet, welcome, receive (guests, etc.). (cf. tábò).

_patábos_, (B) To let, etc. penetrate or flow through. Malakát na
kitá; patabóson ta lang ang ulán sa áton panápton, kay madúgay pa
maghúlaw. Let us go now; we shall let the rain wet our clothes, for it
will last a long time yet before it stops. (pa, tábos). (cf. patahós).

_patáboy_, To let or make sag (as a hammock, etc.). (pa, táboy).

_patád_, Stake, bet, wager; to stake, bet, wager. Magpatád ka lang
sing ápat ka sentimós--or--ipatád mo lang ang ápat ka sentimós. Make a
bet of four centavos. Napúlò ka písos ang íya nga ginpatád. He staked
ten pesos.

_patádul_, To make submissive, keep down or low, treat without
consideration. (cf. tádul).

_patádyong_, A kind of skirt worn by Philippine women. (cf. ámpis,
tápis).

_patág_, An open field, free space. Ang patág sang pagawáyan. The
(open) field of battle.

_pátag_, To be or become level. Nagpátag na iníng lugár, kay ginpapátag
níla. This space has become smooth (level) now, for they have had
it levelled.

_patágnak_, To shed (tears). (pa, tágnak).

_patágò_, Caus. of tágò. To let, etc. hide, preserve. Patagóa siá sang
ímo kwárta. Let him guard your money. Let him put your money in a safe
place. Ipatágò sa íya ang ímo aláhas. Entrust your jewelry to him for
safe keeping. Patagói siá sang ímo kwárta. Let him be the guardian
of your money. Ginpatágò níla ang mga síngsing nga buláwan. They had
their golden rings--hidden (hid),--put in hiding.

_patahós_, To let penetrate, etc. See patábos. (cf. tahós).

_patáid, pataíd, patá-id_, To compare with, liken to; to compete, vie
with, try to match or to outdo. Ipataíd lang iní sa----. Just compare
this to----. Ang mapísan nga táo ginapataíd sa putyókan. A diligent
man is likened to a bee. (cf. paánggid, pasánghid, pasíyaw, súkat).

_patáka_, To match, compete, vie with. See súkat, pasíyaw.

_patáka_, Aversion, repugnance; tiresome, unpleasant, disgusting,
nauseous, repugnant. Patáka nga trabáho. A tedious or unpleasant kind
of work. (cf. pasúng-ol, makataláka).

_pataká_, To cause disgust, make tired of, etc. (pa, taká).

_patákas_, To let--, order to--, go on land, to land, disembark, cause
to leave the water. Ginpatákas níla ang mga sumalákay sa Manílà. They
landed the passengers at Manila. Patakása ang karabáw sa tulúgban,
sa sapâ, etc. Get the buffalo out of the bathing hole, the brook, etc.

_patákay_, Caus. of tákay--to spend for, contribute towards, lavish
upon.

_paták-paták_, Distributed singly rather far from each other, scattered
sparsely or thinly, applied to houses, etc. See atákaták id.

_patálang_, Caus. of tálang. To let, or cause to, err, to lead astray,
misdirect, mislead.

_patalás_, To make smooth or slippery, to oil or grease (a machine,
cart, etc.). Ipatalás iníng síbo sa alíling sang kángga. Use this
grease to make the cart-wheel turn with ease. Use this grease to
lubricate the cart-wheel with. Patalasí ang tutúnlan (tubúg) mo sing
tagábang. Ease your throat by eating tagábang. (cf. talás, patánlas).

_patál-as_, To cause to run away or flow off; to disperse, drive away,
put to flight; to disappear, vanish. (cf. tál-as).

_patálaw_, Caus. of tálaw--to be a coward, etc. Also: to be cowed,
permit oneself to be bluffed, imposed upon or intimidated, etc. Indì
ka magpatálaw sa íya. Don't let him bluff (override) you. Don't allow
him to intimidate you. Don't be afraid of him.

_patálbo_, Caus. of tálbo--to rise, etc. Patalbohá ang yáb-ok. Let
(make) the dust rise.

_patalúm_, To sharpen, hone, etc. Caus. of talúm--to be sharp,
cutting well, etc.

_patalupángud, patalupangúd_, Caus. of talupángud--to pay attention to,
consider or ponder over well, etc. Patalupángda siá sing maáyo sang
íya mga buluhatón. Let him weigh well what he has to do. Ipatalupángud
sa íya iníng katarúngan. Present this argument or reason for his
consideration. (cf. pamalándong).

_patámà, patamâ_, To exceed, do to excess, overdo, overstep the
mark, go beyond the limit, affect too much; cause to exceed,
etc. Ginpatám-an níya siá sing mga ilímnon nga makahulúbug. He
went beyond the limit in treating him to intoxicating drinks. Ayáw
pagpatám-i sing pangabúdlay ang mga bátà. For heaven's sake, do not
overwork the children. (cf. támà, palakás).

_patamád-támad, patamád-tamád_, To be indolent, lazy, negligent,
to neglect. Ginapatamád-tamáran níla ang amó nga mga butáng. They
are lazy (negligent, careless) about those matters. (cf. támad).

_patámba_, Caus. of támba--to throw in, give a baker's dozen,
etc. Patambahí akó sing isá ka gántang. See to it that I be given
one ganta free (over, for luck, thrown in). Have one ganta thrown in
gratis for me. (cf. paáman, padúgang).

_patám-is_, To sweeten, make sweet. Patam-isá ang tsa. Sweeten
the tea. Ang maáyo nga kalingáwlingáwan nagapatám-is sang
pangabúhì. Healthy recreations sweeten life. Ang mahágò nga pangabúdlay
ginapatám-is sang mahál nga sóhol. Heavy work is sweetened by good
wages (pay). (pa, tám-is).

_patándà_, Caus. of tándà--to mark, etc.

_patandâ-tándà_, Marksmanship; to practise shooting at a target,
etc. Also Dim. of patándà. Nagapatandâtándà silá sang pagpalupók
sang íla mga lúthang. They are practising rifle-shooting (marking
down the hits).

_patánì_, A kind of beans that are rather flat in shape.

_patánlas_, To smooth, make smooth or slippery, etc. See
patalás. (cf. tánlas, talás).

_patántan_, See pahánhan. Patantaná ánay ang ímo kináon. Let the food
you have eaten--settle first,--have time to settle first.

_patáo_, To bring forth a child, give birth to, be delivered of a
child. Napatáo siá sa----. He was born in----. (cf. táo, pataótáo).

_patáo_, To hire a workman, engage or employ a labourer. Mapatáo kitá
sing limá sa buás. Tomorrow we shall employ--, give employment to--,
give work to--, five men. Pataóhan ko ang ákon talámnan sing napúlò,
agúd madalî mahíl-ob. I shall hire ten workmen for my farm in order
to finish the work quickly. Pataóhi ánay ang ímo baláy, kon buút ka
magupúd sa ámon. Get someone to look after your house, if you wish
to come with us. (cf. táo).

_pataó-táo_, To give birth to, bring forth--, be delivered of--,
a child, be in labour, to travail. Nagapataótáo siá. She is
giving birth. She is in--labour,--travail,--the throes (pangs) of
childbirth. (cf. bátà, bún-ag).

_patápuk_, Caus. of tápuk. To exile, expel; hide or conceal oneself,
etc. Katúlad siá sang isá ka táo nga nagpatápuk sa isá ka palanagoán
nga índì makítan. He was like a man who had concealed himself in a
hiding place, so that he could not be seen.

_patapúk_, Caus. of tapúk. To spoil, wear out, make fragile, etc.

_patápus_, To end, make an end of, bring to--an end,--a
close,--termination, get through, carry through, get done with, go
through with, to let or make terminate, etc. Patapúsa siá ánay sang
íya sulát. Let him first finish his letter. Ipatápus mo lang sa íya
ang ímo aradohón. Let him now finish your ploughing. (cf. tápus).

_patarámhak_, (B) Thoughtless, careless, indifferent, negligent; to be
thoughtless, etc.; to act carelessly, etc. (cf. tarámhak, patarásak).

_patarásak_, Caus. of tarásak. Careless, negligent, thoughtless,
slovenly; to do carelessly, negligently, indifferently, slovenlily.

_patarátas_, See patarásak. Ginpatarátas (Ginpatarásak) gid lang
níla ang íla trabáho. They do their work very carelessly, in a very
negligent manner, very negligently. They are very negligent (careless,
indifferent) about their work.

_patarípad_, To run swiftly, race or scamper off (like the
wind). Abáw nagapatarípad ang bátà paúlì, kay mahádluk nga hanóton kon
magab-ihán. By Jove (There now), the boy is racing home like the wind,
for he is afraid to get a whipping, if he is overtaken by night.

_patás_, Equal, of the same standard or quality, alike. Walâ sing
patás nga pagkabutá kóndì ang íya sang índì buút makakítà. There
is no blindness equal to the blindness of him who does not want to
see. (cf. tupúng).


_pátas_, Undecided, tie, dead heat, draw, drawn game, neither winning
nor losing, equal, even, level, quits, square; to be equal, to neither
win nor lose. Pátas (nagpátas, nagpatasáy) gid lang kamí. None
of us won or lost. We are (were) equal. We tied. Our points were
equal. (cf. patás).

_patásak_, Caus. of tásak--to step in or through, etc. Pinatasákan
níya silá sang kabáyo. He galloped through them on horseback.

_patátas_, (Sp. patata) Potato. Bákli akó sing patátas. Buy me some
potatoes. Patátas nga kiníhad. Sliced potatoes.

_pátaw, patáw_, (B) Any solid addition, especially meat, in broth. Walâ
sing pátaw iníng sabáw. In this broth there is nothing solid or
substantial. A, malás-ay ang sabáw dídto, kay kúlang ang pátaw. Oh
dear, the broth there was no good, for it was short of solid morsels
or ingredients.

_patáw_, A float of a seine. Light wooden balls are often used as
floats for fishing nets. (cf. pamató--sinker).

_pát-aw_, To make an omission, to skip, leave a bare space or gap. Indì
mo pagpat-awón ang pagpánggas sing maís. Don't leave any gaps when
planting corn. (cf. lúkhò, láktaw, páthaw).

_patáwad_, Pardon, remission, forgiveness, amnesty; to pardon,
grant pardon, condone, absolve, remit, forgive, let off, acquit,
reprieve. Patawára siá. Pardon him. Let him off. Indì mapatáwad
ang salâ kon walâ sing paghinúlsul. Without contrition sin cannot
be forgiven. Patawára lang siá siní nga sayúp. Forgive him this
fault. (cf. pasáylo).

_patáwhay_, Caus. of táwhay. Also: to be quiet, make no stir. Dílì mo
inâ paagíhon sa pakúsug, kóndì sa patáwhay. Don't try to settle that by
an appeal to force, but by peaceful (conciliatory) means. Patawhayá
silá. Make them--keep the peace,--lead a tranquil life. Pacify
them. Nagpatáwhay siá sang íya nga panghámbal. He spoke slowly and
quietly. He talked with impressive restraint (dignity). Patáwhay
kamó. Be quiet. Don't stir.

_pat-áwpát-aw_, Dim. and Freq. of pát-aw. Indì mo pagpat-áwpat-awón
ang pagbása. Don't leave out anything in reading. Don't skip words
or lines. (cf. lukhôlúkhò, laktáwláktaw).

_patáy_, Dead, killed, deceased, demised, departed, defunct, lifeless,
said of any living organism; gone out, stopped, not functioning (of
lamps, fire, clocks, machines, etc.); to cause death, to kill, put to
death, take (a man's) life, slay, murder, slaughter, massacre, do or
make away with, put an end to, despatch. Dúgay na nga patáy siá. He
is dead a long time. He died long ago. Patáy na ang kaláyo. The
fire has gone out. Patáy na ang motór. The motor does not go (is
not working) any more. Pátya siá. Kill him. Indì ka magpatáy. Thou
shalt not kill. Sín-o ang nagpatáy sa íya? Who killed him? Pátya
ang sugâ. Put out the lamp (light). Napatáy siá nga walâ na maabúti
sang manugbúlung. He died before the doctor (physician) could reach
him. Pinatáy (Ginpatáy) siá sang mga buyóng. He was murdered (killed)
by the robbers. Yanáng baláy napátyan sing makaduhá sa sulúd sang
isá ka búlan. Within a month two persons died in that house. Ipatáy
akó ánay siníng haló. Please kill this iguana for me. (cf. kamátay,
matáy, kamatáyon, tagumatáyon, himatayón, panginmatáy, minatáy,
húy-od, múy-od, músduk, paalumátay, namátyan).

_patayá-táya_, To sit or lie down comfortably or snugly, to snuggle,
settle, nestle or rest at ease. Nagapatayátáya siá sa íya nga
butáka. He is resting comfortably in his arm-chair.

_patáy-kaló-oy, patáykalóoy_, Cruel, merciless, heartless, unmoved by
pity, rough, relentless, unrelenting. Táo nga patáykalóoy. A ruffian. A
brutal, cruel fellow. A man bereft of all feelings of humanity.

_patayonán_, Conduit, channel, etc. See palatayonán, palatáynan.

_patayótay_, To prolong, protract, be long at, take a long time,
be occupied with for a long time. Nagpatayótay kamí kagáb-i sang ámon
sugilánon. Last night we were conversing together for a long time. Indì
kamó magpatayótay sang ínyo pagkáon. Don't be long taking--, at--,
your meal. Patayotáya lang ang ímo pagbántay dirâ. Keep on the lookout
there for a long time. Patayotáyi siá sang ímo sugilánon. Detain him
for a good while by your conversation (with your talk). (cf. paútus,
paláwig).

_patáy-pátay_, To work very hard, work oneself to death. Nagapatáypátay
siá sang pangabúdlay nga isagúd níya sa íya mga anák. He works
very hard for the support of his children. (cf. putóy-pútoy) Also:
very much, excessive. Nagkádlaw siá sing patáypátay. He laughed very
much. He was tickled to death.

_pátdan_, Short lengths of sugar-cane used for planting, cuttings
of sugar-cane.

_pátdan_, For patadán, patarán from patád--to stake, etc.

_paténte_, (Sp. patente) Patent; Benediction of the Blessed
Sacrament. May paténte karón sa hápon. This afternoon there will be
Exposition and Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament.

_páthaw_, See pát-aw--to skip, etc.

_páthaw_, To guess, surmise, opine, think, suppose. (cf. máy-om,
lágpat, pakót, bánà, bántà, hunâhúnà).

_patháw-páthaw_, Dim. and Freq. of páthaw.

_páti_, Together with, equally, at the same time, both, including
both, as well as, and. Ang nagakaígò nga pangabúdlay maáyo sa láwas
páti kalág. Suitable labour is good for both body and soul. Ang bánwa
páti ang íya sinâ nga pumulúyò. The town and its inhabitants, the town
as well as its inhabitants. Ikáw páti ang ímo anák. You together with
your son. (cf. kag).

_páti_, To believe, assent, credit, give credence to, give credit to,
be more or less persuaded of the truth of a statement or fact. Patíha
akó. Believe me. Indì ka magpáti sináng mga butáng. Don't believe
those things. Walâ níya pagpatíha ang sinúgid ni Fuláno. He did not
give credence (He gave no credit) to what was said by N.N. Buút níla
ipapáti sa áton nga----. They want us to believe that----. (cf. tóo).

_patí-al_, To expose oneself to heat, especially to the heat
of the sun. Indì ka magpatí-al. Don't expose yourself to the
sun. (cf. patígì).

_patíbong_, Caus. of tíbong--to carry on the shoulders. Kon madálum
ang subâ ipatíbong ko ikáw sa táo. If the river should be deep, I'll
see to it that you will be carried (across) on the shoulders of a man.

_patíb-ong_, Caus. of tíb-ong--to raise, elevate, lift up.

_patíd_, Eaten away, become thin or small through the action of
the soil, said of posts, or the like; to wear out, become thin or
small. Nagpatíd ang isá ka halígi sang ámon baláy. One post of our
house is eaten away at its lower end.

_patigáyon_, To procure, bring about, get ready, accomplish, see to,
see that a thing is done. (cf. tigáyon).

_patigî_, To make hard, crusty, to bake, etc. (pa, tigî).

_patígì_, To expose oneself to the sun or heat. Indì ka magpatígì sa
ínit. Don't expose yourself to the heat. Don't allow yourself to be
burnt by the sun. (pa, tígì).

_pat-ígò, patígò_, To shoot at a target, practise
rifle-shooting. (cf. patandâtándà).

_patík_, To strike, beat, knock, knock out, force out the contents of
a vessel by striking it with a stick, etc.; to strike or beat, as a
gong; to knock or rap a piece of wood or bamboo used for striking or
rapping, especially the piece of bamboo used by tubâ-gatherers for
cleaning the salúd. The "patík" made of bamboo is split all round
at one end so as to form a sort of brush. It is knocked against a
branch of the coconut palm to free it of dregs. Ipatík ang ímo patík
sa páklang. Beat your patík against the branch (of the coconut).

_patikádol_, A noise as of a falling chair, etc. (cf. ringkádol,
lágpok, patingkádol id.).

_patikáng_, Caus. of tikáng. To let, etc. make steps. Patikangá
ang bátà, agúd mahánas maglakát (sa paglakát). Let the baby take a
few steps, that it may get accustomed to walking (that it may learn
to walk).

_patíkang_, Handling, management, treatment, dealing, interference,
contrivance, machination; to deal with, be engaged in business,
trade, have commercial transactions. Anó ang pagpatíkang nímo (Anó nga
patíkang ang ímo) nga walâ lang madúgay nagdakô ang ímo kwárta? How
did you contrive to make so much money in so short a time? Sagád siá
magpatíkang. He is an expert business man. Maáyo gid ang íya patíkang
sinâ. He handled that case (matter) very well. (cf. pumalatíkang,
palatikángan, pahitôhítò, padihútan, pangítà).


_patikasúg_, See panikasúg id.

_patikô_, Caus. of tikô. To turn, bend, curve, make crooked, inflect,
deflect from a straight line or course. Patikoá ang alámbre. Bend
the wire.

_patiláw_, Caus. of tiláw. To let, etc. taste. Ipatiláw sa ákon ang
ímo páhò. Let me taste your mango. Give me a taste of your mango. Let
me see what your mango tastes like. Patilawá man akó sang ímo manámit
nga mamón. Let me also taste your sweet cakes. Kon índì ka maghípus
patilawón ko ikáw sang ákon kamót. Be silent or I'll thrash you.

_patílik_, (H) Whirligig; a game played with coins; to spin
(transitive), cause to spin or revolve, set turning round an axle
or pivot. Patilíka ang pínggan, kálò, kwárta, etc. Spin the plate,
hat, money, etc. Make the plate, hat, money, etc. spin. (cf. pabúyung
patúyub, patírik).

_patilikán_, A windlass; a whirligig; a machine for winding up yarn,
etc.; a game played usually with copper coins. (cf. patílik).

_patimáan_, Notice, remark, observation, hint, information,
intelligence, warning, intimation, advice; to sign or mark, give a
sign or hint, inform, advise, notify, warn, give notice of. Patimán-i
siá sang ádlaw nga napát-ud sa íya eksámen. Inform him of the day
fixed for his examination. Napatimáan sa ámon nga dáan ang amó nga
katalágman. We were warned of that danger beforehand. (cf. timáan,
talámdan, talandáan, paándam, pasáyod, etc.).

_patimáwà_, To free, save, deliver, liberate. Patimawáa kamí,
Ginóo. Deliver us, Oh Lord. Ginpatimáwà níya silá kag hinatágan sang
íla kalúasan. He saved them and granted them liberty. (cf. luás,
báwì, katimawáan, kaluásan, talíbwas, tibáwas, timáwà).

_pát-in_, Sign, mark, symbol, symptom, character, emblem; to sign or
mark. Pat-iní ang líbro. Mark the book. Ginpapát-in níya ang tanán
nga mga galamitón. He had all his furniture marked. Anó ang kahulúgan
siníng pát-in? What is the meaning of this sign?

_patína_, (Sp. patena) Paten; the plate used with the chalice at Mass.

_pátina_, (Sp. pátina) Patina, verdigris, green rust of copper.

_patíndog_, To erect, build, establish, found, make stand up, set up,
stand (transitive). Patindogá ang baláy. Build the house. Patindogá ang
karabáw nga nagalukó. Get the resting buffalo on its legs. Patindogí
ang dakô nga bató dídto sing isâ ka bátà. Let a boy stand there on
that big stone.

_patíng_, Dove. (cf. salampáti).

_patínga_, Deposit, earnest, handsel, earnest-money, earnest-penny;
to advance money on a contract, pay something beforehand, give a
deposit or handsel (hansel). Patingáhi ang pánday. Pay the carpenter
some money in advance. Pilá ang patínga nga ginapangáyò mo sa
talámnan nga ímo ibalígyà? What deposit do you want in advance
for the field you are going to sell? Ipatínga sa íya dútà iníng
katloán ka mángmang. Pay him in advance these thirty pesos for
his land. Pinatingáhan ko ang manugtábas sing tátlo ka mángmang. I
advanced the tailor three pesos. Batóna iníng patínga sa pagpalíg-on
sang áton ginkasugtánan. Accept this earnest-money as a token (Accept
this money as earnest) that our agreement is binding.

_patingî_, To incline, etc. Caus. of tingî--to be inclined, etc.

_patíngkì_, To provoke, excite with anger, challenge, defy. (cf. ákyat,
binggár).

_patingkádol_, A noise as of a falling board, etc.; to make such a
noise. See patikádol, ringkádol, lágpok.

_pátio_, (Sp. patio) Court-yard; church-yard, cemetery, burial
ground. (cf. lulúbngan).

_patírik_, (B) See patílik--to spin a top, etc. Also: A whirligig or
wheel that turns on its axle if carried against the wind. Ang mga bátà
malúyag maghámpang sang patírik. Boys like to play with whirligigs.

_patís_, Salt fish preserved in brine; brine, pickle. (cf. lílang).

_patískug_, To stiffen, strengthen. Patiskugá ang likód sang ákon
báyò. Stiffen (with lining) the back of my jacket. (pa, tískug).

_pátlas_, To avoid, shun, keep out of another's way, be afraid to come
near. Iníng bátà nagapátlas sa íya manunúon, kay may salâ. This boy
is afraid to come near his teacher, for he has a fault to atone for
(he has done wrong). Ginapatlasán níya akó, kay may útang siá sa
ákon. He avoids me, for he owes me money. (cf. likáw; tál-as, lágyo).

_pátlaw_, See patáw--a float.

_pátlog_, To chip or strike off (corners, edges, etc.); to break or
twist off (the neck of a bottle, or the like). (cf. bíntig, páksì,
píngas).

_pátlok_, See pátlog.

_pátnà_, Promise, vow; to promise, decide, determine. Pátnà níya nga
iháwon níya ang báboy. He had promised to kill the pig. (cf. túg-an,
panáad).

_páto_, (Sp. pato) Duck. (cf. bíbi, gakít).

_patô_, To pommel, punch, box. See patók.

_pát-od_, Exactness, preciseness, punctuality; exact, precise, fixed,
punctual, appointed (of time, prices, etc.); to do something properly,
punctually, exactly, precisely, straightforwardly or to the point,
without tergiversation, deviation or circumlocution. Pinát-od níya ang
paglabô sang lubí. He slashed the coconut open with a well-aimed blow
(hitting it in the middle). Pat-orá (--odá) ang paghámbal mo. Speak
to the point. Ang íya pagabút pát-od gid. He came just in the nick of
time, at the exact time, punctually, to the minute. Bilí nga pát-od. A
fixed price. Táknà nga pát-od. A fixed hour. Appointed time.

_patogsíling_, Consideration, regard to, thoughtfulness, helpfulness;
to act considerately, make allowance for--, have regard to--, take
into account--, have consideration for--, another's condition or
circumstances. (cf. pasunáid).

_patóhok, patohók_, To make a hole in, perforate, let make a hole
in, etc. Ipatohók sa íya iníng láta. Let him make a hole in this
tin. Patohokí ang puérta sang ímo kwárto, agúd makaági dirâ sa tanán
nga óras ang kuríng. Have a hole made in the door of your room,
so that the cat may pass there at all hours. (cf. pa, tóhok, tohók).

_patók_, The handle of a hatchet, hoe, adze or the like.

_patók_, To box, punch, beat or strike with the fist, give another
a blow with one's fist. Patoká siá. Box him. (cf. súmbag, búngbung,
ómol).

_pátok_, To found, erect, establish, institute, originate. Patóka ang
isá ka maáyo kag pahunánan nga kumbuyahán. Found a good company with
plenty of capital. Ang hinámbal ni Fuláno pinatókan ni Hosé sing madámò
nga katarúngan. On N.N.'s speech José built up many arguments. Si
Hesukrísto amó ang manugpátok sang Pagkakristiáno. Jesus Christ is
the founder of Christianity. (cf. túkud, patíndog, pásad).

_patók-pátok_, Dim. and Freq. of patók. Abáw, pinatókpátok man lang
iníng sinúgid mo ni Fuláno. Oh dear me! this story you tell was made
up by N.N. (cf. patôpátò, patunâtúnà, patúga).

_pátol_, (B) Strong, tough, lasting well (long), resisting stress, wear
and tear. Pátol nga kalát, hénero, káhoy, etc. A strong rope, cloth,
wood, etc. Napatolán akó siníng delárgo. This pair of trousers looks
strong to me. (cf. húnit, húnlit, tíngting, bákud, báskug, mapátol).

_patóla_, A kind of vegetable vine.

_patóla_, To let, etc. prepare a vegetable dish. Ipatóla mo sa
kosinéro iníng patóla. Have this patóla vegetable prepared by the
cook. (pa, tóla).

_patóng_, (B) To step on, put one's foot upon, tread on, trample
on. Patongí ang tápì. Step on the board. Sang pagkatulúg ko pinatongán
níya akó. While I was sleeping he trampled (trod) on me. Indì ka
magpatóng dirâ, kay madámò ang dógi. Don't tread there, for there
are many thorns. (cf. lápak, tápak).

_patô-pátò_, See patókpátok, patunâtúnà--to invent, set on foot,
bring about, make up (a story, falsehood, etc.).

_patôtô_, To stanch or stop the flow of blood. Patôtoí ang pilás
mo sing tagók sang ságing. Stanch the bleeding from your wound with
banana-juice.

_patotó_, To let, make, or order to, pound or strike as with a
pestle. Also: to charge with, lay (the blame, guilt, etc.) upon. Ang
amó nga hitabô (salâ, sayúp, etc.) ginpatotó níla sa íya. They laid
the blame for that event at his door, they charged him with that
(crime, mistake, etc.). (cf. pabangúd).

_patótot_, Prostitute, harlot, whore. (cf. púta, álpot, bigáon).


_pátpat_, To explain, interpret, translate, give an exposition
of. Makapátpat ka siní? Can you explain this? Ipátpat sa Binisayâ ang
íya nga ginhámbal sa Ininglés. Interpret in Visayan what he has said
in English. Patpatá ang íya sinâ nga kahulúgan. Say (Explain) what
that means. Give the meaning of that. (cf. sáysay, húbad, panáysay).

_patrón; patróna_, (Sp. patrón, patrona) Patron, Patron Saint;
Patroness.

_patrúlya_, (Sp. patrulla) Patrol, guard, troop (of soldiers,
policemen, constabulary or the like). (cf. bántay, túgpa).

_patsáda_, (Sp. fachada) Facade, frontispiece, face,
frontage. (cf. atubángan, támpad).

_pátsi_, Salve, plaster, unguent, ointment; to apply a salve,
etc. Patsihí sing sálong ang dungándúngan mo. Put a plaster of pitch
on your temples. (cf. talámbal, halámpul).

_patsóy_, Missing the mark aimed at, a miss, beside the mark; to miss,
to fail to hit. Sa tátlo níya ka habóy duhá ang patsóy, isá lang ang
matándà. Of his three throws two were misses, only one a hit.

_patuád_, To let, make, order or cause to, bend one's back, bow down
low, turn one's back upon, acknowledge one's guilt, confess. Patuará
siá. Make him bow down low. (pa, tuád).

_patúad_, To make gallop, etc. See patúwad.

_patuás_, To let, make, order or cause to tip over, tilt, cant
up. (pa, tuás).

_patuás-túas_, Dim. and Freq. of patuás. Maáyo siá nga manugwáli kag
sagád magpatuástúas sing magayón nga mga púlong. He is a good preacher
and an expert at giving beautiful speeches.

_patubalíng_, (H) To yield, concede, give in, admit the force of
another's argument, etc. Indì siá buút magpatubalíng sang ímo
ginasilíng. He will not concede or admit the truth of what you
say. (cf. pasúpil, paubág id.).

_patubaríng_, (B) See patubalíng--to yield, etc.

_patubás_, Harvest, crop, produce (of fields), industrial output;
to harvest, gather the crop; to produce, manufacture. Maáyo ang
patubás sa karón nga túig. This year the harvest is (was) good. Pilá
ka pásong ang pinatubás mo sang túig nga tinalíkdan? How many bushels
(of rice) did you harvest last year? Yanáng bakólod saráng mapatúbsan
sing madámò nga lánot. That hill can (could) be made to produce much
hemp. (cf. palatúbson).

_patúbò_, Caus. of túbò. To make or let grow; to lend on interest. Pilá
ang ginabáyad mo nga túbò sa pílak nga ginpatubóan níya sa ímo? How
much interest do you pay on the money he has lent you? Patubói ang
ímo kwárta sa íya sing waló sa isá ka gatús. Lend him your money
at eight per cent interest. Humáy na man ang patubóon mo sa siníng
túig, índì lang tubó sa gihápon. Plant (raise, grow) rice also
this year and not sugar cane alone. Mapatúbò ko pa iníng káhoy sing
tátlo ka túig kag ugáling tápson ko. I'll allow this tree to grow
yet three years and then I will cut it down. Pinatúbò níya akó sang
íya pílak. Pinatubóan níya sa ákon ang íya pílak. He has lent me his
money (at interest). Ipatúbò na lang sa íya ang isá ka gatús. Patubóa
na lang siá sing isá ka gatús. Just grant him a loan of a hundred
(pesos). (cf. pasákà).

_patubúk_, (B) To yield, give way, submit, concede, assent, give up,
surrender. (cf. patubalíng, pasúpil, paubág).

_pát-ud_, Fixed time or term, etc. See pát-od id.

_patudlánay_, Literally: To push each other, from tulúd. To argue,
altercate, quarrel about which of the disputants should perform a
task that is equally disagreeable to all of them. (cf. padaítol).

_patúdok_, To reflect deeply, ponder well, think
profoundly. Nagapatúdok siá sang íya malisúd kag may gamó nga
kahimtángan, agúd makadángat siá sing katawháyan sa madámò níya nga
kasábà. He is pondering upon his hard and contentious life, in order
to find a way of coming to terms in his many lawsuits. (cf. tudúk).

_patúga_, Start, origin, something originally planned, brought about
or done, cause of. Patúga inâ ni Fuláno. That is N.N. work. N.N. is
the cause of that. Walâ sáyod ang patúga mo nga iní. That is a foolish
idea of yours. Kay sín-o ang patúga nga butangán na man ang áton bánwa
sing hospitál? Who originated the plan that our town should be provided
with a hospital? Si Fuláno amó ang nagpatúga sinâ. N.N. is responsible
for that. N.N. started that idea, plan, business, etc. (pa, túga).

_patúgbong_, Caus. of túgbong--to enter; bring to the market,
etc. Ginpatúgbong níya sa amó nga minurô ang duhá níya ka lampitáw
nga batíd kaáyo. He sent his two expert detectives into that
village. (cf. padalá).

_patuhád-túhad_, Contrivance, machination, management; to bring
about, invent, plot, plan, machinate. (cf. pátok, patúga, paratúdhan,
pahitôhítò, patigáyon).

_patulón_, Caus. of tulón--to swallow, gulp down. Ipatulón mo sa íya
inâ. Let him swallow that (literally and metaphorically). Patúnla siá
siníng bulúng. Make him swallow this medicine. Give him this medicine
to swallow.

_patulúd_, Caus. of tulúd--to push, etc. Also: Well-wishing at parting,
god-speed, farewell; to say goodbye to, accompany a parting friend
to the train or boat, give one a "send-off".

_patúlug_, (H) To let sleep, cause to sleep, etc. Patulúga ang
bátà. Put--, send--, the baby to sleep. Let the baby sleep. Patulúgi
iníng kátre sa bisíta. Let the visitor sleep in this bed. (pa, túlug).

_patulúg-tulúg_, (H) Caus. of tulúg-tulúg. To give a little rest to,
to let doze, snooze, sleep, take a short nap. Patulúgtulugón mo lang
ánay inâ. Let it rest for a while. Sleep over it. (cf. pahilónghilóng).

_patumbáyà_, To neglect, abandon, shirk, bestow no care upon or pay
no attention to. Indì mo pagpatumbayáan ang ímo mga tulumánon. Don't
neglect your duties. Ginapatumbayáan gid lang níya ang pagpatoón sa íya
mga kabatáan. He pays no attention to the education of his children.

_patumbáyag_, To walk quickly, run, etc. See patabáyag.

_patúmtum_, To take aim, aim at, point at (with a revolver, or the
like). (cf. túmtum, táyà, paatúbang, túmud).

_patunâ-túnà_, To originate, invent, bring about, be the cause of;
cause, origin, work, deed, doing. (cf. patók-pátok, patúga, túnà).

_patúnto_, To play the fool, allow oneself to be duped or made a fool
of, be silly, act foolishly or stupidly. Nagpatúnto siá sa íla. He
allowed them to fool him. He was (became) their dupe. They gulled
(cheated, tricked him easily). (cf. tónto, paunís, pahásò).

_patupâ_, Caus. of tupâ--to fall or alight upon, etc. Pinatúp-an níya
si Fuláno sang íya kamót. He struck N.N. He laid hands on N.N.

_patupád_, To be at--, go to--, the side of. (cf. tupád).

_patúpad_, Caus. of túpad. To remove to the side of, join to, bring
near or close to. (cf. paatúbang).

_patúpling_, To light, alight, settle upon, come to, arrive at, land,
take up one's abode, come to rest (said particularly of fugitives,
runaways, vagabonds, or the like). Túbtub karón walâ sing nakasáyod
kon diín siá nagpatúpling (napatúpling). To this moment nobody knows
where he is or where he has taken up his abode. (cf. túpling).

_patúpung_, Caus. of túpung. To be equal to; to equalize, make equal,
make uniform, to match, cause to correspond or to come up to the
same standard.

_patupúng_, To stand about idle, stand leaning against a wall or the
like. Indì kamó magpatupúng sa gangháan. Don't stand there in the
doorway. Nagapatupúng gid lang silá dirâ sa kodál. They are leaning
idly against the fence. (cf. táyod, pamuágpuág).

_paturá_, To reserve, guard, put by, keep for. Patúd-i (paturahí,
paturaí) sing kalan-ónon ang útud mo nga walâ dirí. Keep some
sweetmeats for your absent sister. Ipapaturá sa manuglútò iníng
laúya. Let the cook put by this piece of boiled meat. (pa,
turá). (cf. pabilín, pasalín).

_patúras_, To be exposed to the rain, heat, elements, etc., stand
(defy, brave) the rain, heat, etc. Indì ka magpatúras sa ulán, sa
ínit. Don't expose yourself to the rain, the heat of the sun.

_paturâ-túrà_, Caus. of turâtúrà--to shake, etc. Ipaturâtúrà sa íya
ang manók túbtub nga magsámpok. Let him shake and set on the cock
till it gets up a fighting spirit.

_paturís-túris_, Ado, fuss, bustle, formality, fooling, warning,
or the like; to fuss, bustle, fool, play, behave in a silly manner,
perform with much ado. Sa walâ sing paturístúris dáyon níya akó
sinúmbag. Without warning he struck (boxed) me. Walâ gid sing madámò
nga paturístúris. Without fuss, bustle or much ado. Without many
formalities.

_patúsà_, (B) To insist, importune, press or force upon. See pagâgâ.

_patútò_, To strive, aim at, seek to obtain, be active or energetic,
work with diligence or application; be a good boy. (cf. panútò).

_patutús_, To yield, give in, submit, etc. See patubalíng, paubág.

_patúwad_, To make gallop, to gallop (transitive), put to the gallop
or canter. Patuwára ang kabáyo. Gallop the horse. Ginpatúwad níya
ang karabáw. He made the buffalo run fast. (pa, túwad).

_patúyang_, To have one's will, or way, go one's own way, do as one
likes (pleases, chooses) or to follow one's own inclination for. Ang
mga manggaránon saráng makapatúyang sang íla mga lúyag. Rich folks
can afford to do as they please. Ipatúyang lang ang ímo pílak. Do
what you like with your money. (cf. pasamíyang, pagusá).

_patuyótúyo_, To be or get sleepy, feel drowsy, go to
sleep. Nagapatuyótúyo lang siá sa íya lingkoránan. He is getting
sleepy (is dozing) in his chair. He is sitting half asleep in his
chair. Figuratively: He is lazy in the performance of his official
duties. (cf. tuyó).

_paúba_, Caus. of úba--to undress, take off, disrobe, strip. Paubáha
siá sang íya báyò. Let him (Order him to) take off his jacket.

_paubág_, To give in, give way, yield, submit. See patubalíng,
pasúpil, patubúk).

_paúbus_, Caus. of úbus--to finish, make an end of, etc. Ipaúbus lang
sa íya iníng tinápay. Paubúsa lang siá siníng tinápay. Just let him
finish up this bread (eat it all).

_paubús_, To go down hill, descend; to be humble, modest, humiliate
oneself. Magpaubús ka sa atubángan sang mga punoán. Be modest (humble)
in the presence of authorities. (cf. ubús, mapainubúson).

_paudúng_, (B) To make no stir, be quiet or silent; be pensive or
dejected. (cf. pakuribúng).

_paugút_, To blend, commingle or mix blood (as by
intermarriage). Madámò nga mga pilipínhon nagpaugút sang dugô nga
katsílà--or--madámò nga mga pilipínhon pinaúgtan sang dugô nga
katsílà. Many Filipinos have Spanish blood in their veins.

_paugút_, To make angry, exasperate; to become angry, get exasperated,
grow hot or excited. Nagapaugút siá. He is getting exasperated. Paugutá
(paúgta) siá. Make him angry. Provoke him to anger. (pa, paákig,
pangákig).

_paúgwad_, To prolong, protract; postpone, put off,
procrastinate. Paugwadá ang ínyo nga pándut. Postpone your
feast-day. Ginpaúgwad níla ang íla hambárò nga nagbáhaw ang íla
panyága. They prolonged their conversation so much that their dinner
got cold. (cf. palántang, palígad, paláwig).

_paúkag_, Caus. of úkag--to chatter, prattle, prate, talk much.

_paukóy_, To sit lazily at home doing nothing, to remain at ease
without work. (cf. pakuribúng id.).

_pá-ul_, To tire, cause stiffness in the limbs (as from much walking
or overexertion). Napá-ul akó. I got (felt) tired. Napa-úlan ang ákon
páa. My leg got stiff. (cf. búdlay, álay).

_paúlaw_, (H) Caus. of úlaw--to stop. Pinaúlaw sang amó nga bulúng
ang íya nga katúl kag pinatáy ang mga kágaw. That medicine cured
(stopped) his katúl and killed the microbes.

_paúlì_, To return, go home. Paúlì ka na. Now, go home. Mapaúlì
na kitá. Let us go home. Papaulía siá. Make him go home. Send him
home. (pa, úlì). Also the Caus. of úlì-- to give back, return.

_paulî_, To sell at cost price, dispose of without profit. Ipaulî mo
sa ákon ang ímo kálò. Let me have your hat at cost price. Ginpaulî ko
sa íya ang ákon alhíbi--or--ginpaulián ko sa íya ang ákon alhíbi. I
sold my water tank to him at cost price, at the same price that I
gave for it. (cf. ulî--to buy at cost price).

_paulî-ulî_, To recuperate, gain strength, recruit--, regain--,
recover--, one's health, convalesce, put on flesh. Nagapaulîulî
siá sa isá ka minurô sa búkid. He is trying to recuperate (regain)
his strength at a village in the mountains. Paulîulií ang láwas
mo. Try--to regain your strength,--to get back your health. (cf. úlì).

_paulús_, (B) To dress, clothe, provide clothes for, give garments
to. Ang mga ginikánan nagapaulús sa íla mga bátà. Parents provide
clothing for their children. Paúsli ang bátà. Have a dress put
on the boy (girl). Put something on the boy (girl). Dress the boy
(girl). Ipaulús sa íya iníng báyò. Dress him (her) in this jacket
(tunic). (cf. ulús).

_paumá_, Caus. of umá--to till, etc. Paúmha siá siníng bánglid. Ipaumá
sa íya iníng bánglid. Let him cultivate this slope. Order him to turn
this hillside into farm-land.

_paúmpaw_, Caus. of úmpaw. To restore to consciousness, etc.; a remedy
or medicine used for restoring to consciousness persons in a swoon,
collapse, fit of epilepsy, etc. May paúmpaw (inogpaúmpaw) ikáw? Have
you got a restorative? (cf. paulîulî).

_paúmud_, To abstain from, restrain oneself from, keep from, withhold
oneself from, forbear, exercise patience or mortification. Paúmud ka
sa kárne sa mga ádlaw nga Biérnes sang Kuarésma. Don't eat meat on
the Fridays of Lent. Abstain from meat on the Fridays of Lent. Paumúri
ang ímo mga lúyag (lubá). Restrain (Mortify) your desires. Adlaw nga
inogpaúmud sa kárne. A day of abstinence. (cf. úmud).

_paúna_, Initial, advance, first payment or instalment, handsel,
earnest-money; to advance money, etc.; to make or let go first. Paunáhi
siá sing limá ka mángmang. Advance him five pesos. Paunáha siá sa
pagpaúlì. Let him go home first. Send him home ahead of you. (cf. úna,
patínga).

_pauná-uná_, To vie with, compete, contend, strive with, try to come
out first. (cf. paúna, paindísíndis, padágánay).

_paúnay_, Caus. of únay. To let one please oneself, eat or drink
or do as one likes, lay no restraint upon. Ipaúnay lang sa íla ang
pagkáon. Let them eat as they like, i.e. without restraint and without
preference. Paunáyan mo silá sang panyága. Let them take their dinner
without formality. Kon magsúgud gánì ang galíng ang úna nga háon
ginapaúnay sa mga táo. When the milling of sugar cane commences,
the first vatful of sugar is given to the workmen (to do with as
they please).

_paungá-únga_, (B) To do to one's heart's content, do as one
pleases. Nagapaungáúnga gid siá sang káon sing páhò. He is eating
mangoes to his heart's content. He eats as many mangoes as he
likes. Walâ níya pagtugúti ang bátà nga magpaungáúnga sang mga búnga
nga maáslum ukón línghod. She did not permit her child to eat sour
or unripe fruit. (cf. paáyaw, kánkan, patúyang, pagusá, pasamíyang).

_paúnhan_, From paúna.

_paunís_, Caus. of unís--to fool, flatter, wheedle. Indì akó magpaunís
sa íla. I am not going to be fooled (cheated, tricked) by them.

_paúntat_, Caus. of úntat. To put an end to, cause to cease, suspend,
stop, hinder, impede; let stop, order to stop, etc. Ipaúntat sa kay
Hosé ang pagarádo ni Huán. Let José put a stop (an end) to John's
ploughing. Pagapauntatón siá karón sang mga matatáas nga punoán sa
íya nga palangakóan. He will (now) be suspended from office by the
high authorities.

_paúntay_, Caus. of úntay--to stretch, straighten, etc. Ipaúntay sa
íya ang alámbre. Let him pull the wire straight. Hand the wire over
to him for straightening it out.

_paúnung_, Caus. of únung--to be with, stay with, etc.

_paupúd_, Caus. of upúd--to go with, come with, accompany, etc. Paúpda
siá sa ákon. Let him come with me. Order him to accompany me. Pinaúpdan
akó níya sing tátlo ka táo. He sent three men along with me. He
ordered three men to come with me.

_paupúk_, To wreak one's vengeance upon, vent one's anger on anything
near at hand. Indì ka magpaupúk sa báso nga walâ sing salâ. Don't
vent your anger on the glass (by breaking it, etc.) that has done no
wrong. Ginpaúkpan níya ang mga pínggan sang dakô níya nga kaákig. In
his anger he wreaked his vengeance on the plates (by smashing them,
etc.).

_paupús_, To burn down, make charred bits of, burn to
cinders. (cf. upús).

_paurúg_, (B) To talk playfully, jest, say something in fun,
crack a joke; to cajole, wheedle, cheat, trick, induce another by
plausible pretexts to do something to his own disadvantage and to
the advantage of the inducer; a joke, pleasantry, fun, something
said or done in jest, a hoax. Paurúg lang níya iní. This is simply
a joke of his. This is only his fun. Paurugí siá agúd matápnà ang
íya paghibî. Tell him some jokes to stop his crying. (cf. ológológ,
orógoróg, unís, utís, odót).

_paurúng_, (H) To meditate sadly, be pensive, thoughtful, to ruminate,
muse. (cf. búog, paudúng).

_paurúng_, Caus. of urúng--to be surprised, astonished, shocked, etc.

_paúrut_, Caus. of úrut--to end, finish, complete, etc.

_páus, pá-us_, To be or become hoarse, raucous. Napáus akó. I have
become hoarse. (cf. láus).

_paús, pa-ús_, Hoarse. Paús akó. I am hoarse. (cf. laús).

_paús-us_, To make slip down, let drop or glide down. (cf. ós-os,
paós-os).

_paútang_, To lend, make a loan, advance money, grant a favour,
etc. Pautánga siá sing duhá ka mángmang. Lend him two pesos. May
kabaláslan nga dakô akó sa íya, kay ginpaútang níya akó sing madámò
nga kaayóhan. I am deeply grateful to him, for I am indebted to him
for many favours. (pa, útang; cf. hulám, pahulám).

_pautáw-útaw_, To drift, sail, swim, float, glide along the surface
of water. Also: Caus. of utáwútaw.

_pautingúl_, To pretend not to hear, affect deafness, be stubborn,
pay no heed or attention to. (cf. pabungúl, pakabungúl).

_paútus_, To prolong, protract, take a long time, lengthen out, extend
the duration of. Indì kamó magpaútus sang ínyo nga sugilánon. Don't
talk too long. Don't engage in a long conversation. Abáw, nagpaútus
ang párì sang íya sermón. Goodness me! The priest preached a long
sermon. Pautúsi gid ang maís, agúd makaisá na lang náton ibulád. Let
the corn ripen well, so that we may have to dry it in the sun only
once. (pa, útus).

_pauyahón_, To display or show the best side or quality of a
thing. (cf. paguyá, panawóng, uyahón).

_paúyhaw_, Caus. of úyhaw--to cry out aloud, shout.

_pauyó-úyo_, To follow suit, follow another's lead, be easily swayed,
ruled, prevailed upon, imposed upon. Nagapauyóúyo lang siá sang lúyag
ni Fuláno. He simply carries out N.N.'s wishes. (cf. padaládála;
idógidóg).

_páwà_, To be or get light or bright, to shine, brighten
(intransitive). Nagapáwà na ang ádlaw. The sun is shining bright
now. Napawáan kitá sang Pagtóo. We are (were) enlightened by faith. Ang
kapáwa nga dáyon magpáwa úntà sa íla. May the eternal light shine
upon them. (cf. síga, sánag, íwag, bánag, banáag, sílak).

_páwat_, (B) To want, lack, cease to have or get, be without,
but mostly construed with índì or walâ. Indì man mapáwat ang ámon
pagkáon. We shall not lack food. Walâ pa man mapáwat ang ákon dáwat
nga tubâ sa hapónhápon. I have always succeeded up to now in gathering
(I have never failed up to now to gather) some tubâ every evening
(or afternoon). (páwat is perhaps a Contr. of pa- and awát).

_pawíkan_, Tortoise, turtle. Very sensitive, touchy, irritable,
impressionable, easily affected, laughing or crying at the slightest
provocation. (cf. ámog, bingít).

_pawód_, A sheet of nipa-roofing.

_páw-us, paw-ús_, See páus, paús--to become hoarse; hoarse.

_pay_, (B) But, except, except that, barring, on the other hand,
yet. (cf. ápang, péro).

_payâ_, Coconut shell.

_payaón_, Pertaining to a coconut shell; young, inexperienced,
foolish. (cf. bataón).

_payág_, A small field-hut, a roofed shelter, a small shed.

_payág-páyag_, Dim. of payág. Any primitive little structure resembling
a tent, field-hut or shed.

_payâ-páyà_, Dim. of payâ. Also: Bones of the skull; shoulder-blade.

_payáso_, (Sp. payaso) Clown; jester. (cf. társo).

_payásyas_, To expose to the full force of (wind, etc.). Bukasí ang
mga bintánà, kag payasyasán kamí sang hángin. Open the windows and
let the wind blow freely in on us. (pa, yásyas).

_páyhud_, See páihod id.

_payô_, To move or shake up and down as the balanced loads slung on
the ends of a shoulder-pole.

_páyong_, Umbrella.

_payô-payô_, Dim. and Freq. of payô. Also: to trudge along, walk slowly
(as one tired from much walking, etc.). In an obscene sense equal to
iyót, ayódáyod.

_payó-páyo_, To stroke gently, touch lightly; to massage; to settle
amicably (a dispute, quarrel, or the like). Napayópayóhan na ang íla
gamó. Their differences have been amicably settled. (cf. kapánkápan,
hapúlas, apóhap, kálot).

_payôpô, payópò_, Fine (bamboo) shavings or scrapings; to make
thin, fine shavings of dry bamboo to be used for producing fire
by friction. Kawáyan nga pinayôpô (pinayópò). Bamboo cut into thin
fragments or shavings. Payôpoí (Payopói) akó sing kawáyan, kay mabágid
akó. Get me some dry bamboo-shavings, for I am going to make fire by
friction. Payôpoá (Payopóa) ang kawáyan. Make bamboo-shavings. Cut
some shavings off the bamboo.

_payópot_, Stud, boss, bud, knob. (cf. bókol, bokól, alóp, halúp,
támpok, pútot).

_payósan_, Tapering, tapered, taper (adjective), cut or dressed to
a point or taper. (cf. piyósan id.).

_páypay_, A fan; to fan; to beckon. Paypayí siá. Fan him. Beckon
him. (cf. kuyáb).

_pebréro_, (Sp. febrero) February. (cf. dagangkáhoy).

_pekádo_, (Sp. pecado) Sin, fault, transgression, dereliction,
delinquency. (cf. salâ).

_pekás_, (Sp. peca) Freckles.

_pekasón_, Freckled, covered with freckles or specks.

_pelígro_, (Sp. peligro) Danger, peril, jeopardy, risk,
hazard. (cf. katalágman).

_pelíkula_, (Sp. película) Pellicle; film. Pelíkula sa síne. A
cinematograph film.

_pelútse_, (Sp. pelusa) Down, nap, floss, fuzz, filaments of untwisted
silk or the like.

_pepíno_, (Sp. pepino) Cucumber.

_péras_, (Sp. pera) Pear.

_pérde_, (Sp. perder) To lose, perish, succumb, suffer loss or
defeat. (cf. piérde id.).

_perdigón_, (Sp. perdigon) Small shot, bird-shot, hail-shot.

_perdubál_, Insolent, overbearing, haughty, bad, wicked; prodigal,
spendthrift. (cf. sutíl, bugalón, maláin; buhahâ, maúdhà).

_perénsa_, (Sp. prensa) Smoothing iron; to iron or press
clothes. Perensahá ang ákon delárgo. Iron my trousers. Perensahí siá
sing báyò. Iron (press) the jacket for him. Perensahí lang ang lamésa
siníng mga panápton. Iron these clothes on the table. Maálam ka balá
magperénsa? Do you know how to iron clothes? (cf. prénsa, plánsa).

_períko_, (Sp. periko) Parrot. (cf. pikóy).

_periódiko_, Newspaper, periodical, journal. (cf. balasahón,
pamantaláan).

_periodísta_, (Sp. periodista) Newspaper-correspondent, one that
writes articles for periodicals, journalist. (cf. mamantálà).

_perkál_, Muslin, calico, percale.

_pérlas_, (Sp. perla) Pearl. (cf. mútyà).

_perlína_, (Sp. perlino, perlina) Pearl-coloured; a kind of very
light cloth for blouses and jackets (báyò).

_permíso_, (Sp. permiso) Permit, license, authorization, permission,
leave. (cf. túgut, pahanúgut).

_péro, peró_, (Sp. pero) But. (cf. ápang).

_persiána_, (Sp. persiana) Window-blind, Venetian blind,
shutter. (cf. takúd).

_pesár_, (Sp. pesar) To weigh, have weight, find the weight of. Pesará
ang kalámay. Weigh the sugar. Napesár (Ginpesár) na nínyo ang tátlo
ka sáko nga kópras? Have you weighed the three sacks of copra? Pesarí
siá sing napúlò ka kílo nga kapé, kay báklon níya. Weigh him out ten
kilos of coffee, for he is going to buy them. (cf. tímbang).

_peskísa_, (Sp. pesquisa) Inquiry, investigation, search,
examination. (cf. pangusísà).

_péso_, (Sp. peso) Weight, heaviness. (cf. kabúg-at); the peso of
Philippine currency, half an American dollar. (cf. písos, mángmang).

_péste_, (Sp. peste) Pest, plague, pestilence, epidemic, murrain;
corruption of manners. (cf. pamíste).

_pétsa_, (Sp. fecha) Date, datum.

_petséra_, (Sp. pechera) Shirt-bosom, shirt-frill, chest-protector.

_pétso_, (Sp. pecho) Thorax, chest; breast. (cf. dúghan, abá; sóso).

_piádo_, (Sp. fiado) Trustworthy, reliable; a
confidant. (cf. salalígan).

_piadór_, See the Sp. fiador.

_piakát_, A kind of basket. See bayakát id.

_piámbre_, (Sp. fiambre) Cold-served; sweets, cakes, etc. served cold
as a dessert after a meal.

_piambréra_, (Sp. fiambrera) Lunch-basket, dinner-pail, an outfit
consisting of several containers for carrying food to workmen in the
fields, etc.

_piáng_, Lame, halting, walking with a limp; to be or become lame,
etc. (cf. kunád, piángkol, píngkaw).

_píang_, To be or become lame or limping, to lame, cripple. Napíang
ang báboy, kay ginhabóy sang mga bátà sing bató. The pig has gone
lame, for the boys have been throwing stones at it. Piánga lang ang
idô. Lame the dog. Ginpíang níla ang manók. They lamed the chicken.

_piángkol_, Used humorously and colloquially for piáng--limping.

_pianísta_, (Sp. pianista) Pianist.

_piáno_, (Sp. piáno) Piano.

_pián-pían_, Eking out, helping, being of a little assistance; to help,
assist. (cf. sapísápi, bulígbúlig, tabángtábang).

_piánsa_, (Sp. fianza) Surety, bail, bond, guarantee, security. Mangítà
ka sing piánsa. Find bail. (cf. kalig-onán).

_piár_, (Sp. fiar) To trust, entrust, confide in, have confidence in,
rely upon. Saráng mo siá mapiarán sang ímo kwárta, kay matárung kag
salalígan siá nga táo. You can entrust your money to him, for he is an
honest and reliable man. Ipiár lang sa íya ang ímo bisikléta. Entrust
your bicycle to him. Indì siá magpiár sa ímo sang íya áwto. He will
not entrust you with his auto. Saráng ikáw makapiár sa ákon. You can
rely upon or trust me. (cf. sálig, túgyan).

_piáya_, A kind of sweetened bread.

_piáyo_, A kind of tree yielding a resin which is used as incense.

_pidâ_, One who does not eat meat or fish, one who is very particular
about his food; a vegetarian. Pidâ siá sa kárne, ísdà, etc. He does
not eat meat, fish, etc. (cf. mapidâ).

_pidál_, (Sp. pedal) Treadle, pedal; to secure or hold fast by treading
or exerting pressure upon. Pidalí ang tápì sa púnta. Press the board
firmly down at the end. Pidalí ang papél, agúd índì mahúlug. Hold
the paper down firmly or it will fall. (cf. lapakán).

_pidâ-pídà_, Dim. and Freq. of pidâ--fastidious, particular (as to
food). Also: to eat slowly or daintily.

_pidáso_, (Sp. pedazo) Piece, bit, fragment, part, shard,
sherd. (cf. báhin).

_pidís_, A kind of evergreen plant.

_pídngan_, From pilóng, piróng--to close. Napídngan siá sang íya mga
matá. His eyes were closed.

_pidô-pidô_, A sneak, mean, servile fellow, a coward; to slink
away, sneak off, go away silently and noiselessly (out of fear or
shame). The Freq. pamidôpidô is more in use as verb, pidôpidô as noun
and adjective. Daw idô siá nga nagapidôpidô (nagapamidôpidô). He is
like a dog that slinks away quietly.

_pidyô-pídyò_, A loafer, vagabond, parasite, one living at the
expense of others; one who always asks for favours, discount,
etc. (cf. paniróngsiróng, pamidyôpidyò).

_piél_, (Sp. fiel) Faithful, trustworthy, etc. See salalígan, matútum,
matinoóhon.

_piérde_, (Sp. perder) To lose, perish, succumb. Napiérde siá sa
búlang, sugál, komérsyo, etc. He lost in the cockpit, at the gaming
table, in business, etc. Ginpierdehán níya ang bilí sang karabáw
sing limá ka mángmang. He lost five pesos on the buffalo. Ginpiérde
sang bágyo ang íya mga lubí. His coconut palms were destroyed by the
hurricane. (cf. pérde).

_piésta_, (Sp. fiesta) Feast, festival; to celebrate a feast. Piestahá
ang ínyo patrón. Celebrate the feast of your Patron. Walâ níla
pagpiestahí ang íla Patrón sang túig nga tinalíkdan. Last year they
did not celebrate the feast of their Patron Saint. (cf. pándut).

_píga_, Hard, troublous, difficult (of times, life, etc.). Nagpíga ang
íya pangabúhì. His life became hard. Píga karón ang íya pangabúhì. His
life at present is full of troubles. (cf. pigádo).

_pigádo_, (Sp. pegado) See píga, pikóta, malisúd, lapígot).

_pígang_, To extend by spreading, to spread all over, applied
especially to skin-diseases like katúl. Nagapígang ang katúl sa kamót
sang bátà. The katúl is spreading all over the child's hand.

_pigá-píga_, Dim. and Freq. of píga and more in use than the simple
píga.

_pígaw_, Frail, feeble, weak, infirm, delicate; to become frail,
feeble, infirm, to weaken (intransitive). Nagpígaw siá kútub sang
pagbalatián níya. Since he was ill, he became feeble. He has been
feeble since his illness. Napigáwan akó sa íya. He looks delicate to
me. (cf. lúya).

_pigáy-pígay_, Staggering, wabbling, toddling; to stagger, toddle,
wabble, wobble, totter, waddle. (cf. balúdbálud, hungáyhungáy).

_píghol_, Hardened or lumpy rice; clod, lump, cluster, mass (of rice,
earth, or the like, sticking together). (cf. bigól, púg-a, pugá).

_pígkang_, Clotted, pasted, glued together; to be clotted, etc. Ang
íya bohók gomón kag nagpígkang sang dugô. His hair was dishevelled
and clotted with blood.

_pígok_, A kind of fish.

_pígos_, To press, compress, squeeze, grip tightly or firmly; to
oppress, treat harshly or unjustly. Pinígos níya siá sang íya mga
bútkon. He held him firmly with his arms. He gripped him tightly. Indì
mo pagpigóson ang mga mamumugón. Don't oppress workmen. (cf. limólimó,
lúgus).

_pígot_, To close, join, put together. (cf. píkot, kípot).

_pigóton_, Closed, close, near together, narrow (aperture, etc.).

_pigót-pigotán_, Back, end of the spine, coccyx, anus. (cf. pígot,
pígtot).

_pígsà_, To compress, squeeze. Pigsaá ang íya túdlò. Squeeze his
finger. Ginpígsà sang manughilót ang íya bútkon. The massagist
compressed (kneaded) his arm. (cf. pisíl, ipít, písgà).

_pígtot_, The coccyx, the end of the spinal column; rudiment of a tail.

_pigúra_, (Sp. figura) Figure, form, shape, outline, exterior
aspect. (cf. dágway, báyhon, hitsúra, tsúri).

_pígus_, See pígos--to oppress, etc.

_pihák_, A half; one part or side of anything cut in two; the other
side, the part or side that is--beyond,--behind,--in front,--to the
right or left,--opposite. Isá ka pihák. One half. Sa pihák. On the
other side. Sa pihák sang búkid. Beyond the mountain. On the other
side of the mountain. Diín ka makádto?--Sa pihák. Where are you going
to?--(I am going) to the other side. N.B. Here and in similar cases,
on account of the various meanings of "pihák", it may be necessary
to further question the speaker as to what part or what direction
he really alludes to by "pihák". (cf. tungâ, bangî, tabók, likorán,
atubángan, tupád, kílid, únhan, támpad).

_píhak_, To cut in two parts, to halve, cut in half, divide in
halves. Piháka ang báboy. Cut the pig in two. Nagpíhak siá sang
ísdà. He cut the fish (lengthwise) in halves. Piháki akó sing páhò. Cut
a mango in half for me. (cf. tungâ, pákas, útud).

_pihíng_, Not standing straight, lopsided, crooked, uneven,
applied to a pot, etc. with an uneven bottom. Pihíng ang kabô nga
iní. This coconut bowl--does not stand straight,--stands crooked,--is
lopsided. (cf. kiwî, balingíg).

_pihít_, Tongue-tied, tongue-tacked, not able to pronounce clearly
or distinctly, defective of speech, having a defect in one's
speech. (cf. hát-on, kúnlà).

_pího_, (Sp. fijo) Fixed, appointed, determined, decided, certain,
sure. Pího gid. Quite certain. Nagabút siá sa pího nga óras. He came
at the appointed time. Malakát ikáw buás sa Ilóngílong?--Hóo, pího. Are
you going to Iloilo tomorrow?--Yes, certainly (for sure). (cf. pát-od,
segúro gid).

_pií, píi_, To cover or wrap up well, compress and pack tightly, make
compact; to be or make as airproof as possible. Piihón mo ang tabákò
sing maáyo, agúd índì makasungáw. Wrap the tobacco up well, that it
may not be spoilt through contact with the air. Pilpilí sing bató ang
tabákò, agúd magpií (magpíi). Weigh the tobacco down with a stone,
that it may pack closely (be compact). (cf. píot, hugút, pílpil).

_piíl_, Wedge; to wedge, fasten or secure with a wedge. Píl-i (piilí)
ang halúg nga káhoy. Secure the loose piece of wood with a wedge.

_píka_, (Sp. pica) Wedge, etc. (cf. písak, bángil, bangíl, pások,
pasók).

_píka_, (Sp. pica) Pike; goad, cudgel; to strike, beat, thrash; to
hurt, wound (by speech). Pikáhi siá sang ímo bastón. Hit him with your
stick. Give him the stick. Pinikáhan níya akó sing makasaláklaw kag
masakít nga mga púlong. He wounded my feelings by using exasperating
and cutting language. (cf. bálbal, hánot, lámpus; láslas).

_piká_, (Sp. picar) To prick, pierce, puncture, tattoo; to notch,
indent. Napikahán ang íya bútkon sang manugpiká. His arm was tattooed
by the tattooer. Nagpiká ang pánday sa salsálon sang galáb. Ginpikahán
sang pánday sa salsálon ang galáb. The smith notched the sickle,
cut teeth in the edge of the sickle.

_pikáhan, pikahán_, An instrument for indenting or tattooing;
typewriter.

_pikadúra_, (Sp. picadura) Cut tobacco, pipe-tobacco.

_piká-piká_, Dim. of píka. Also: To line or join with mortar
stones, or tiles, to point the joints of cut stones or tiles with
mortar. Pikápíkahí sing ápog ang hulút sang mga bató. Put lime in
between the stones. (cf. galá-gála).

_píkas, pikás, pikasón_, See gíkas, gikás, gikasón--cut lengthwise,
etc.

_pikás_, See pekás--freckles.

_pikasón_, See pekasón--freckled.

_píkat_, To stick together, adhere to, be stuck together by some
viscous substance. Ang ákon mga túdlò nagapíkat sa tagók sang
lángkà. My fingers are stuck or glued together by the juice of the
jack-fruit. Nagapíkat ang matá ko sang múrì. My eye is sticky with
mucus.

_píking_, A kind of rice-wafers or rice-biscuits. Ang binókbok nga
bugás kutáwon sa túbig, ibutáng sa mga dáhon kag pamalamalahón kag
ugáling pritóhon; amó iní ang píking. Powdered rice is made into dough,
spread on leaves to dry and then fried; the result is píking.

_pikít_, Very tight, close, narrow. Panápton nga pikít. Very tight
or closely fitting clothes. (cf. hugút, pígus, gutúk).

_pikíti_, A little, not much; slight, superficial, not deep (of wounds,
etc.). (cf. tikî, diótay).

_píknat_, To adhere, stick to, clot, etc. See píkat,
pígkang. (cf. pilít, dokót).

_píknik_, (English: picnic) Picnic; to go on (for) a picnic. Ipíknik
náton iníng mga manók nga binakól. We are going to have these stewed
chickens at our picnic. Kon malúyag kamó magpíknik, piknikán lang
nínyo ang bakólod dirâ. If you like to go on or for a picnic, picnic
there on that hill.

_pikníkan_, Place of a picnic.

_píknit_, To pinch, grasp or squeeze between thumb and forefinger; a
small quantity, a pinch. Piknitá ang íya bútkon. Pinch his arm. Piknitá
ang tabákò. Press the tobacco between the finger-tips. Take up a
pinch of tobacco. Piknitá siá sa batíis. Pinch his calf. Pinch him
in the calf.


_píko_, (Sp. pico) Pick, pickaxe; picul, a measure of sugar weighing
63,26 kilos.

_píko_, A children's game in which they have to cross blindfolded or
with raised eyes various lines traced on the ground. He who steps on
a line loses; to play that game. Nagapíko--or--nagapikohánay ang mga
bátà. The children are playing the pico-game. (cf. pikopákan).

_pikón_, Irascible, irritable, choleric, testy, techy, touchy, getting
angry at the slightest provocation. (cf. madorogsánon, mainakígon,
buróka, burakínta, kutóskutós, sietésieté, sanggurút).

_pikopákan_, A children's game. See píko.

_píkot_, To close; to patch, mend, sew together torn pieces of cloth,
etc. (cf. pígot, tókap, takóp, pilóng).

_pikót_, Only partially opened, half-closed, half-open (of eyes). Pikót
siá sing matá. His eyes are only half-open. He can hardly--open his
eyes,--keep his eyes open.

_pikóta_, Hard, troublous, trying, difficult,
distressful. (cf. malisúd, pigádo, lapígot).

_pikóy_, Parrot. (cf. períko) Also: Having the upper eye-lids wrinkled
and shaped somewhat like a parrot's beak (bill). Pikóy siá sing
matá. His eye-lids hang over his eyes like a parrot's bill (beak).

_píkpik_, To pat, strike, nudge. Pikpiká ang íya likód--or--pikpikí
siá sa likód. Pat him on the back.

_píkrat_, To tear, rend, etc. See bíkrat, páhak.

_pikrát_, Torn, rent.

_píkul_, A measure for sugar. See píko id.

_píla_, (Sp. pila) Stone trough or basin; font, Holy water stoup. Píla
bautismál. Baptismal Font.

_píla_, (Sp. fila) Line, row, tier; to stand in a line or row. Nagapíla
ang mga soldádo. The soldiers are standing in line. (cf. ídas, kátay).

_píla_, To excoriate, abrade, chafe. Napiláhan ang bulî ko sang
maláwig nga pagsakáy ko sa kabáyo. My seat became sore from long
riding on horseback. (cf. piláhon).

_pilá_, (H) How many? How much? An uncertain number (but usually more
than one). Pilá ka mángmang ang kinahánglan mo? How many pesos do
you need? Pilá ang ginbáyad mo sinâ--or--pilá ang bakál mo sinâ? How
much did you pay for that--or--for how much did you buy that? Mga
pilá lang ka táo ang nagtalámbong. Only a few people attended. Pilá
ang edád mo--or--pilá ka túig ang edád mo? How old are you? What is
your age? (pirá id.).

_pilágpilág_, Spread out, not close or dense, sparse, thin (with many
gaps). Pilágpilág dirí ang maís sa talámnan. Here the corn is growing
sparsely over the field (with many empty spaces). (cf. lakâ, malakâ).

_piláhon_, Excoriated, abraded, chafed, sore (of skin); bed-sore;
bedridden. Presentádo gánì, piláhon. One who presents himself
has a sore skin i.e. one who presents himself to another has
usually--something to ask,--some complaint to make,--"an axe to
grind". (cf. píla).

_pílak_, Silver; money; to turn into money. Pilákon mo lang iníng
mga kadiós. Turn these cadios-peas into money. Make money on these
cadios-peas, (i.e. sell them).

_pilák_, To throw--, cast--, chuck--, away, fling off, hurl. Ipilák
sa gwâ iníng mga ságbot. Throw this rubbish out. Pilakí akó sing isá
ka sipî nga ságing. Throw me a cluster of bananas.

_pilákan_, Rich, moneyed, monied, having much silver or
money. (cf. manggaránon; bangkílan, aligyanán).

_píl-an_, From piíl--to wedge.

_píl-as_, Steep, precipitous, high, sheer. (cf. hándog, tindógon).

_pilás_, Wound, cut, slash, gash, incision, injury; pain, grief,
sorrow.

_pílas_, To wound, inflict a wound, cut, slash, gash, to
injure; to hurt, wound (one's feelings). Indì mo siá pagpilásan
(pagpiláson). Don't wound him. Ginpílas níya ang ákon tagiposóon. He
hurt my feelings. Walâ siá pagpilása sang ruéda sang káro, kóndì
pinahánog lang ang íya bútkon. The cart-wheel did not inflict a wound
on him, but only bruised his arm.


_pilasón_, Wounded, injured, crippled. Ang mga pilasón íla gindalá sa
hospitál. They carried the wounded to the hospital. Pilasón man siá,
ápang pikíti lang. He was wounded also, but only slightly.

_piláy_, Inclined, turned sideways or downwards (downward), not
straight; to hang down, droop. Ang mga súngay siníng báka piláy. The
horns of this cow are turned downwards.

_píl-ay_, To tire, stiffen, cause stiffness or cramps. Nagakapíl-ay
ang íya láwas. He is getting very tired (stiff). (cf. pául, lúyà).

_piláy-pílay_, Dim. and Freq. of piláy. Also: to tire, exhaust,
fatigue. (cf. búdlay, álay, pául, kápoy, lúya).

_pildorás, píldoras_, (Sp. píldoras) Pill, pellet.

_piléw-piléw_, Summit, etc. See piléw-pilewán, putókputokán.

_piléw-pilewán_, Summit, apex, tip, top, peak, crown, highest point or
top of a bamboo, tree, belfry, mountain, or the like. (cf. alipokpokán,
piléwpiléw).

_píli_, A kind of pitch used as incense.

_pilî_, Vote, election vote, voice, choice. (cf. pílì).

_pílì_, Picked out, chosen, selected, the very best; fastidious,
particular, overnice, difficult to please as regards food, or the
like; to choose, select, pick out, elect, vote for. Pílì nga táo. A
picked, prominent, outstanding man (person, personage). Pílì nga
heneró. Carefully chosen or selected cloth. Pílì nga káhoy. The very
best wood (timber). Mga pílì gid nga pagkáon ang íya nga lúyag. He
wants to have the very best food. He is very fastidious as regards
food. Pilía ang mga dalágkò sináng mga páhò. Choose (pick out)
the large ones from among those mangoes. Magpílì kamó sing mga
kandidáto nga maáyo kag matárung. Cast your vote for good and honest
candidates. Pilíi sing pásì ang bugás. Pick out the unhulled rice
grains from among the pounded rice. Nagapapílì siá liwán? Is he
offering his candidature again? Ang ibán nga mga nagapapílì maáyo
manghapóhap (mangapóhap) sa mga pumililî. Some candidates are clever at
(well versed in) fooling (flattering) the electors. (Note the accent
in the following). Napilián siá nga pangúlopuód sang pagpiniliáy nga
naglígad. He was chosen Provincial Governor at the last election. Walâ
sing pílì kag walâ sing pilían. Without fear or favour. (cf. luhâ,
áno, bóto).

_pílì_, A stripe, streak; striped, streaked. (cf. sámay, sámri,
rámbat).

_piliáran, piliyáran_, (From the Sp. fiar) Trustworthy, reliable,
meriting--, worthy of--, confidence. (cf. salalígan, piár).

_piligwakán_, The hip-joint, the top of the femur or thigh-bone;
the waist line. (cf. balikawáng).

_pílik_, To quiver, vibrate, flutter, flap, tremble, shake, move
quickly to and fro. Nagapílik sa hángin ang mga dáhon sang burí. The
leaves of the buri-palm are trembling in the wind. Ginapapílik
sang hángin ang mga dáhon sang káhoy. The wind is tossing (shakes)
the leaves of the tree to and fro. Kon papilíkon sing lakás sang
hángin ang mga hayáhay magísì. If the wind flutters (flaps) the flags
too much they tear (get torn). Ang ámon kúmbung pumílik sa hángin,
nadúktan sang kandílà kag nasúnug. Our curtain swayed in the wind,
came too near (against) the candle and took fire.

_pilikílyo_, (From the Sp. fleco) A fringe of hair hanging down
straight over the forehead to within a short distance of the
eyebrows. Pilikílyo ang íya bohók. Her hair hangs down in a fringe
over her forehead.

_pilík-pílik, pilík-pilík_, Dim. and Freq. of pílik. To tremble,
move, shake slightly; to shake off (by a quick tremulous
motion). Ginapapilíkpílik sang dupóydúpoy sang hángin ang mga
pakláng sang ságing. The soft breeze is moving (swinging, swaying)
the banana leaves gently to and fro. Pinilíkpilikán siá sang lunángon
nga karabáw kag napilitán siá sa pagpalígos. He was bespattered with
mud by a dirty buffalo and was forced to clean himself by taking a
bath. (cf. hulághúlag).

_pililián_, Election; place where something is to be chosen or elected,
electoral district. (cf. pílì, palapilián).

_pililión_, That is to be chosen or elected, eligible, worthy to be
chosen, desirable. (cf. pililián).

_pílio_, (Sp. pillo) Roguish, knavish, shrewd, artful, cunning,
tricky, tricksy. (cf. sutíl, perdubál, lág-it, agóng, lísto, antígo).


_pilípig_, (H) A dish of immature rice or corn; to prepare or
make such a dish. Mapilípig kitá. Let us make a dish of pilípig or
límbok. Pilipíga ang kalanáy nga ináni ko kaína. Prepare a dish of
pilípig from the sticky rice I cut a short while ago. (cf. límbok,
linubók).

_pilipiliwán_, (B) See pilewpilewán.

_Pilipínas_, The Philippines, Philippine Islands.

_Pilipínhon_, Philippine, pertaining to the Philippines; Filipino.

_Pilipíno_, Filipino. Batásan nga Pilipíno. Philippine customs.

_pilípis_, To crush, break into small fragments or crumble a piece
of sugar, a clod of earth, a lump of salt, etc.; to rub, squeeze,
roll (between the fingers). Pilipísa ang kalámay. Crumble the
sugar. Pilipísa ang áto sang hílo túbtub nga magsulúd sa dágum. Roll
the end of the thread to a fine point, till it can pass through the
eye of the needle.

_pilípod_, To sprinkle, scatter or spread from between the tips of
the fingers (as ash, powdered sugar, salt, etc.) Pilipóri sing asín
ang kán-on. Sprinkle some salt on the (cooked) rice. (cf. bilíbod,
pirípod).

_pílit_, (H) To urge, insist, force, compel, impel, constrain, drive,
make, press with arguments, entreaties, threats, etc. Pilíta siá sa
pagtámbong. Compel him to attend. Ginpílit níya akó sa pagupúd sa
íya. He pressed me to accompany him. He made me go with him. Napilitán
akó sa paghámbal sa ínyo nga----. I feel obliged or am compelled
to tell you that----. Indì ka magpílit sa ákon. Now, don't force
me. (Note the accent in "napilitán").

_pilít_, To adhere to, stick to (as paste, glue, etc.). Ang lúnang
nagpilít sa ákon sapátos. The mud stuck to my boots. Papilití
(papítli) ang sóbre sing prankéo. Stamp--, put (stick) a stamp on--,
the envelope. (cf. dokót).

_pilitíkan_, The trigger of a rifle, revolver, or the
like. (cf. pitík).

_pilitíkon_, See pilitíkan. (cf. gatílyo).

_pilítkan, pilítkon_, See pilitíkan, pilitíkon.

_pilíw-pilíw, pilíw-piliwán_, See piléw-piléw, piléw-pilewán--top, etc.

_piliyáran_, See piliáran.

_pilô_, Double, twofold, duplicate, folded; to double, duplicate,
fold. Piloá ang kalát, kápay, etc. Double the rope, fold the blanket,
etc. Piloón (Piloán) mo lang ang bilí siní. Simply double the price
of this. Charge double the price. Ginpilô níya ang íya paningúhà. He
redoubled his efforts. Pilô nga kadunggánan ang íya naágum. He obtained
a double (twofold) honour.

_pílo_, (Sp. pelo) Hair, fibre, filament. (cf. bohók, búlbul,
balahíbo).

_pilók_, Fold, plait, doubling; to fold, plait, double. Piloká ang
hábul. Fold the blanket. Pilokí akó siníng mga papél. Fold these
papers for me. (cf. pilô, píod).

_pilón_, (Sp. pilon) Watering trough, basin; loaf (of sugar); to
filter, especially to purify unrefined sugar by putting it into a
wicker-basket and letting the moisture filter through. What remains
in the basket is then dry sugar of a whitish colour. Kalámay nga
pilón. A loaf of refined sugar. Piloná ang kalámay. Filter the sugar.

_pilóng_, To close or shut the eyes; closed, shut (of eyes). Pilongá
ang ímo mga matá. Close (shut) your eyes. (cf. píong, píyong, piróng;
kípot)

_pílpig_, To tear or twist off, break off; gather. (cf. bílbig).

_pílpil_, To weigh down, cap, top, put on top; any weight put on top
of something else. Pilpilá ang tabákò sang isá ka bató nga dakô. Put
a large stone on top of the tobacco-leaves. Pilpilí iníng mga papél,
agúd índì mapálid sang hánging. Place some weight on these papers,
so that they may not be blown (carried) away by the wind.

_pilúka_, (Sp. peluca) Peruke, wig, periwig; false hair.

_pilwák-pílwak_, The thin part of a cable or rope. Ang kalát mabúgtò
sa pilwákpílwak. The rope will snap where it is thinnest.

_pilwák-pilwakán_, Place where a thing is thin or narrow; the (hollow)
flank, as of a cow, buffalo, etc.


_pílyo_, See pílio--roguish, shrewd, etc.

_pilyó-pílyo_, Dim. of pílyo. Also: Top, highest
point. (cf. piléwpilewán).

_pilyó-pilyóhon_, A little knavish, roguish, shrewd,
cunning. Pilyópilyóhon nga táo. A rather cunning fellow, a trickster.

_pimiénta_, (Sp. pimienta) Pepper; black pepper.

_pimiénto_, (Sp. pimiento) Pepper; red or Cayenne pepper; condiment,
seasoning (in general).

_pinahorób-hórob_, (B) Comprehension, understanding, knowledge. Walâ
gid akó sing pinahoróbhórob sang íla nga sugilánon. I do not know at
all what they are (were) talking about. (cf. namasngaán, nabádwan).

_pinadahúm-dáhum_, Thought, idea, inkling, knowledge. Walâ akó sing
pinadahúmdáhum kon sa diín siá karón. I have no idea where he is
now. (cf. dahúmdáhum).

_pinakâ_, (H) A kite having a tail and shaped somewhat like a
frog. Hence the name. (cf. pakâ--frog; sapísápi, sinángula, buladór,
pinángkà).

_pinákas_, Cut in two, kippered, especially applied to fish cut and
salted. Nakabakál akó sing pinákas. I bought some salt fish cut and
dried. (pákas).

_pinalábtog_ Hash, minced meat. (palábtog).

_pinálad_, Lucky, fortunate. (cf. pálad, kapaláran, paláran).

_pinalánggà_, Darling, pet. (palánggà).

_pinalían_, Healed, scarred, cicatrized, bearing the mark of a healed
wound or ulcer. (pálì)

_pinamalahán_, (H) Fish or meat prepared and served without sauce. (pa,
malá).

_pinamúgnan_, Employment, position; wages, earnings, pay (for
work). (cf. pógon, palamúgnan, pangítà, kinitáan).

_pinanahián_, What has been sewn or stitched, sewn
together. (cf. tahî).

_pinangálap_, Talisman, amulet, charm, mascot, anything worn with the
superstitious belief that the bearer will enjoy protection from harm
and danger. (pangálap). (cf. antíngánting).

_pinangát_, Dried leaf-stalks of dágmay mixed with dried fish, garlic
and ginger. (pangát).

_pinangawatáy_, (H) Stealing, cheating (of many). (cf. káwat).

_pinángdan_, Like a--, in the form of a--, screw-pine; twisted like
a screw-pine. Bángkaw nga pinángdan. A lance with a long drawn and
twisted point.

_pinangilayáy, pinangiláyay_, (H) To wink at one another, pass a
hint--, to signal--, to another by moving the eyebrows (said of more
than two). (cf. kílay, pangiláy).

_pinángkà_, See pinakâ. (pakâ--pángkà).

_pinaniíran_, (H) Observation, experience, knowledge of
life. (cf. tíid, paníid).

_pinanilágan_, What has been well watched or observed, observation,
experience. (cf. panílag, pinaniíran).

_pinanimád-únan_, Knowledge, experience, observation. (cf. panimád-on,
pinaniíran, pinanilágan).

_pinanlatón-láton_, (H) What has been handed down by--,
received from--, others; tradition, myth, legend, non-historical
narrative. (cf. latón).

_pinanlayáhan, pinanglayáhan_, Caught by a láya-net. Pinanlayáhan
ukón pinanagatán iníng mga ísdà? Has this fish been caught by net or
by hook and line? (cf. láya, pangláya).

_pinanóng-pánong_, (H) Grouped; in groups, by groups or bunches,
many together. (cf. panóng).

_pinarásko_, Bottled; by the bottle or flask. (cf. prásko).

_pinaságì_, Squared, square beams, logs, planks, laths, spars (as
for sale in a lumber-yard); mercantile timber. (cf. paságì).

_pinasahî_, Extraordinary, excelling, out of the common, superior,
uncommon, quite different. (sahî; pasahî).

_pinasapayánon_, Unconcerned, indifferent, phlegmatic, easy-going,
devil-may-care, careless, listless, unsolicitous. (cf. pasapayán).

_pinatabák_, Lye, water mixed with ashes for cleaning
purposes. (patabák).

_pináwà_, Rice not well pounded or milled, an inferior kind of rice.

_pinayaón_, Childish, silly, unreasonable. (payâ).

_pinayópò, pinayôpô_, Shavings used for kindling a fire as well as
for producing fire by friction. (payópò).

_píndak_, Wholesale, in gross, in the gross, in the bulk,
in large quantities; to buy--up,--in the gross,--wholesale (by
wholesale). Nakapíndak akó sing ságing sa tiénda. I bought bananas
wholesale (by wholesale) in the market. Ginpapíndak ko ang ákon
kalámay. I sold my sugar in the gross. Nagapamalígyà kamí sing píndak
kag sing utáyutáy. We are selling (en gross and en detail) wholesale
and retail.

_pingás_, To have a bit (piece) broken off, (applied to an earthen pot,
crockery, etc.). (cf. bingáw).

_píngas_, To break a bit out of pottery or crockery, etc. Indì mo
pagpingáson ang báso, kólon, túbo, etc. Don't break (chip) the glass,
the rice-pot, the lamp-chimney, etc. Napíngas ang gorgoríta. The
water-jar had a bit (piece) broken off.

_píngga_, Pole, bar, stick; to carry on a pole. (cf. tíngga, tinggáhan,
tuángtuangán).

_pínggan_, Plate, table-ware; dish. (cf. tulánhan, pláto).

_píngig_, The under-jaw, lower maxilla. (cf. apipíngig).

_píngig_, Protruding, prominent or ugly jaw-bones.

_pingígan_, See pingígon.

_pingígon_, One who has protruding, ugly jaw-bones, prognathic,
prognathous.

_píngkaw_, Stiff or paralyzed in the arms; to become stiff or
paralyzed, said of the arms. Nagpíngkaw siá. His arm became paralyzed
or stiff.

_píngos_, To breathe with difficulty, wheeze. (cf. hímpok, hápò).

_piníd-an_, Folded, fold, plait, braid. (cf. píod).

_pínig_, To separate, segregate, set apart, select, distribute,
divide, classify. Pinígon mo ang mga páhò nga maáyo. Set the good
mangoes apart. (cf. pílì, pabulág).

_piníg_, Set apart, chosen, select, extraordinary, not common,
excelling. (cf. pinílì, pasahî).

_piníg-pínig_, Dim. and Freq. of pínig--to separate, etc.

_pinílì_, Chosen, elect, select, picked. Madámò ang tinawág, diótay
lamáng ang pinílì. Many are called, but few are chosen.

_pinilían_, Chosen--, selected--, from; remnant, leavings, what has
been rejected or discarded. (cf. pílì).

_pinilián_, Chosen, elected, voted for. (cf. pinílì, napilián).

_piniliáy_, Election, election time; to elect, vote for. (cf. pílì).

_pinilípig_, Made into pilípig. Pinilípig nga pilít. Pilít-rice made
into a dish of pilípig or ibus, which see.

_pinilipínhon_, Of--, pertaining to--, made in--, according to use
and custom in--, the Philippines. (Pilipínas, pilipínhon).

_pinilitáy_, Force, compulsion, physical or moral constraint; to force,
compel (said of many). (cf. pílit, lúgus).

_pinilokán_, A fold or plait, anything folded or plaited, a
dog-ear. May pinilokán sa púnta sang papél. There is a fold at the
corner of the paper. The paper is turned down (dog-eared) at the
corner. (cf. pilók, piníd-an).

_pinindákay_, Wholesale, buying and selling on a large scale or in
large quantities. (cf. píndak; utáy-utáy--retail).

_pinínpin_, Half-full grains (of rice). (cf. alopínpin, amáyaw,
umáyaw).

_pínkas_, (Sp. penca) A pulpy leaf or joint (of plants).

_pínkas_, (Sp. finca) Real estate, property. (cf. pagkabutáng,
umá, baláy).

_píno_, (Sp. fino) Fine, perfect, pure; slender, thin, small;
delicate, polished, refined. Papíno--to refine, etc. etc. Pinapíno
nga kalámay. Refined sugar. Papinohán-kalámay, papinohán sang
kalámay. Sugar-refinery.

_pín-ot_, Tightness; to tighten, make compact or tight, so that air or
fluids cannot pass at all or only with difficulty. Dílì mo pagpin-otón
ang pagdúbla sang tabákò, agúd índì akó pagpin-otán sa pagsúpsup. Do
not roll the tobacco-leaves (cigar) too tight for otherwise it will be
difficult for me to draw (smoke) the cigar. Nagpín-ot ang dúghan ko,
nga daw dílì akó makaginháwa. My chest feels tight, so that I can
scarcely breathe.

_pinóy_, Filipino. (cf. pilipínhon. Pinóy is used humorously and
even contemptuously).

_pínpin_, To take away from, set apart, separate from a heap or large
quantity a certain amount. Pinpiní akó sing duhá ka bílog nga kakáw
sa siníng túmpok. Set apart for me from this heap two (a couple of)
cacao-fruits. Ipínpin (pinpiná) ang humáy nga bilinhíon. Separate
the seed-grain from the rest of the rice. (cf. bulahín).

_pínpin_, All together, general; to collect, unite, bring together,
gather. Pínpin nga piniliáy. General elections. Pinpiná silá nga
tanán. Gather them all together. (cf. tingúb, pínsan, púnpun).

_pínsa_, (Sp. pinzas) A pair of tweezers, pincers, forceps,
nippers. (cf. kímpit).

_pínsa_, See pinsár.

_pínsa_, (Sp. dispensa) Pantry, larder, provision-store; rice-granary
placed under the floor of a house. (cf. palúsad).

_pínsan_, To gather, collect into one, do all together, in one
go. Pinsanón ko lang ang pagbáyad sang tanán ko nga mga útang. I am
going to pay all my debts in one go. Ginpínsan níya ang tanán nga
mga mángga. He gathered all the mangoes in one heap. Pinsaní ang
dispénsa sang tanán nga mga inámot sa tábad. Put in the larder all
the provisions contributed for the banquet. (cf. tingúb).

_pínsar, pinsár_, (Sp. pensar) Thinking, thought, reflection,
cogitation, consideration, pondering; to think, ponder, reflect,
consider, cogitate, turn (a matter) over in the mind, apply
the mind to. Táo nga walâ sing pinsár. A man without thought or
reflection. Pinsahón (Pinsarón) mo inâ sing maáyo. Think it out
well. Think well on it. Walâ gid akó makapinsár nga mahanabô inâ. It
never entered my thoughts--, it never struck me--, I could not
possibly think--, that such a thing would or could happen (come to
pass). (cf. dúmdum, hunâhúnà, painóíno, libólíbo, basóbáso). (pínsa
id.).

_pinsél_, (Sp. pincel) A brush, especially an artist's or painter's
brush.

_pinsútan_, Bad, no good, good-for-nothing. (cf. waláy pulús, walâ
sing átsoy, etc.)

_pínta_, (Sp. pintar) Paint, colour, pigment; to paint, make a picture
or drawing of, to picture, illustrate, portray, delineate, draw,
pencil, sketch, limn. Pintahí ang lamésa, ang díngding, etc. Paint
the table, the partition wall, etc. Ginpintahán níya ang laráwan ni
Fuláno. He painted N.N.'s portrait. Ipínta sa kisamí iníng kolór nga
maputî. Paint the ceiling with this white colour. (cf. duág).

_pintál, píntal_, Bolt, bar; to bolt, bar. Pintalí ang ganháan. Bolt
the door. Ipintál sa puérta iníng kawáyan. Bar the door with this
bamboo.

_píntas_, Cruelty, brutality, inhumanity, truculence, harshness;
to be cruel, harsh, brutal, inhuman, truculent, treat with
great harshness, cruelty, rigour, severity. Indì ka magpíntas sa
íya. Indì mo siá pagpintasán. Do not be cruel to him. Don't treat
him with cruelty. Pahaliná yanáng magtotóon, kay dáyon gid lang níya
ginapamintasán ang mga eskuéla. Send that teacher away for he is
always harsh to his pupils.

_píntok_, Mark, sign, dot, spot, stain; to stamp, punch, puncture,
make dots. Ipíntok ang hál-o sa humáy, índì sa bató. Bring the pestle
down on the rice not on the stone. Kon malúyag ka magásod sa ámon
mamíntok ka ánay, agúd índì magsintokánay ang áton mga hál-o. If you
wish to join us in pounding rice, time your strokes first, lest our
pestles should knock together.

_pintók-píntok_, Dim. of píntok. Spotted, dotted, punctured, dapple,
variegated. (cf. kámbang--piebald, brindled).

_píntong_, A game of cards (at cards).

_pintór_, (Sp. pintor) Painter. (cf. tigduág).


_píntos_, Parcel, package, bundle. May píntos ka nga dalá
(gindalá)? Have you brought a parcel? (cf. pinutús id.).

_pintúra_, (Sp. pintura) Paint, colour, colouring matter, pigment,
wash, distemper; picture, painting. (cf. duág, dinuagán).

_pinúdlan_, The part of a tree left in the ground after the trunk is
cut down, stub, stump. (cf. pulúd).

_pinugián_, The cloth woven first and consequently the first to be
wound on the roller of a native loom. The pinugián is frequently
not quite smooth and is inferior in value to the rest of the
weave. (cf. púgì, purogían).

_pinúlon_, Roll, reel, film (of a motion-picture). (cf. pólon, púlon).

_pinulúngan_, What has been said, speech, discourse, talk, object
talked about. (cf. púlong).

_pinúnà_, Meshed, netted; net, fishing net, knitted goods. (cf. púnà).

_pinunâ_, By the piece; divided in pieces or parcels. (cf. punâ--piece,
part, division).

_pinungá_, To snuffle. See pungá.

_pinúngsan_, Made up in a knot, bunch or chignon; chignon. Ipuní iníng
mga búlak sa ímo pinúngsan kag dúghan. Decorate your hair (chignon)
and bosom with these flowers. (cf. pungós).

_pinúnsok_, Clustered, in clusters; to cluster, crowd
together. (cf. púnsok).

_pinúsong_, Bosh, twaddle, foolish or silly talk, nonsense; to talk
nonsense, etc. (cf. púsong).

_pinustahánay_, Betting; to wager, bet (one against
another). (cf. pústa).

_pinut-ánay_, The ambushing, waylaying, murdering, etc. of one another
(on a large scale). (cf. puút).

_pinútì_, Knife, bolo, any cutting tool made of steel. (cf. putî).

_pinutús_, Parcel, packet, package, bundle. (putús; cf. píntos id.;
binágtong).

_pinuyasáy_, Scolding, cursing and swearing, abusive or vituperative
language; to abuse, revile, reproach, disparage, use foul or insulting
language. (cf. púyas).

_pínya_, (Sp. piña) Pine-apple; fibre obtained from the leaves of
the pine-apple plant; cloth woven of such fibre.

_píod_, Fold, plait; to fold, plait. Píd-on (pióron) mo ang ákon
báyò kag ibutáng sa maléta. Fold up my jacket and put it in the
handbag. Píd-i (pióri) akó siníng mantél. Fold this table-cloth for
me. (cf. pilô, pilók, lilín).

_piód-píod_, Dim. of píod. Páypay nga piódpíod. A folding fan.

_piokós_, A cigar rolled for private use at home, as done in many
native households. Ginapasolabí ko ang mga piokós sa abáno. I prefer
home-made cigars to factory-cigars.

_píol_, To tire, etc. See pául id. Napiólan--napaúlan.

_pión_, To move, displace. (cf. tión, tióng, língkang, ínghit, íngkà).

_pióng_, Closed, shut (of eyes). (cf. piyóng id.).

_píong_, To close or shut the eyes. Piónga ang mga matá mo. Shut
(Close) your eyes. (cf. pilóng, piróng, píyong).

_píot_, To be or become tight, straitened, difficult; to oppress,
treat harshly. Nagpíot karón ang íya pangabúhì. His life is at
present a trying one. He is in a tight fix. He is leading a hard
life now. Napít-an kamí sang ámon pangabúhì sa karón nga túig. This
year we are living in straitened circumstances. Ginapíot silá sang
íla pangolohán. Their government treats them harshly (oppresses
them). (cf. lapígot, pígus).

_píphi_, See the following pípi id.

_pípi_, To rub--, strike--, brush--, wipe--, shake--, dust--,
off. Pipíha ang mga subáy sa ímo báyò. Brush the ants off your
dress. Pipíhi ang ákon likód sang yáb-ok. Brush (Rub, Wipe) the dust
off my back (with the hand or with a brush). (píphi id.).

_pípì, pîpî_, To strike with a flat instrument, to hammer; beat,
slap with the hand repeatedly or in quick succession (especially
in connection with massaging); to shampoo, clean the hair and scalp
with a hair-wash; to prepare a hair-wash from the salangkógi-bark,
or the like, by hammering (beating, crushing) the bark and dissolving
its juice in water; to use or apply such a hair-wash. Pipíi (Pîpií)
akó sing hinakí. Prepare a hair-wash for me. Pápà ka sing hinakí nga
ipípì (ipîpî) sa ákon bohók. Beat out some bark (Prepare a hairwash)
for cleaning my hair. Pipíi (Pîpií) ang ákon bohók sing hinakí. Pour
some hair-wash over my hair. Pinipían (Pinîpián) níla ang bútkon
ni Fuláno sa pagpaúmpaw sa íya. They slapped N.N.'s arm in order to
bring him to. (cf. pápà, pâpâ).

_pípis_, To empty completely, let fall out the last drop (from a
bottle, or the like). (cf. titî). Also: to roll, twist, squeeze. See
pilípis.

_pirá_, (B) How many, how much. See pilá.

_pirahón_, The comb of a cock. (cf. padóng, paróng).

_piráw, píraw_, To shine feebly, burn dimly or low, give but little
light. Nagapíraw na gid lámang ang kandílà, kay upúd na kaáyo. The
candle gives now only a little light, for it is burned to a very
short stump. (cf. kíraw).

_piráw-píraw, piráw-piráw_, Dim. and Freq. of píraw--to burn
dimly. (cf. kiráw-kiráw).

_piráw-piráw_, A kind of sea-shell.

_píri_, To quiver, tremble, quake. Nagapíri ang matá níya. His eye
quivers (is quivering).

_pírik_, To tremble, quiver; speak indistinctly, murmur, utter
with trembling lips. Kon hubúg siá nagapírik ang íya dílà sing mga
pamuyáyaw. When he is drunk he utters indistinct curses. (cf. pílik,
píri).

_piríkat_, Twaddle, bosh, nonsense. (cf. puriákot, lamádà, lásang).

_piripiási_, Very little, only a little at a time. Piripiási gid lang
ang íya pagtahî. She is doing very little in the way of sewing. She
sews seldom and only a little at a time. (cf. diótay, dítay, isót).

_pirí-píri, pirí-pirí_, Dim. and Freq. of píri. Nagapirípíri pa ang
inútud nga íkog sang tagútò. The broken-off tail of the lizard is
still wriggling.

_pirípis_, See pilípis, pípis--to squeeze, twist, roll (between
the fingers).

_pirípod_, See pilípod--to sprinkle, scatter.

_pírma_, (Sp. firmar) Firm, firm-name; signature, sign manual;
to sign, subscribe, put one's signature to. Walâ pa siá makapírma,
kay may kasablágan siá. He has not been able to sign yet, for he
has been detained (occupied, engaged, busy with something else,
prevented or impeded). Pirmahí iní. Sign this. Put your signature to
this. Napirmahán na balá ang kalig-onán? Is the document signed? Has
the document (deed) been signed?

_pírma_, Contr. of konpírma. Anák níya siá sa pírma. He is his godson
(goddaughter) by confirmation.

_pírme_, (Sp. firme) Constant, consistent, incessant, uninterrupted,
persevering, perpetual, continual, ceaseless, unceasing, persistent,
continuous, pertinacious, steady, invariable, regular; firm; strong,
lasting; constantly, always, ever, for ever, every moment, all the
time, aye, for aye, consistently, etc. Pírme lang siá nagasugál. He
is always playing cards. He is for ever gambling. (cf. dáyon, daláyon,
gihápon, sáli, ságad).

_piróng_, (B) Shut, closed (of eyes); to shut, close. See píyong,
kípot, pilóng.

_pírot_, Shut, closed; to shut or close (the eyes), to be shut or
closed. Papiróta ang isá sang mga matá mo. Shut (close) one of your
eyes. (cf. píyong, kípot, piróng).

_pirót_, One who has the eyelids nearly closed or only half open.

_pisáda_, (Sp. pesada) A quantity weighed at a time; one weight of
sugar or one picul equal to 63.26 kilos.

_písak_, Wedge, plug, stopple; to plug, wedge in, stopple,
put--, drive--, in a wedge. Pisáki ang arádo. Put a wedge into the
plough. Pánday-písak. An indifferent or inferior kind of carpenter,
who is no good at measurements and has frequently to use plugs and
wedges in order to make things fit.

_pís-an_, Having a brood of chickens, broody. Mungâ nga pís-an. A
hen with a brood of chickens. (cf. pisô).

_písan_, To be or become diligent, assiduous, zealous, active,
energetic, indefatigable, hardworking; to apply oneself to with zeal,
perform diligently. Nagpísan siá karón, ápang sang úna matámad
siá magtoón. Now he is diligent, but formerly he was too lazy
to study. Pisáni gid ang ímo pagtóon, pagpangabúdlay, etc. Study
with great application, work with zeal, etc. Ginapisánan níla ang
pagáni. They are working hard,--hard at work (diligent or industrious)
at harvesting rice. Kon mapisanán (note the accent!) akó mahápit akó
sa ímo baláy. If I feel inclined (disposed or in form) I will pay
you a visit at your home.

_pisándo_, (Sp. pisar) To walk, stroll, visit. Malúyag siá magpisándo
sa----. He likes to visit----. He wants to go to----. (cf. lakát,
kádto, paseár, dúaw, támbong).

_pisáng_, Potsherd, shard, a piece of broken pottery or the like;
broken, maimed, mutilated, having a piece broken off. (cf. pingás).

_písang_, To knock or break off a piece or bit of glass, pottery,
etc. (cf. píngas).

_pisár_, See pesár--to weigh, etc.

_pisára_, (Sp. pizarra) Slate; blackboard, hyloplate.

_pisáw_, A wink, nod, sign; to wink, blink, twinkle, nod, give a sign
by moving the eyes, open and shut the eyes rapidly.

_písaw_, A small penknife edged at the point somewhat like a chisel
and used for sharpening pencils, etc.

_pisáw-pisáw_, To blink, twinkle, wink; to open and shut the eyes
rapidly; to nictitate. Dim. and Freq. of pisáw. (cf. pamilók,
pamilókpilók, pamisókpisók).

_pisáw-písaw_, A kind of small tree.

_písgà_, To pinch, press, compress, squeeze, grip firmly. Naghibî
ang bátà, kay pinísgà sang íya manoglíbang sa bútkon. The child
began to cry, because the nurse pinched its arm. (cf. pígsà, ipít,
pisíl, píslit).

_písì_, Cord, string, rope. (cf. kalát, higót, káble).

_písì_, A small amount, very little, as much as two or three fingers
can hold. (cf. púdyot, kusî, kodót).

_pisî_, To squeeze, press, compress, pinch. (cf. kodót, kusî, pisíl,
píslit, písgà, pígsà).

_pisík_, To fly or jump off, make a quick and sudden movement, as a
frog jumping into the water when alarmed, or the like. (cf. lisík,
líksi).

_pisiká_, (B) Money, cash. (cf. písos, pisítas).

_pisíl_, To compress, pinch, squeeze (between the fingers without
using the nails, applied particularly to massaging). Pisilá (Písla) ang
íya bútkon. Massage his arm (by pinching and kneading). (cf. píslit).

_pisítas_, (Sp. peseta) A dime, a silver coin worth twenty centavos,
a peseta; worth or costing a peseta. Pilá ang ginbáyad mo siníng
tíntà?--Pisítas (tagpisítas) ang botílya. How much did you pay for
this ink?--Twenty centavos the (a) bottle.

_piskál_, (Sp. fiscal) Fiscal, attorney or prosecutor for the
government; parish-clerk, amanuensis, assistant of a parish priest
in keeping the parish records.

_piskalíya_, (Sp. fiscalia) Office i.e. room and business of a fiscal.

_piskánte_, (Sp. pescante) Coach-box; cart-driver; to drive. Sín-o
ang mapiskánte? Who will be the driver? Who shall drive? Who is going
to drive? (cf. dalá).

_pískil_, Any natural knob or protuberance.

_píslì_, To squander, waste,
be--fastidious,--squeamish,--prodigal,--difficult to please in matters
of taste, or the like. (cf. údhà, buhahâ, pílì, pidâ).

_píslit_, To pinch, compress, knead, massage. See pisíl. Pislitá ang
íya bútkon. Massage his arm. Pinch his arm.

_píslong_, To put rice into the mortar for pounding; to step
accidentally into a hole, mud, pool, etc., to stumble, fall
into. Pislongí ang lusóng sing humáy. Put some rice into the
mortar. Ipíslong iníng isá ka gántang nga humáy sa lusóng. Put this
ganta of rice into the mortar. Nakapíslong sa búhò ang íya tiíl kag
nabálì. He fell into a hole and broke his foot.

_písngi_, The cheek. (cf. bagíing).

_písngò_, The convulsive sobs emitted as weeping draws to an end;
to sob after weeping, as children when they have had their cry
out. (cf. hibubún-ot).

_pisô_, Chicken, chick, chickling. (cf. sumaláyhaw, kilawát, mungâ,
sulúg).


_pisô_, To make a swift movement, etc. See pisík, lisík, líksi, págsi).

_pisók_, A wink, twinkling, instant, moment; to blink, twinkle,
close (and open) the eyes (eyelids). Isá ka pisók gid lang ang
pagtúlug (pagkatulúg) ko kagáb-i. Last night I hardly slept a wink,
i.e. very little. Pisoká ang ilalangúb mo. Open and close (shut)
your eyes. Ipisók ang matá mo. Blink your eyes. Keep opening and
closing your eyes. (cf. pamisók, pamisókpisók, pamilók, pamilókpilók,
pamisáwpisáw).

_pisón_, (Sp. pisón, apisonar) Rammer; steam-roller; to ram, go over
with a steam-roller.

_písos_, (Sp. peso) A peso, half an American dollar. Písos ang ginbáyad
ko siní. I paid one peso for this. Baylohí akó sing mamisosón (sing mga
pisosón) siníng papél de bánko. Change me this bank-note; give me pesos
for it (in silver peso-pieces or in one-peso bills). (cf. mamísos,
mángmang).

_pisót_, See bútò.

_píspis_, Bird. Ang píspis nagalupád. A bird flies. The bird is
flying. (cf. lupád).

_písta_, See piésta--feast. (cf. pándut).

_písta_, (Sp. pista) Trace, trail, track, scent, clue, sign,
indication. (cf. úsoy, timáan, tándà, ági, pát-in).

_pistílyo_, (Sp. pestillo) Door-latch; the lock of a door; the bolt
of a door-lock.

_píswak_, To gush out, spirt, spurt, squirt, spout out, jet,
issue in a jet. Ang túbig nagpíswak sa alhíbi nga naígò sang isá ka
lisó. The water squirted (spirted) from the tank that was hit by a
bullet. (cf. súmpit, púswak).

_píta_, (Sp. pita) Agave, century plant. (cf. magí).

_pítad_, To open, unfold, spread out. Pitára (pitáda) ang
tulún-an. Open the book. (cf. bítad).

_pitád-pítad_, Dim. and Freq. of pítad--to open, etc.

_pít-ag_, To oppress, keep in subjection, treat harshly with. See
pít-al.

_pítak_, To enclose, lay up in a bin, make a primitive bin, enclosure
or receptacle for grain, or the like. Quite frequently such a bin
or container (pitakán) consists of a mere framework of bamboo lined
with grass, straw, leaves, or the like. Pitáki ang humáy. Make a bin
(an inclosure) for the rice. Dagámi ang ipítak mo. Use straw for the
bin (rice-container).

_pitáka_, (Sp. petaca) Cigar-case; wickerwork box, clothes-basket,
case, trunk, travelling box. (cf. tampípì, piakát, boónbóon).

_pitakán_, A bin, primitive grain-container, rice-storage. (cf. pítak).

_pít-al_, To oppress, deal harshly with, molest, pester, trouble, keep
in subjection, keep "under the thumb", (cf. pít-ag, pígos, limólimó).

_pítalâ_, The ring binding a wooden handle where the stock enters
(of a bolo or other tool).

_pít-an_, From píot--to press squeeze, tighten, etc.

_pitápitá_, Widely spaced or separated from one another, scattered,
straggling, standing here and there; to divide, separate, set apart,
segregate one from the other. (cf. putáputá, atádatád, atákaták).

_pítaw_, A kind of small bird.

_píti, pití_, To finger, handle, fumble, touch or toy with the fingers;
to twist, roll (between the fingers). Ngáa nga ginapíti (ginapití)
mo lang ang balasahón nga walâ mo pagabasáha? Why are you fingering
the paper without reading it? Pitíha (Pitihá) ang púsud sináng pányò
nga sóklà kag ikúhit sang púling sa íya matá. Roll up the corner of
that silk handkerchief and remove with it the mote from his eye.

_pitík_, Rein, tether, lead, rope attached to a buffalo, ox,
etc. for guiding or leading; to guide (a buffalo, etc.) by means of a
rope. Maálam ka balá magpitík sang karabáw? Maálam ka balá magúyat sang
pitík sang karabáw? Can you handle a buffalo (by means of a rope)? Do
you know how to guide a buffalo with a rein (lead, rope, line)?

_pitík_, To palpitate, throb, beat, thump, hammer; to snap (one's
finger); palpitation; a tap, slight blow. Ang íya tagiposóon nagpitík
sing madásig. His heart beat fast. Nagapitík ang ólo ko. My head is
hammering, i.e. I have a head-ache. Pítki (pitikí) or Pítka (pitiká)
siá. Snap your finger at him. Tap (rap) him.


_pitík-míngaw, pitíkmíngaw_, To be love-sick or heart-sick,
particularly applied to lovers that are separated and long to see
each other, or the like. (cf. pitík, míngaw).

_pitík-pítik_, Dim. and Freq. of pitík. Also: Wrigglers, the larva
of a mosquito, etc., so-called, because it wriggles in water.

_píting_, Closely attached, narrow, tight; transparent; to be closely
attached, etc. Píting ang íya báyò. His jacket is too narrow,--too
tight,--a very close fit,--transparent.

_pitípit_, Very much, excessive, utmost, extreme. Pitípit nga kadulúm,
kalisúd, etc. Utter darkness, utmost distress, etc.

_pití-píti_, Dim. and Freq. of píti--to finger, etc. Also:
to play with, fool, trick. Anó ang ginapitípíti mo? What are
you--fingering,--toying with? Why are you fumbling with your fingers?

_pitípot_, To stick or adhere to. Ang butóngbútong nagapitípot sa íya
kamót. The butóngbútong-candy is sticking to his hand. Ang tanán nga
mga maragkót nagapitípot. All viscous matter is sticky. (cf. dokót,
pilít).

_pítkan, pítkon_, From pitík--to throb, etc.

_pítlà_, Indistinct, thick, not quite clear (of speech); to
speak with a rather slow tongue (thick utterance), to pronounce
indistinctly. (cf. pihít, hát-on).

_pítlan_, From pilít--to adhere to, etc. Napítlan ang íya mga túdlò
sang dúgà sang lángkà. The juice of the jack-fruit stuck to his
fingers.

_pítluk_, To throttle, strangle, kill by throttling or by cutting
the throat. (cf. kugâ).

_píto_, (Sp. pito). Whistle, pipe, penny-whistle, cat-call; the whistle
of a steamboat, horn of an automobile. (cf. pamíto, huní, síyak).

_pitó_, Seven.

_pitó-ádlaw, pitoádlaw_, A week. (cf. simána, pitó, ádlaw).

_pitó-adláwan, pitoadláwan_, A Weekly, a periodical appearing once
a week.

_pitógo_, A kind of palm much used for decorating purposes.

_pítok_, To wriggle, squirm, move, stir as a worm crawling on the
ground. (cf. híwos, etc.).

_pitók-pítok_, Dim. and Freq. of pítok.

_pít-ol_, To strike, beat, hit. Pit-olí siá sang ímo binángon, hál-o,
etc. Hit (Strike) him with your bolo, rice-pestle, etc. (cf. bálbal,
lámpus, hánot, búnal, hámpak).

_pitó-pitó_, To count up to seven and begin again at one. Pitópitohá
ang pagísip sang maís. Count out the maize-cobs in sevens. Also:
A seven months old fetus.

_pitó-pitó_, Irascible, choleric; irritable, testy, techy, touchy,
hot--, sharp--, quick--, short--, tempered. (cf. sanggurút, pikón,
kutóskutós).

_pitó-píto_, To pick for "Blind man" in a game. Each partaker puts one
finger into the open hand of the leader; he whose finger is caught in
the suddenly closed hand has to be "Blind man", or the like. "Pitópíto,
dákpa si Beníto, kay nangáwat (nanákaw) sing (kang) tubó". "Pitópíto,
catch Benito, for he has stolen sugar cane" (one of the doggerels
sung by children).

_pítos_, To strike or slap with the fingers or with the whole open
hand. Pitósi siá sa likód, sa bútkon, etc. Slap him on the back,
on the arm, etc. (cf. lágpì, pípì, pípi, támpà, lipát, etc.).

_pitóy_, See bútò, id.

_pitrólyo_, (Sp. petroleo) Petroleum, mineral oil, kerosene,
lamp-oil. (cf. gas, agás).

_pítsay_, A kind of cabbage.

_pitsé-pítse_, (Probably from the Sp. peche, pechina) Trifles, things
of little value or importance, trivial or paltry matters; the common
run, ordinary people, poor folks. May ginabalígyà dirâ nga nanarîsárì
nga pitsépítse. Various little things (refreshments) are sold (served)
there. Pitsépítse silá nga mga táo. They are ordinary, simple common
people. (cf. girígirí, witíwití, timáwa; kagagmayán, karintukáy).

_pitsíl_, (Sp. pichel) Pitcher, mug, tankard, water-pot, especially
one used with a wash-basin.


_pitsokwérno_, (Perhaps from the Sp. pecho, cuerno) A toothed metal
plate with holes for the fingers, worn on the hand and used for
fighting. A well aimed blow from a hand armed with a "pitsokwérno"
may kill a man. A sort of iron cestus. (cf. kaboráta--a slung shot).

_pitsón_, (Sp. pichon) A young pigeon or dove.

_pít-ul_, See pít-ol--to strike, beat, club, cudgel, thrash, hit.

_pítyong_, Button, knob, stud. Pítyong-kilás. An electric
button. Itúm-ok mo ang ímo kamomóo sa pítyong-kilás. Press your thumb
against the electric button. (cf. pútyong, botón, botónes).

_piyángak_, To cry, whine, utter shrill cries of complaint, distress,
pain, protest, etc. (cf. tiángak, tiyángak).

_piyokós_, See piokós--a home-made cigar.

_piyóng_, Closed, etc. See pióng.

_píyong_, To shut, close. See píong.

_piyósan_, See payósan--tapering, etc.

_pláka_, (Sp. placa) Plate, plaque; medal, badge, insignia, star
(of an order, or the like).

_plamíngko_, (Sp. flamenco) A sharp knife, sword or
bolo. (cf. palamíngko).

_plan_, (Sp. plan) Plan, outline, scheme, intention, project,
design. (cf. túyò, huluáran, solóndan, katuyoán, hunâhúnà, dúmdum).

_planggána_, Wash-basin. See palanggána, labadór.

_plánsa_, (Sp. plancha) A sheet or plate of metal, galvanized iron
for roofing; smoothing iron, cloth-iron; to iron cloth. See perénsa,
plansahá, plansahí--perensahá, perensahí.

_plása_, (Sp. plaza) A public square, town-square, square, church-yard.

_plasáda_, The percentage of the betting paid to the owner of a
cockpit or similar places. (cf. mesáda).

_plastádo_, (Sp. aplastado) Crushed, smashed, flattened out; tight,
close-fitting. (cf. pikít, lumâ, pusâ, lamúsut).

_plasíbo_, (from the Latin "placebo)" The ringing of bells for and
during the "Libera" with absolution of the dead after mass; to ring
the bells for the funeral services of a deceased adult. Plasibóhi ang
minatáy. Ring the bells (toll the bells) for the dead. (cf. úndras).

_pláso_, (Sp. plazo) Time, term, date (of payment); instalment; a
limited or definite extent of time; work, job, employment. (cf. tión,
tiémpo, dág-on, panahón; alagarán, palamúgnan).

_plasolíta_, (Sp. plazoleta) A small public square.

_pláta_, (Sp. plata) Silver. Dipláta, di pláta (Sp. de plata)--of
silver, made of silver. (cf. pílak).

_plátano, platanó_, (Sp. plátano) Banana, plantain. (cf. ságing,
sáb-a).

_platéro_, (Sp. platero) Silversmith, goldsmith; a cupboard.

_platíto_, (Sp. plato) A small plate or dish; a kind of plant with
plate-like leaves.

_pláto_, (Sp. plato) Plate; dish, mess, fare, food served. Nakaúyon
akó gid siníng pláto nga balensiána. I liked that dish of valenciana
very much. (cf. pínggan, tulánhan).

_pláwta_, (Sp. flauta) Flute.

_plawtín_, (Sp. flautin) An octave flute or piccolo; a small flute.

_plékos_, (Sp. fleco) Fringe, purl, flounce, small tassels as often
seen on napkins, towels, etc. (cf. pilikílyo).

_plémas_, (Sp. flema) Phlegm. (cf. bádlò).

_pléte_, (Sp. flete) Fare, freight, freightage; hire, payment for
the lease or hire of; to hire, lease (out), take on lease, engage
a vehicle, etc. Pilá ang pléte? What is the fare? How much is to
be paid for the lease or hire? Ginpletehán ko ang íya áwto, ang íya
baláy, etc. I engaged his auto. I hired his house, etc. Ipapléte mo
sa ákon ang ímo dútà, kabáyo, etc. Let me have your land on lease,
let me hire your horse, etc. (cf. hinákay).

_pliéges_, (Sp. pliegue) Fold, crease, plait, pleat, tuck,
gather. (cf. pilók).

_pliégo_, (Sp. pliego) A sheet of paper, folded paper,
note-paper. Bákli akó sing tátlo ka pliégo nga papél. Buy me three
sheets of paper.

_plikílyo, plikílyos_, See plékos, pilikílyo.

_plúma_, (Sp. pluma) Pen (for writing); quill, plume,
feather. (cf. isulúlat, igsulúlat; búlbul).

_póbre_, (Sp. pobre) Poor, indigent, pauper, beggar, mendicant;
miserable, pitiable. (cf. próbe, ímol, makalolóoy, makilímos, dungúl).

_podól_, Stumpy, stocky, stubby, pudgy, etc. See póktol, búdul,
matipúngkò, pudól, pórdo).

_pódpod_, To crush, crumble, pulverize (between the fingers). Podporá
(-odá) ang kalámay nga bilóg. Crumble the lump of sugar. (cf. pilípis).

_pógo_, To bring together, lock up or keep in a safe place (chickens,
etc.). Kon hápon ang mga babáye nagapamógo sang mga manók. In the
evening the women gather the chickens to roost. Pogóha (Pógwa) ang
mga manók. Lock up the chickens. Ginpógo níla si José, kay ígò lang
siá sang lágaw. They have put José in a safe place, for he is very
much given to wandering about.

_pógon_, To toil, labour, work for daily wages, (but the frequentative
form "pamógon" is nearly always used).

_pógwan_, From pógo.

_póhon_, Conspiration, conspiracy, scheme, complot, intrigue,
cabal, machination, plot; to machinate, intrigue, scheme, conspire,
plot. Ginpóhon níla nga atihón ang báryo. They conspired to plunder
the village. Ginpohónan níla ang pagpatáy sa íya. They conspired to
kill him.

_pohonán_, Conspiracy, plot, secret combination for the commitment
of some crime; scheme, concerted plan; meeting place of conspirators
or plotters. (póhon).

_pokák_, See bilát.

_póker_, (English: poker) An American game at cards; to play poker.

_pokíto_, (Sp. poco, poquito) A little, rather little. (cf. diótay,
isót, piripiási).

_pokíto_, To move the fingers, opening them out and closing them again
as small children often do. Tan-awón mo ang bátà nga nagapokíto. Look
at the baby opening and closing its fingers.

_póklid_, To fall or tumble down, sink to the floor; throw on the
ground. Nagsunggoánay silá kag napóklid silá nga duhá. They ran
against each other (they collided) and both of them tumbled to the
floor. (cf. túmba).

_poklíd-póklid_ Dim. and Freq. of póklid. Also: A kind of poisonous
mushroom resembling the amamákol. Tan-awá yanáng balúng nga táo
nga nagapoklídpóklid. Look at that drunken man falling down every
few steps.

_póklo_, See bilát.

_pokô_, Syphilis. (pukô id.).

_pokól_, To be feeble and indistinct (of speech). Nagahugút ang íya
dílà kag nagapokól ang íya panghámbal. His tongue is tied and his
speech scarcely intelligible (very indistinct). Sugúng na ang íya
balatían kag pokól ang íya tíngug. He is now seriously ill and can
scarcely talk. (cf. harawaháw, pagáw, paragáw).

_pókol_, To knock together, as heads, balls, coconuts, etc.; to strike,
hit, pommel. (cf. bágol, bákol).

_pokoón_, Syphilitic; suffering from syphilis. (pokô).

_pókot_, A fishing net. (cf. tsintsóro, sápyaw, láya).

_pókot_, To move about as fish in a net, to be crowded; to wriggle,
struggle. Nagapókot gid lang ang mga táo sa sulúd sang simbáhan. The
people in the church are moving about like fish in a net, i.e. they
are crowded or closely packed. Nagdúmug kag nagpokotáy silá nga duhá
sing maláwig túbtub nga ang isá sa íla nabúntol. The two of them
wrestled and struggled for a long time till one of them was thrown
(and gave in).

_pókpok_, To beat, stamp, hammer, spank. Pokpoká ang ímo bág-o nga
térno. Beat the dust out of your new suit. Pinokpokán níya iníng lamésa
sang íya nga kúnop. She beat her cloak on this table. (cf. bókbok,
papák, tapátápa).

_póktol_, Thickset, stocky, stumpy, dumpy, stubby, podgy, pudgy, thick,
stout, squab, squabby, squat, short but bulky. Póktol nga táo, karabáw,
báboy, etc. A thickset man, a stumpy buffalo, a stout or fat pig,
etc. (cf. podól, pudól, pórdo, búdul, matipúngkò, karibúd, kiribúd).

_poláinas_, (Sp. polaina) Spatter-dashes, spats, leggings.

_pólbora_, (Sp. pólvora) Gunpowder; black powder.

_pólbos_, (Sp. polvo) Face-powder, toilet-powder. (cf. uyakúp).

_polís_, Police, policeman, constable, officer. (cf. bántay;
tíktik--secret service man; lampitáw--spy).

_polisíya_, (Sp. policía) The police force; policeman, officer,
constable.

_politána_, (Sp. napolitana) A combination of cards in certain
card-games having the effect of automatically doubling or trebling
the stake played for. (cf. napolitána; paboríta--a double politána).

_polítika_, (Sp. política) Politics; clever management, trick,
machination, plot, plan. (cf. pamánwa, himánwa; pahítò, patúga). Also:
cunning politeness; to act like a politician with studied kindness
and tactfulness.

_polítiko_, (Sp. político) A politician; political, clever, tricksy.

_pólka_, (Sp. polca) Polka, a kind of dance.

_pólo_, (Sp. polo) The handle of a bolo, etc. (cf. ápal id.).

_polô_, (H) Island, isle; a group of houses forming part of a barrio,
but separated from it.

_pólog_, (H) To plate, overlay, cover with gold or silver; to polish,
give lustre to, make bright. Pológa ang síngsing, aríto, etc. Plate the
ring, ear-ring, etc. (Cover the ring, ear-ring etc.) with gold. Pológi
akó siníng síngsing sing buláwan. Please plate this ring of mine with
gold. (púlug id.).

_pólog_, (B) To be in a hurry or anxious to do something at
once. Nagapólog siá sa pagpaúlì. He is anxious to go home. He is in
a hurry to get home. (cf. pólok).

_pologohán_, See pológwan.

_pológot_, Dust and perspiration accumulating on the skin (especially
around the throat, knees and elbows). (palógot id.).

_pológ-pólog_, Dim. and Freq. of pólog. Also: to writhe, wriggle,
struggle.

_pológwan_, (H) A basket with wide meshes, larger than an "alát"
and used for carrying chickens to the market, etc. (pógo).

_pólok_, To struggle or make frantic efforts to escape from a firm
grasp or to rise from underneath a superimposed weight, and the like.

_polók-pólok_, Dim. and Freq. of pólok. Nagapolókpólok ang karabáw
nga ginamarkahán. The buffalo that is being branded is making frantic
efforts to rise. (cf. rímpwal, pológpólog).

_pólon_, (H) To wind up yarn on a bobbin. Polóna ang bunáng. Wind
the yarn on bobbins.

_polón_, (H) Spool, bobbin, reel. Isá ka polón nga hílo. A spool
of thread.

_polóndan_, (H) A large bamboo-bobbin. (cf. puludánan). Anything to
be closed or dammed up. (cf. púnud).

_pólpol_, To put thorns or briars across a path, obstruct a road or
entrance by means of thorny branches and the like. Polpolí ang dálan
sing dógi. Close the road with thorny branches. Ginpólpol níla sa
dálan iníng sibúkaw. They put these sebucao-branches across the road.

_pomáda_, (Sp. pomada) Pomatum, pomade (for the hair).

_pontipikál_, (Sp. pontifical) Pontifical.

_póo_, Fallow, untilled, uncultivated, uncropped; to be or lie
fallow. Póo nga dútà. Fallow ground. Nagpóo iníng talámnan, kay walâ
dirí ang tagíya. This land lies fallow (is untilled), for the owner
is not here.

_póog_, To smoulder, smoke, burn feebly (but with much smoke). Nagapóog
lang ang kaláyo. The fire is only smouldering.

_poóng_, A bunch, group, cluster; patch of ground, piece, parcel,
district. Isá ka poóng nga baláy. A cluster of houses, a group of
buildings.


_poóng_, Low, deep (of voice, of musical instruments, etc.). Kapoóng
sang íya tíngug. His voice is very deep. What a bass voice he has!

_pópò, pôpô_, To pick, gather, pluck, cull, break off, twist off. Popóa
(Pôpoá) ang búnga. Pluck the fruit. Popói (Pôpoí) ang páhò sang íya mga
búnga. Pick (Pluck) the fruit off the mango tree. (cf. dágas, dúgus).

_pórba_, (B) (Sp. probar, prueba) Proof, experiment, trial, test,
check; to make trial of, put to the test, to test, prove, try,
taste. Porbahí ang sabáw kon manámit ukón malás-ay. Taste the sauce
to see whether it is nice or insipid. Porbahí. Try it. Find it out
by experience. (cf. tiláw, pruéba).

_pórdo_, (B) Thickset, stocky, stumpy, etc. See póktol, podól, pudól.

_pormál_, (Sp. formal), Formal, polite, proper, decent, seemly,
courteous, mannerly, decorous, according to established manners or
etiquette. (cf. ígò, ángay, dápat, maúgdang, malígdong, may tinón-an).

_poróbe_, (B) Poor, indigent; a beggar, pauper, mendicant. (cf. ímol,
makalolóoy, makilímos, póbre, próbe).

_pórog_, (B) See pólog--to be in a hurry, etc.

_porókpok_, The flower of the mango-tree. (cf. parókpok).

_poróy_, Knee-breeches, shorts, knickers, knickerbockers. (cf. sárwal,
bahág, delárgo).

_porpía, porpiár_, (Sp. porfía, porfiar). Obstinacy, persistence,
stubbornness, competition, provocation; to wrangle, quarrel, bicker,
contend, provoke, altercate in opprobrious terms, insult or abuse with
contemptuous language. Ginporpía (Ginporpiár) níya akó. He insulted
me. He provoked me. Nagaporpiáhay (Nagaporpiyáhay) silá. They are
abusing each other. (cf. ákyat, pamúyas, pinuyasáy, timoláng, pasipála,
padag-ánay, paindísíndis).

_porpíya_, See porpía, porpiár.

_portalón_, (Sp. portalón) Gangway, gangplank. (cf. andámio, latayán,
guluwáan).

_pósas_, (Sp. posa) A pause; a stop or halt in a funeral procession
for the purpose of singing a response; to sing a response at
a funeral. Magpósas kamó dirí. Stop here for the singing of a
response. May tátlo ka pósas. There will be (or were) three pauses
or stops (for the singing of a response).

_pósas_, (Sp. esposa) Manacles, fetters, shackles, handcuffs;
to handcuff, manacle, fetter, shackle, put handcuffs on
another. Ginposásan siá sang polís, kay nagbátok sa íla. The police
handcuffed him, because he offered resistance. (cf. gapús, gápus,
higót).

_posás-pósas_, Slight pauses, rests at short intervals. (cf. pósas).

_póso_, (Sp. pozo) Well, water-hole, pit, cistern. (cf. áwang, bubón).

_póso_, A game at (of) cards.

_pósò_, The flower-bud, peduncle of a banana, etc.

_posô_, (B) Chignon, hair-knot, knot of hair; to put up--, bind up--,
the hair, make the hair up in a knot or chignon. Pós-a (Posoá)
ang ímo bohók. Do up your hair. Pós-i (Posoí) ang bátà sang íya
bohók. Tie the girl's hair up in a knot or chignon. Put up the child's
hair. (cf. pungós, pinúngsan).

_póspas_, A kind of dish made of rice mixed with meat, ragout,
fricassee; also verb. Napospasán akó níya sing manók kag bugás nga
maputî. She prepared for me a chicken mixed with white rice.

_pósporo, posporó_, (Sp. fósforo) Phosphorus; match,
lucifer. (cf. lag-íton, bag-ídan).

_póspos_, Stripped of leaves, hairs, feathers and the like; to
become stripped of leaves, etc. Nagpóspos iníng káhoy sa bágyo. This
tree--became bare of leaves,--was stripped of its leaves,--was stripped
bare, during (in) the storm. (cf. húblas).

_póste_, (Sp. poste) Post, pillar, column. (cf. halígi).

_posturáo_, (Sp. postura) Of vainglorious carriage or proud demeanour;
posing, posturing, dandylike, ostentatious, proudly erect, stiff,
distant, stand-offish. (cf. biád-ad, liád, báy-ad, báy-od, bugalón).

_póswak_, To spirt (spurt) out in a rather large stream or quantity,
to squirt. Ang túbig nagapóswak sa túbo. The water is spirting out
of the tube. Naposwakán akó sing nánà sang íya dakô nga hubág. I was
sprinkled (spattered) with matter from his large boil. (cf. búswak).

_póswit_, To spirt or squirt out in a small jet or stream; to crack,
burst (of fire-crackers, etc.). (cf. póswak, súmpit, búswit, píswak).

_poswít-póswit_, Dim. and Freq. of póswit.

_póto_, A dish of rice-flour mixed with sugar.

_póto_, To become or make insolvent or bankrupt, to break. Napóto
siá. He went bankrupt. He was declared insolvent. Manggaránon siá
sádto ánay, ápang ang géra nagpóto sa íya. He was rich formerly,
but--the war made him bankrupt,--the war broke him.

_potók_, A kink; to kink. Nagpotók ang kalát, ang hílo, etc. The rope
kinked, the thread twisted into kinks, etc. (putók id.).

_potól_, To cut off, lop off, maim, etc. See putúl.

_potsyám_, See kotsyám--a kind (variety) of rice. (cf. arabón).

_póypoy_, To weaken, get or become weak, feeble, enfeeble. Napóypoy
(Nagkapóypoy) ang bútkon ko. My arm got weak. (cf. púypuy, álay,
lúya, pígaw).

_pranéla_, (Sp. franela) Flannel, woollen cloth, cloth made of a
mixture of wool and cotton (in cheaper makes wholly of cotton).

_prangkéo, prangkíyo, prankéo, prankíyo_, (Sp. franqueo) Postage,
postage stamp.

_pransés_, (Sp. francés) French; a Frenchman.

_praskíta_, (Sp. frasco, frasquete) Vial, a small flask;
medicine-bottle. (cf. tolotádyaw).

_prásko_, (Sp. frasko) Flask, bottle, gallipot.

_práyle_, (Sp. fraile) Friar, member of a religious order with
perpetual vows.

_prémyo_, (Sp. premio) Premium, reward, recompense, remuneration,
prize, meed, guerdon; to reward, grant a premium, etc. remunerate,
requite. Premiohí siá sing medálya. Give him a medal as a
prize. (cf. dúlut, hátag, bugáy, pásdà, pádya, regálo).

_prénda_, (Sp. prenda) Mortgage, pledge, security, pawn, token; to
pawn, mortgage, pledge, give--security,--a token. Iprénda lang sa íya
ang ímo talámnan. Mortgage your field to him. Ginprendahán níya si
Fuláno sang íya kalubihán. He made over (He gave) his coconut grove
as security to N.N. (cf. pasálig, kaligonán, patínga).

_préno_, (Sp. freno) Bridle, bit; reins; brake, check, drag, skid,
stop; to restrain, put on the brake, apply the brake, have the brake
(drag) on, to brake, keep in check. Prenóhi ang kabáyo, ang áwto,
ang kángga, etc. Rein in (up) the horse, put on the brake and check
the motorcar, the cart, etc.

_prénsa_, (Sp. prensa) Press, vise, clamp; the daily press, journalism,
papers, periodicals. (cf. pamantaláan, balasahón).

_prénsa_, (Sp. prensa) Smoothing iron, box-iron, sadiron,
flatiron; to press or iron cloth. Prensahá ang panápton. Iron the
clothes. Prensahí akó sang ákon báyò. Press my jacket. Anó ang iprénsa
mo kon walâ ka sing prénsa? What will you iron with, if you have no
flat-iron? (cf. perénsa, plánsa).

_presentádo_, (Sp. presentado) A person presented, introduced,
presentee, one who presents himself. The phrase "Presentádo gáni
piláhon" means; One who offers his services voluntarily or applies
for a job will usually not give full satisfaction; he will do his
work carelessly or will even run away before long according to his
own convenience or advantage.

_presentár_, (Sp. presentar) To present oneself, present,
introduce. Nagpresentár siá sa ákon. He presented himself before
me. Ginpresentahán akó níya sang íya hináblus. He introduced his
nephew to me. (cf. atúbang, pakilála, pakítà, paháyag).

_presidénte_, (Sp. Presidente) President. Presidénte
Munisipál. Municipal President. (cf. pangólo, pangólo-bánwa,
pangólo-puód, pangólo-púngsod, etc.).

_présko_, (Sp. fresco) Fresh, cool; greenhorn, fool, inexperienced,
unsophisticated. (cf. matúgnaw, mabúgnaw; payaón, bataón, bag-óhan,
dílì maálam, halasoón).


_préso_, (Sp. preso) Prisoner, convict, inmate of a prison, jail-bird,
one kept in detention; to imprison. (cf. binilánggò, bilánggò).

_pretílya_, A part of the entrails close to the gizzard in
poultry. This part is reserved as food, whilst the rest of the entrails
is usually thrown away. See partílya id.

_prinsipál_, (Sp. principal) Principal; capital, stock. (cf. úlo,
pangólo, manugdumála; pahunán).

_príto_, (Sp. frito, freir) Fried; to fry. Manók nga piniríto. Fried
chicken. Pritóha ang manók. Fry the chicken. Pritóhi akó sing
kárne. Fry me some meat. (cf. gisá, gisádo).

_próa_, (Sp. proa) Bow, prow; steerage. (cf. olín).

_próbe_, (B) (Sp. pobre) See póbre, ímol, poróbe, makilímos--a
beggar; poor.

_probínsya_, (Sp. provincia) Province. (cf. puód).

_prodúkto_, (Sp. producto) Product, produce; benefit or advantage
derived from any work or engagement. (cf. búnga, kapuslánan, kaayóhan;
palatúbson).

_progmasón_, Cipher, the use of a code or secret writing intelligible
only to the initiated, the use of a secret language by agreed upon
additions and transpositions of letters, etc. (cf. trogmasón id.).

_propesór_, (Sp. profesor) Professor. (cf. manunúon, magtotóon).

_prosisyón_, (Sp. procesión) Procession. Ang prosisyón magalíbut sa
mga dálan nga ginaprosisyonán silíng sang kinabatásan. The procession
will pass over the customary route. (cf. kátay).

_pruéba_, (Sp. prueba) Proof, proof-sheet; to prove, try, put to the
test, etc. See pórba.

_puág-puág_, Loafing, standing idle, standing about lazily or idly. The
Freq. pamuágpuág is usually employed as a verb and the form puágpuág
as an adjective or noun.

_púak_, Throat, gullet, swallow, oesophagus. (cf. tubúg, púwak,
tiláok, tutúnlan).

_puákì_, See puwákì--a fraction, etc.

_púas_, To dispel, disperse, dissipate, dissolve, undo, scatter,
blow off (away), to cause to be seen no longer. Ang ádlaw nagapúas
sang mga gál-um. The sun is dispelling the clouds. Ang asó ginapúas
sang hángin. The smoke is being blown away (off) by the wind. Napúas
(Nagkapúas) na ang mga gál-um. The clouds are (were) dispelled.

_puása_, Fast, fasting; to fast, be fasting, keep the fast. Magpuása
kamó kag magpaúmud sa kárne sa mga Biérnes sang Kwarésma. Keep the
fast and abstinence on the Fridays in Lent. Adlaw nga inogpuása. Day
of fasting. (cf. ádlaw nga inogpaúmud sa kárne--a day of abstinence).

_públiko, publikó_, (Sp. público) The public; public,
notorious. (cf. ang mga táo, ang mga tumalámbong, pumulúyò; dayág,
hayág, kinilála, lutáw, bántug, balahúbà, buyágyag).

_púdag_, To pace up and down angrily, to stamp the feet in
anger. (cf. púsad).

_pudág-púdag_, Dim. and Freq. of púdag. To shuffle or scrape the
floor with the feet, stamp the feet, dance with rage (as done by an
angry child). (cf. pusádpúsad, pundákpúndak).

_púdan_, The piece of wood or bamboo attached to the gíkos and góta
and connecting the draught-animal with the plough, harrow, etc.; a
small board worn on the back under the ropes in the primitive method
of weaving by means of an ántip; to use such a board, etc. Magpúdan
ka, agúd índì magsakít ang pudanán mo. Wear a board on your back,
so that your spine may not be hurt. Pudáni siá. Put a board over her
back. Provide her with a board for the back. (cf. upúdan id.).

_pudanán_, That part of the back over which the púdan is worn, the
back, the lower spine. (cf. likód).

_púd-is_, White, whitish, pale, pallid, wan, faded (of colours);
to be or become pale, to pale, fade (said especially of colours
that lose their brightness through the influence of sun-light, rain,
etc.). Napúd-is (Nagkapúd-is) ang duág siníng baláy. The colour of
this house has faded. (cf. púg-is, lubád, búdhaw, lús-aw; láspì,
lúspad, lún-ad).

_púdlon_, From pulúd--to fell (a tree), etc.

_púdlus_, Rod, cane, stick. (cf. bilogón, bulunál, náwì).


_púdlus_, To slip out or off, escape from a grip, etc. See pádlus,
palús.

_pudól_, Thickset, stumpy, stubby, pudgy, etc. See póktol, búdul,
karibudó, matipúngkò.

_pudóng_, A turban, head-cloth; to turban, wrap a cloth around the
head. Pudongí ang ólo mo. Cover your head with a cloth. Ipudóng
sa ólo mo iníng pányò. Put this cloth or handkerchief on your
head. (cf. tabón, tábon, kódong, tákdong, takuróng).

_púdyot, pudyót_, A pinch, as much as one can grasp between two
or three fingers; a little, a small amount; to take up (eat) with
the fingers, take up a pinch or very small amount. Isá ka púdyot nga
kalámay. A little sugar. A pinch of sugar. Pudyotá lang ang kán-on. Eat
the rice with the fingers. (cf. písì, kusî, kodót).

_puéra_, (Sp. fuera) Out, outside, without, not in; not belonging
to, having no reference or connection with. Puéra! Away with
you! Take yourself off! Make yourself scarce! Clear out! Go off! Go
away! (cf. gwâ, halín, luás, waláy lábut).

_puérsa_, (Sp. fuerza) Force, strength, power, might, energy,
vigour, vehemence, violence; to make (do, etc.), to force, coerce,
constrain, compel, oblige, insist on. Puersahá siá sa pagbáyad sang
íya útang. Force him to pay his debt. (cf. pílit, pígos, lúgus,
kusúg, pakúsug).

_puérta_, (Sp. puerta) Door, gate, portal, postern, entrance;
gate-money, entrance-fee. (cf. ganháan, gangháan, gawáng, entráda).

_puertáhan_, See puérta.

_puérto_, (Sp. puerto) Harbour, port, haven. (cf. dungkáan).

_pugá_, A hard clod--, clump--, lump--, of earth. Podporá ang mga
pugá. Crumble the lumps of earth. Magakalapódpod gid yanáng mga pugá
kon ulanán sing madámol. Those clods of earth will crumble under a
heavy shower of rain. (cf. parák, padák, bilóg).

_púgà_, To compress or wring out. Magpúgà ka sang túbig (púg-on
(pugáon) mo ang túbig) gíkan sa panápton. Wring (Press) out the
water from the clothes. Púg-i (Pugái) ang panápton. Wring--out the
clothes,--the clothes dry.

_púg-a_, Difficult to swallow; a soft or very brittle lump of
earth, sand, sugar, etc.; to be or become difficult to swallow,
etc. (cf. pugá, bigól, pígol, píghol, bilóg).

_pugaáng_, Very red, bright red, conspicuous from afar. (cf. pulá,
pulagáng, dagáang, dagángdang).

_pugaás_, To shout, vociferate, yell, holla, give--, raise--a yell
or a shout. (cf. pagaás, pugaít, sínggit, turayáw).

_púgad_, A nest; to make a nest, nestle, build a nest. Ang mga píspis
nagapúgad sa káhoy. Birds build their nests in trees. Ang kalabánan
sináng mga káhoy pinugáran sang mga píspis. Most of these trees are
full of birds' nests, are the nesting places of birds.

_pugadán_, Nest, breeding place, hen-nest, etc. (cf. pugarán id.).

_pugaít_, To yell, shout, holla, vociferate. (See sínggit, pugaás,
etc.).

_pugakáy_, To crush. See bugakáy.

_pugánggang_, To shine, be bright, be visible or
conspicuous. (cf. dagáang, dagángdang).

_pugâ-púgà_, Dim. and Freq. of púgà--to wring out, etc.

_pugá-púga_, (B) To hurry, speed up, hustle, work hard, apply
oneself to with vigour or energy. Ginpugápúga níya ang íya aradohón
kag sang pagkatápus nagpabánwa siá sa pagtán-aw sang kátay. He
ploughed with great energy and then went to town to see the parade
(procession). (cf. dalî, dásig, písan, úkud).

_pugarán_, (H) See pugadán--nest, etc.

_pugáwa_, The threads that cross the warp and form the web; the threads
of the weft or woof; cross beams, transverse laths, or the like.

_púgdaw_, To fall or break asunder, disintegrate, fall to pieces,
crumble. Nagapúgdaw ang mga sinipád sang búlak. The petals of the
flower are dropping off, the flower is falling to pieces. (cf. púgday).

_púgday_, Piece, part, crumb; to fall to (go to) pieces, disintegrate,
crumble, break up, break asunder (of clods of earth, lumps of salt or
sugar, etc.). Napúgday (Nagkapúgday) na ang mga pugá sa inaradóhan,
kay naulanán sing madámol. The clods of earth in the ploughed field
have crumbled, because they have been soaked with rain. Pugdayá ang
bilóg nga kalámay. Crush the lump of sugar.

_púgì_, To fasten the threads of the warp to the cloth-roller
in a weaving loom, to start, begin, do or use something for
the first time. Nakapúgì ka na sang ímo haláblon? Have you tied
to the roller the warp of the new web? Pugíi ang pulugían sang
bunáng nga haláblon. Fasten on the cloth-roller the yarn to be
woven. (cf. pulogían).

_pugí-ot, pugíot_, Troubled, etc. See purogí-ot.

_púg-is_, See púd-is--pale; to fade, etc.

_púgnak_, A gush or flow of liquid from a vessel turned upside down;
to pour out a liquid with some force, (as by turning a bottle,
ewer, etc. upside down). Nagpúgnak ang túbig sa pitsíl, kay íya
ginpatabulî. The water gushed (poured all at once) out of the pitcher
for he turned it upside down. (cf. búswak, púswak, búgwak).

_púgo_, See pógo.

_púgo_, A kind of skin-disease resembling prickly heat. Also
used as verb. Pinúgo siá kahápon, kay nagsakáy sa karabáw kag
natalithihán. Yesterday he contracted the skin-disease "púgo" on
account of riding on a buffalo when a light rain was falling.

_púg-ok_, To be tight, close; to shut up within one's breast,
cherish, nurse, nurture some secret sorrow or pain, to hide sorrow or
pain. Nagapúg-ok ang dúghan níya. His chest is tight, he can scarcely
breathe. Ginpapúg-ok (Ginpúg-ok) níya ang amó nga kasubô sa íya nga
dúghan. He locked that sorrow in his heart (breast). (cf. pín-ot,
gutúk, pún-ud).

_púgon_, See pógon--to labour, work for daily wages.

_púg-on_, From púgà--to wring out, etc.

_púgot_, See púgut--to behead, decapitate.

_pugóy_, See pugóy-pugóy.

_pugóy-pugóy_, Very simple, unadorned, plain; one who is slovenlily or
shabbily dressed; a simpleton. Walâ makakúhà sing prémyo ang íla mga
baláybálay sa amó nga paindísíndis, kay támà gid ka pugóypugóy. Their
booths were given no prize in that competition, because they were
far too plain (without any decorations, etc.).

_púgsa_, A boil, ulcer or tumour (especially one on the back). Also
used as verb. Pinúgsa siá. He has a púgsa-boil. Pinugsahán siá sa
bulî. He has an ulcer on his seat.

_púgsak_, To do something with force or violence, as kicking, stamping,
throwing something on the floor, etc. (cf. púsdak, búgsak).

_púgtak_, Dot, spot; to dot or spot, to embroider in various colours,
make fine needle-work.

_pugták-púgtak_, Dim. and Freq. of púgtak. Spotted, variegated,
dotted; not near together, placed singly or apart. (cf. atákaták). The
frequentatives pamúgtak and pamugtákpúgtak are more used in the
meaning of: to embroider.

_pugúng_, To repress, restrain, check, prevent, curb, hold--,
keep--, back (in check), to hinder, impede, control, withhold. Púnggi
ang kaákig mo. Curb your anger. Pinúnggan níya siá sa pagkáon sing
kárne. He prevented him from eating meat. Daw sa dílì na mapúnggan ang
dakô níya nga dumút. His great hatred can scarcely be repressed now. It
looks as if his intense hatred has got beyond his control. Walâ níya
mapúnggi sa gilayón ang nagadalágan nga áwto kag ang makalolóoy nga
táo nadalasâ. He could not stop at once the racing automobile and
the poor man was run over. (cf. puút, sagáng, tápnà).

_púgus_, To press--, clasp--, strain--, to one's bosom, to embrace,
clasp in one's arms, throw one's arms around, to hug, cuddle, strain--,
fold--, clasp--, in one's arms (embrace). (cf. hakús, abráso).

_púgut_, To cut off the head, to behead, decapitate. Pinugútan siá
sang ólo. He had his head cut off. He was beheaded.

_púgwan_, From púgo, pógo.

_púgwat_, Angry excitement, trembling, shakiness; to gesticulate
excitedly, show fury in one's face (features) and movements, be angry,
be indignant, to look cross; to become shaky or loose (of wheels,
etc.).


_púhag_, To break open, unfold, ransack, disturb one's peace, to
rummage and deprive of (e.g. take away the honey from a bee-hive,
etc.). Ginapúhag kitá níla kag ginabínghal. They disturb us and
rail at us. Puhága ang baláy sang mga putiókan kag kuháon mo ang íla
dugús. Break into the bee-hive and take out the honey.

_puhár_, (Sp. pujar) To buy wholesale, etc. See píndak. Puhará lang ang
ákon mga ságing. Buy up my bananas, the whole lot. (cf. hág-on, ságib).

_puhól_, To stop, prevent, etc. See púlhan.

_púhon_, To conspire, etc. See póhon, húmon.

_púhot, puhót_, To penetrate, pass or go through, seep--, soak--,
through, percolate, filter. Ang ulán nagpúhot (nagpuhót) sa ákon
panápton. The rain soaked through my clothes. (cf. tábos, tahós, sálà).

_púka_, To rise--, be up--, early. See pamúka.

_púkan_, To overthrow, overturn, fell to the ground, lay low, cut
down; to fall down. Pukána ang káhoy. Fell the tree. Pukáni akó sing
ápat ka halígi. Cut down four posts for me. Ginpúkan sang hángin ang
páhò. The mango-tree was blown down by the wind. Nagkalapúkan silá sa
patág sang pagawáyan. They fell on the field of battle. Kon mabáskug
ang bágyo mapúkan (magakapúkan) iníng baláy. If there should blow a
violent storm, this house will tumble down. (cf. pulúd, túmba).

_pukán-púkan_, Dim. and Freq. of púkan. Also: to shake, roll, rock,
move up and down or to and fro; rocking, rolling, swinging.

_pukatód_, Top, highest point, peak, summit, brow, apex,
climax, hill, hillock, eminence, height, rise, elevated ground,
mound. (cf. alipokpokán, bakólod, putókputokán, bukatód, búkid).

_pukatorón_, Hilly, etc. See bukatorón, pukatód.

_púkaw_, To wake, awake, awaken, stir up, rouse. Pukáwa siá. Wake
him. Pukáwi akó sing limá ka táo. Wake five men for me. Palapúkaw sa
(sang) kalág. Awakener of the soul.

_púkaw_, The celebration of marriage before dawn. May púkaw sa
buás. (May kasál buás sa ága pa gid). There will be a marriage before
dawn tomorrow.

_pukî_, See bilát.

_pukíng_, See bilát.

_púklat_, To open (the eyes). See pamúklat, múklat.

_púklid_, See póklid.

_pukô_, See pokô id.

_púkol_, To knock, hit, strike, etc. See pókol.

_pukoón_, See pokoón.

_pukúd_, To throw or tear down, remove from. Pukurá inâ sa íya nga
nahamtangán. Take (tear) it down--, remove it--, from its place
(stand, pedestal, base).

_pukúl_, See pokól.

_púkut_, See pókot.

_pukwát-púkwat_, To rise and sit down again repeatedly, get anxious,
excited or fidgety as one who is in a hurry to leave, but is
detained. (cf. púgwat).

_pulá_, Red; to become red, redden. Nagpulá siá sa ínit. He reddened
in the heat. He was flushed on account of the heat. Napulahán gid
akó sináng báyò. That jacket is too red for me.

_púlag_, To scold, etc. See pamúlag.

_pulagáng_, Bright red. See pugaáng id.

_pulágsak_, To throw down with some force; to drive or ram down
(a stake; etc.). (cf. púgsak, búgsok, ósok).

_puláhan_, Red, clothed in red, wearing red garments;
communist. (cf. pulá).

_púlak_, To blight, wilt, wither, canker, decay, applied especially
to fruit that does not mature or to flowers nipped in the bud. Napúlak
iníng mga búnga. These fruits were blighted. This fruit is cankered.

_pulák_, Blighted, blasted, cankered, wilted, withered, nipped in
the bud, drooping before it is full-blown (of a flower), fallen off
a tree before it is full-grown or mature (of fruit). (In both cases
owing to insects or maggots). (cf. púlak).


_pulák_, A small measure of rice, etc. usually either one-third or
one-fourth of a gantang.

_pulakán_, A measure of either one-third or one-fourth of a
gantang. Pulakán nga talatlóhan (alapátan). A pulakán-measure of
one-third (one-fourth) of a gantang. Pulakán--measures of one sixth
and one eighth of a gantang are also used in some places.

_púlaw_, Unmixed, pure, unadulterated, unalloyed. (cf. púraw, id.).

_púlaw_, Sleeping little, able to go without sleep long or regularly
(as some gamblers, etc.). Púlaw siá nga táo. He sleeps very
little. (cf. mapúlaw).

_puláw_, To keep watch at night, stay up, keep awake, keep vigil,
sit up, keep late hours. Pulawí ang masakít. Watch the sick person
during the night. Magpuláw kamó túbtub kamí magabút. Keep awake till
we arrive. Stay up for us. Ginpulawán gid sang íya mananábang ang amó
nga kasábà. His lawyer sat up till late at night studying that case
(lawsuit).

_puláwan_, A wake. (cf. belasyón).

_púlhan_, From the seldom used puhól--to stop, hinder, check,
forbid, prevent, curb, hold--, keep--, back (in check), withhold,
stay (transitive). Ginpúlhan níya akó. He kept me back. Púlhi ang íya
pagarádo. Stop his ploughing. Stop him from ploughing. Make him stop
ploughing. (cf. pugúng, tápnà, dílì, dumílì).

_púli_, To make common cause against, attack together, mob, fall upon
in company with others. Ginpulíhan níla siá. They--fell upon him in
a body,--attacked him all together,--mobbed him.

_pulinás_, Worn, obliterated by use, defaced, battered, sweated,
light, bad, false, spurious, base, counterfeit; to be or become worn,
etc., particularly applied to coins. Iníng unsíta índì na mabáton,
kay nagpulinás. This doubloon will not be accepted,--One cannot pass
this doubloon,--because it is worn. Pulinás nga kwárta. Worn out money,
that is not fit any longer for currency. False or counterfeit money.

_púling_, A small particle, a tiny splinter, a mote. Also used as
a verb. Napúling (Napulíngan) ang matá ko. A speck or mote has got
into my eye. May púling ang matá ko. I have a small splinter in my eye.

_pulís_, Police, policeman. See polís id.

_pulmón_, (Sp. pulmon) The lungs, (cf. bagâ).

_pulô_, (H) See polô.

_púlo_, See pólo.

_púlò_, Ten. Tátlo ka púlò (katloan). Three times ten
(thirty). (cf. napúlò).

_púl-o_, Knobby, knotty, hard pieces of wood.

_pulókpok_, The blossom of the mango-tree, kamúnsil, lúmboy, pási,
etc. The verb is pamulókpok. Nagapamulókpok (Nagapamúlak) na ang
páhò. The mango-tree is blossoming (is in blossom). (cf. pamarókpok).

_púlon_, (H) See pólon.

_pulón_, Spool, bobbin. See polón.

_pulóng_, Bunch, collection, tuft, cluster. Isá ka pulóng nga búlak,
búnga, etc. A bunch of flowers, fruit, etc. (cf. púngpung).

_púlong_, (H) A word, term, vocable, saying, speech; to say,
speak, utter, express oneself. Anó ang ginpúlong níya? What did he
say? Pulóngi siá sing mahínay kag matinahóron. Speak to him quietly
and respectfully. Sa laín nga púlong----. In other words----. Mga
pilá lang ka púlong ang íya nga ginhámbal. He spoke (said) only a
few words. (cf. silíng, hámbal).

_pulongkóan_, (H) Seat, anything that can be sat upon. (púngkò).

_pulóngpong_, (H) A bouquet, bunch of flowers, nosegay, posy;
button-hole, boutonniere (cf. pulóng).

_pulón-púlon_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of púlon, pólon. Nagapulónpúlon
lang sa íya úlo ang mga panghunâhúnà. Thoughts or ideas are whirling
in his head i.e. succeeding each other rapidly without order or logic.

_puló-púlo_, To beat, box, strike, punch, pommel. Pulopulóha ang íya
úlo. Punch or pommel his head. (cf. pólo, púlo).

_puló-púlo_, To stroke, touch another's head, etc. caressingly.

_púlpito_, (Sp. púlpito) Pulpit. (cf. walihán).

_púlpug_, To strike or beat against something, a burning piece of
wood, a lit cigar, or the like; to strike, box, pommel. Pulpugí sang
ímo abáno ang bulutángan sang abó, agúd índì madágdag (magkadágdag)
sa salúg ang abó. Knock your cigar against the ash-tray, lest the
ash should (so that the ash may not) fall on the floor. Ipúlpug ang
sarísì sa bató, agúd magkalatáktak ang mga bága. Beat your torch
against the stone, that the charred parts may fall off. (cf. pókpok).

_pulséras_, (Sp. pulsera) Bracelet; wristlet.

_púlso_, (Sp. pulso) Pulse, pulsation; that part of the wrist where
the pulse is felt. (cf. bayóbáyo).

_pulúd_, To hew--, chop--, cut--, down, fell (a tree, etc.). Púdla
(puludá, pulurá) ang páhò. Cut down the mango tree. Ipulúd iníng
wásay sa káhoy. Use this hatchet to chop down (fell) the tree
with. (cf. tapás, púkan).

_puludanán_, The back. See pudanán.

_puludánan_, (H) A large (bamboo) bobbin for winding yarn
on. (cf. polóndan).

_púlug_, See pólog--to plate, cover with gold.

_pulugían_, Cloth-roller. See purogían.

_pulúgnan_, (H) Work, employment, service, job, etc. See palamúgnan,
pamulúgnan, alagarán, púgon).

_puluguhán, pulúgwan_, See pologohán, pológwan--a chicken-basket, etc.

_pulúkà_, To cluster together, crowd, be many, be crowded
together. (cf. kútò, gutúk).

_pulukanón_, What is to--, should--, be felled, as a tree,
etc. (cf. púkan).

_pululúngon, pululungón_, (H) Speech, words, language, expression,
utterance. Sa maáthag kag matahúm nga pululungón íya ginpaháyag
ang íya nga katarúngan. In clear and beautiful language he unfolded
(made clear) his argument. (cf. púlong).

_pulún-on_, What is to--, should--, can--, be filled; vacant,
empty. (cf. punô).

_pulúnton_, (H) Fit for or to be used for building a punút
(fish-trap). Kawáyan nga pulúnton. Bamboo destined (intended) for
the making of a fish-trap. (cf. purúnton id.).

_pulupúon, pulupuón_, (H) What is to be plucked, fruit to be gathered
from trees, etc. (cf. pópò, pamópò).

_púlus_, Fez, turban, cap, cover for the head; to wind round, cover
(the head). (cf. tútub, tutúb, kálò).

_pulús_, Advantage, benefit, profit, gain, use, usefulness,
service, help, stead, avail; value, worth, efficacy; to be of use,
be profitable, advantageous, useful. May pulús pa inâ. That is quite
useful still. Walâ sing pulús iní. This is no good, is of no use. Indì
na ikáw makapulús sinâ. Indì mo na mapúslan inâ. You can no longer
get any advantage out of that. That is of no avail (no good) to you
any more. Ginpúslan níya sing dakô ang amó nga kahigayónan. He made
very good use of the occasion. He took advantage of the occasion. He
profited by the opportunity. (cf. himulús).

_pulús_, All without exception, one and all, every one of them. Iníng
mga páhò pulús gid mga maáyo. These mangoes are all good, there is
not a bad one amongst them. Ang mga pumulúyò sang ámon bánwa pulús
mga katóliko. The inhabitants of our town are all (All the people
in our town are) Catholics without exception. Pulusá lang ísdà ang
súd-an ta karón sa panyága. Serve only fish as a side-dish for our
dinner. (cf. tanán, pasáy).

_pulúslan_, Of use, useful, serviceable, advantageous. (cf. pulús).

_púlut_, To pick up, lift, raise, take up from the floor or
ground. Pulúta ang pányò nga nadágdag. Pick up the handkerchief that
has dropped on the floor. Ginpúlut níya ang kwárta nga íya nakítà
sa dálan. He picked up the money he found on the road. Pulúti ang
dálan sináng mga bató. Take those stones off the road. (cf. púrut,
hákwat, ógkat).

_púlut_, The last peal of bells, the end of the ringing of bells;
to stop the ringing of bells, to ring off. (cf. rimáti, púrut).

_pulút_, Firmly twisted or twined (of thread, a rope, etc.);
thickening, getting sticky and viscous (of sugar in the process of
sugar-milling); to become firmly twisted (of thread, etc.); to thicken,
inspissate, curdle, coagulate, congeal, condense (of sugar, etc.);
thick syrup or molasses near the stage of crystallization. Nagpulút
na ang kalámay. The juice of the sugar cane has condensed to thick
molasses (is on the point of crystallizing).

_pulútsan_, Wrapper, wrapping paper, wrapping cloth, any material
used for wrapping or packing. (cf. putús, baláhos).

_pulúy-an_, Home, house, dwelling, dwelling-place, living-quarters,
lodging, lodgings, residence, abode, domicile, habitation, place to
live or stay in, tenement, diggings. (cf. puyô, baláy, dalayonán,
ginaestarán).

_púlway_, To belch forth, spirt out, spit out, emit jets of. Ang amó
nga bolkán kon kaisá nagapúlway sing maitúm kag madámol nga asó sa
íya bábà. That volcano at times belches forth (vomits, spews) dark
and dense smoke from the crater. (cf. úlway).

_pumahaláyag_, (H) See pumalaháyag id.

_pumalaháyag_, (H) One who appears or presents himself; a
representative, deputy. (cf. paháyag).

_pumalátad_, (H) A gambler, gamester, better, bettor, one who stakes
money or makes a bet, etc. (cf. patád).

_pumalatíkang_, (H) Dealer, merchant, business-man. (cf. patíkang).

_pumalatíndog_, Builder, architect, shipwright, mason, engineer,
or the like. (cf. tíndog, patíndog).

_pumalátok, pumalatók_, (H) A founder, one who founds, makes
or establishes something. Pumalatókpagbulút-an. A law-maker,
legislator. (cf. pátok).

_pumilílì, pumililî_, Voter, elector, one who
chooses,--selects,--elects,--votes. (cf. pílì).

_pumulúyò_, Inhabitant, resident, citizen, dweller, denizen, burgher,
burgess, townsman, householder, villager, cottager, people, the
public. (cf. puyô).

_púnà_, Mesh, netting, network; to make a mesh, to mend nets, etc.,
to knit, make lace with a crochet needle, to crochet. (cf. táting).

_punâ_, Division, part, chapter (of a book); part, parcel, lot, piece
(of land, etc.). (cf. báhin, páhat, párte, kusî).

_punâ-púnà_, Dim. and Freq. of púnà--to mend nets, etc.

_punâ-punâ_, Dim. of punâ. Small separate pieces or parcels; small
articles, essays, stories, paragraphs, or the like.

_púnaw_, To make or become dizzy, confused, grow weak or faint,
become upset (through fear, or the like). Indì ka maglántaw sa idálum
kon dídto ka sa matáas nga lingganáyan, kay mapúnaw ka gid. Don't
look down when you are there on the high belfry or you will feel
dizzy. Napúnaw (Nagkapúnaw) siá sang mga pilás ni Fuláno. She got a
shock (fainted, was mentally confused or upset) when she saw N.N.'s
wounds. (cf. língin, lipóng).

_punawón_, One who is easily upset or frightened, nervous, giddy,
dizzy, timid, apprehensive, frightened out of one's wits. (cf. púnaw).

_púnay_, Pigeon, dove. (cf. salampáti).

_punáy-púnay_, Dim. of púnay. Also: to talk of love, to spoon, to
bill and coo (of boys and girls).

_púnda_, (Sp. fonda) Inn, tavern, public house, saloon,
refreshment-room, restaurant, tea-shop, eating-house. (cf. talangwáyan,
karihán, tiánggi, kalán-an).

_púnda_, (Sp. funda) Casing, cover, pillow-slip,
pillow-case. (cf. baláhos, putús, pulútsan sang ulúnan).

_pundág-púndag_, To stamp the feet, shuffle the feet. (pundákpúndak
id.).

_pundák-púndak_, See pundágpúndag, pusádpúsad.

_pundíyo_, (Sp. fondillos) The seat of a pair of trousers; wide,
loose trousers as used by the Chinese.

_púndo_, (Sp. fondo) Funds, capital, stock, assets. (cf. pahunán,
pílak).

_púndo_, (Sp. fondo) To gather, collect, accumulate; to stop,
unhitch, (of a cart, etc.). Nagapúndo lang ang túbig dirí, kay walâ
sing iligán. The water collects (accumulates) here for want of an
outlet. (cf. supón).

_púndok_, Heap, cluster, collection; colony; district comprising
several towns, electoral district. (cf. puód).

_pungá_, Having the nostrils stuffed, clogged, stopped or obstructed;
talking through the nose. Táo nga pungá. One whose nose is stopped
up. Pinungá is used as verb: to snuffle, talk as if through the nose
or with clogged nostrils. Indì ka magpinungá. Indì mo pagpinungahón
ang ímo panghámbal. Don't talk through the nose. Don't snuffle--in
your talk,--when you talk.

_pungâ_, (H) Scarcely able to breathe, breathless, gasping, panting
for breath; to gasp or pant for breath, as one drowning or near
suffocation. (cf. púnghà).

_pungág_, Forgetful, wandering in one's mind, oblivious, not quite
normal, absent, absent-minded, abstracted, wrapt--, lost--, in thought,
in a reverie, day-dreaming, wool-gathering, not all there. (cf. pangág,
balingág, tipangág).

_pungál_, With broken-off horns, having the horns (or one of them)
broken with only the stump remaining. Pungál nga báka. A cow with
broken horns.

_púngal_, To break off short, to break off a horn, or the like, near
the root. Sang pagsúngay siníng báka sa isá ang isá níya ka súngay
napúngal (nagkapúngal). When this cow fought with another one of its
horns was broken off short.

_pungángo_, The stem or stalk of a flower or fruit, peduncle.

_pungâ-pungâ_, (H) Breathless, scarcely able to breathe, panting,
gasping. Dim. of pungâ.

_púng-aw_, Dreary, lonely, sad, lone, forlorn, solitary, unfrequented,
cheerless, lorn (poetical); to become dreary, etc. Ginapung-awán
akó. I feel lonely. Sádto ánay masádya iníng lugár, ápang karón
nagpúng-aw na. Formerly this was a cheerful place, but now it has
become lonely. (cf. míngaw, sím-ong).

_pungáy_, To become weak, feeble, enfeebled, frail. Nagpungáy siá sa
balatían. He became weak through sickness. (cf. lúya).

_púnggud_, Pimple, blackhead, acne, comedo. (cf. bugás).

_púnggul_, To cut off, lop off, decapitate, behead. Punggulá ang
ólo sang mán-og. Cut off the head of the snake. Pinunggulán níya ang
manók sang íya ólo. He decapitated the chicken. He chopped off the
chicken's head. (cf. pungól).

_púnghà_, See pungâ--gasping for breath, etc.

_punghâ-púnghà_, Dim. and Freq. of púnghà.

_púngì_, To break or twist off; pluck, cull, gather (corn-cobs,
etc.). (cf. lúngì, sipî).

_púngil_, To chip, break off a bit (piece) of glass, pottery, crockery,
or the like. (cf. písang, píngas, bíngaw).

_pungíl_, Having a bit (piece) broken off; to be chipped, said of
glass-ware, pottery and crockery. (cf. písang, pingás, bingáw).

_púngis_, To give or take a very small amount; to diminish by a
little. Ginpungísan lang akó níya sing dútà. He gave me only a small
patch of land. (cf. pungís, báhin, búhin).

_pungís_, A little, a very small amount, small quantity, morsel, scrap,
mite. Isá ka pungís gid lang nga kalámay, tinápay, etc. ang ginhátag
níya sa ákon. He gave me only a little sugar, bread, etc. (cf. diótay,
kálwit, púdyot, isót, piripiási).

_púng-it_, Dry mucus adhering to the nostrils.

_pung-itón_, One why has dry mucus adhering to the nostrils, as a
child that has not been taught to wipe its nose.

_púngki_, A bamboo sling hung on a pole and carried by two men
when transporting sand, gravel, stones, coconuts, etc.; to carry or
transport by means of a púngki; to have much money, spend money freely.

_púngkò_, To sit down, take a seat, be seated, seat oneself. Púngkò
(Magpúngkò, pumúngkò) ka. Be seated. Take a seat. Sit down. Seat
yourself. Pungkoí iníng síya. Sit down on this chair. (cf. língkod).

_púngkoy_, To throw, fling, chuck. Pungkoyá ang báboy sing bató. Throw
a stone at the pig. (cf. bálang, habóy, pilák).

_pungó_, A handful, a bunch, as much as one can grasp with the
hand. (cf. púngpung). Also: the fruit of the nípà palm.

_pungól_, To break off the neck of a bottle, the fingers, arms or
legs of a statue, etc.; to maim, cripple. Napungól (nápngol) ang úlo
sang laráwan ni San Bisénte. The head of the statue of St. Vincent
broke off. (cf. píngas, kímpul, púnggul, púngil).

_pungós_, (H) The hair tied up in a bunch, knot or chignon. (cf. posô,
pinúngsan).

_púng-ot_, Catarrh, cold in the head, stuffed (stopped, stopt)
nostrils, running from the nose; to obstruct or stuff the nostrils,
etc. Ginapung-otán (Ginapúngtan) akó. My nose is stuffed up (clogged
up). I have a catarrh. I have a cold in the head.

_púngpung_, A bunch; a handful. (cf. pulóngpong, pungó, pulóng).

_púngpung_, Darling. (cf. akáy, índay, bábay).

_púngsud_, Nation, a people, community, state, race, tribe, clan,
commonweal. (cf. dútà, bánwa, lúngsod, ginharían).

_púngyot_, Cluster, group, bunch, tuft. (cf. húngyot, púngpung).

_puní_, Decoration, adornment, ornamentation, embellishment;
to decorate, ornament, adorn, embellish. Punihí ang simbáhan sing
maáyo. Decorate the church well. Ipuní iníng mga hénero sa Piésta. Use
these pieces of cloth as decorations for the Feast. Ginpunihán níya
ang íya kalág sing madámò nga mga birtúdes. She adorned her soul with
many virtues. (cf. hiyás).

_puní-púni_, Dim. and Freq. of puní.

_púnlas_, To steep in acid or sour liquids clothes, hemp-fibre,
or the like, in order to take out stains and bring back the original
colour. Punlasí ang lánot nga balayoón sing daláyap (sing áslum). Steep
the hemp for making clothes in a solution of daláyap i.e. the juice
of the daláyap orange (in an acid). Nagdalág ang íya báyò; gánì
pinunlasán níya, agúd magúlì ang dumáan níya nga duág. His jacket
had turned yellow, therefore he steeped it in an acid to bring back
its original colour.

_púnò_, Stump, stem, trunk, bole (of a tree); origin, source,
beginning; root, head, chief. Waláy púnò kag waláy útbong. Without head
or tail. Having neither head nor tail. A thing that has no sense in it.

_punô_, (H) Full, brimming, brimful; to fill, replenish, charge,
brim. Pún-a ang báso. Fill the glass. Pún-i sing bíno iníng
kopíta. Fill this glass with wine. Maghimáyà ka, María, nga punô ka
sing grásya. Hail Mary, full of grace.

_punoán_, Authorities; chief, head, (seldom punóan).

_púnong_, Weir, weel, fish-lock, fish-weir, fish-pond; to dam or dyke
a sheet of water, enclose, confine, shut up. (cf. púnud).

_púnpun_, To gather, collect, shake together into a heap and take
up (said of rice spread on mats to dry, of clothes hung on a line
or spread in the sun or the like). Punpuná ang humáy. Put the rice
together, gather the rice. (cf. pínpin, típon).

_púnse_, (Sp. ponche) Punch, mixture of intoxicating drinks like tubâ,
beer, gin, etc.; to mix intoxicating drinks. Punsehá ang tubâ kag
serbésa. Mix the tubâ and beer.

_punsyón_, (Sp. función) Feast, banquet, dinner, convivial or social
party, an entertainment with eating and drinking. May punsyón sa
baláy ni Fuláno. There is a social party at N.N.'s house. Mamunsyón
kamí sa buás. Tomorrow we are going to have a dinner-party or banquet.

_púnsok_, Group, clump, heap, compact mass, pile, batch, assemblage,
gathering, collection, accumulation; to come or gather close together,
collect in a heap, form a compact mass, huddle together. Nagapúnsok
lang silá dirâ sa pamúsud. They are crowded together in the
corner. Punsoká ang mga bató. Gather the stones in a heap.

_púnta_, (Sp. punta) Point, sharp end of anything, end; to point or
aim at. Puntahá sing maáyo sang pusíl mo ang píspis. Ipúnta sing maáyo
ang pusíl mo sa píspis. Take good aim at the bird with your rifle.

_púntadiamánte_, (Sp. punta de diamante) A kind of plant with prickly
leaves.

_punteríya_, (Sp. puntería) Aim; pointing a weapon, training or
directing a cannon, etc.; to take aim, to aim at, cover (with a gun, or
the like). Ginpunteriyáhan níya akó, ápang walâ akó maígò kay naglíksi
akó. He aimed at me, but I was not hit, for I jumped aside. Maáyo
siá sing punteríya. He is a good (an expert) shot. (cf. patandâtándà).

_puntilyóso_, (Sp. puntilloso) Punctilious; moody, subject to fits
of bad temper. (cf. barinóhon, tarádyon, pikón).

_púnto_, (Sp. punto) Point, full stop, period; tone, tune, pitch,
key, clef. Anó gánì ang púnto sádtong ímo kansyón kahápon? What is
the key of that song of yours you sang yesterday?

_puntuál; puntualidád_, (Sp. puntual; puntualidad) Punctual;
punctuality. (cf. pát-ud, ígò, síbò).

_púnud_, Dam, dyke, weir, lock, weel; to dam, make a dam or dyke,
build a barrier or weir in a river, etc. Ginapúndan níla ang kanál,
ang kalóg, ang túbig, etc. They are building a dam across the channel,
across the ditch, against the flow of water, etc. Ipúnud ang mga
bató, káhoy, kawáyan, etc. Use stones, wood, bamboo, etc. to build
the dam with.

_pún-ud_, To be, become, or make tight, close, etc. See
púg-ok. Pinunurán (Napún-ud, nagkapún-ud, pinún-ud) siá. He was
(became) breathless, unconscious.

_púnung_, See púnong id.

_punút_, Fish-corral, a large fish-trap erected in shallow sea-water.

_punyáda_, (Sp. puñada) Punch, fisticuff, cuff, buffet, box, blow
with the fist. (cf. súmbag, pókpok, búngbung).

_punyál_, (Sp. puñal) Dagger, poniard, stiletto. (cf. íwà, dága,
súndang, etc.).

_púnyo_, (Sp. puño) Fist; grasp, handful; wristband, cuff, (cf. ómol,
inómol).

_púnyos_, (Sp. puños) Cuffs, wristbands, handruffles, the hem, rim
or cuffs of shirt-sleeves.

_puód_, District, province, state. Pangólo-puód. State-Governor,
Provincial Governor. (cf. púngsud, puók).

_puodnánon_, Belonging or referring to a state or province. Pangolohán
nga puodnánon. State-Government, Provincial Government.

_puók_, District; place, corner, territory. (cf. púndok, puód).

_puól_, Snail. (cf. koól, kuúl, ígi).

_puóng_, Bunch, group, troop. See poóng id.

_puót_, To stop, etc. See puút.

_puóng-puóng_, Dim. of puóng. A separate group, grove, cluster, clump
of trees, houses, etc. A village may be called puóngpuóng sang bánwa.

_pupítre_, (Sp. pupitre) Writing case, writing desk. (cf. sululátan).

_púrag_, To stamp (with) the feet. See púdag.

_purág-púrag_, Dim. and Freq. of púrag. See pudágpúdag, pundágpúndag,
pundákpúndak, pusádpúsad.

_purángot_, To frown, scowl; to pout, sulk, etc. See kósmod, súngon,
súnggud, riwaróng, kulumúron.

_puráso_, (Sp. porrazo) Blow, fall, knock, beating, stroke with
a club or stick; sudden, transitory, passing; a kind of game at
cards. Puráso man lang yádtong íya kaákig. That was only a passing
outburst of anger on his part.

_puráut_, Hard times, distress, difficulty, excitement, agitation;
warm (hot) season. Ang panahón sang puráut. A time of dearth or
distress. The hot season. (cf. hiwáos).

_púraw_, Pure, unmixed, etc. See púlaw, púro, pulús, lúnlun, pasáy,
lúnsay, lúgus, lubús.

_púrga_, (Sp. purga) Purge, aperient, cathartic, laxative, purgative,
opening medicine; to take or administer a purge. Nagapúrga siá. He is
taking a laxative. Purgahá siá. Give him a purge, administer to him
a cathartic. Ipúrga sa íya iníng mga píldoras (nga inogpúrga). Give
him these laxative pills to take. (cf. ayúda, kalíya, labatíba).

_purgatóryo_, (Sp. purgatorio) Purgatory.

_purgatoryohánon_, The Souls in Purgatory.

_puría, púria_, (Sp. fuéra) Outside, off, away, not in or within. Puría
(Púria) ka. Get out! (cf. puéra, halín).


_puriákot_, (B) Nonsense, absurdity, twaddle, bosh, trash; absurd,
no good, foolish. (cf. piríkat, lamádà, lásang).

_púro_, (Sp. puro) Pure, unmixed, unadulterated. (cf. púlaw, púraw,
pulús, lúnsay, lúgus).

_purô_, (B) See polô--island, etc.

_purogían_, (B) The cloth-roller in a loom on which the web or newly
woven cloth is wound up. (púgì, pulogían).

_purogí-ot_, Upset, troubled, at a loss; to be at a loss, upset,
not to know what to do or where to turn. (cf. libúg, lingín).

_púron_, (B) See pólon.

_púrug_, (B) To plate, etc. See púlug.

_púrug_, The fruit of the úbi.

_purúng_, See pulóng id. Purungá (pulongá) ang maís. Make the maize
up in bunches or clusters.

_púrung, purúng_, To crown. Ginpurungán sang mga Hudío ang Aton Ginóo
sing tunúk. The Jews crowned Our Lord with thorns. Ipúrung sa íya
úlo iníng mga búlak. Crown his head with these flowers.

_purúng_, A crown, diadem; wreath, chaplet, fillet, coronet. Purúng
nga hariánon. A royal crown.

_purúng-púrung_, Dim. of purúng. Anything resembling a crown.

_purúnton_, (B) See pulúnton.

_purús_, (B) Strength, force; strong; to be or become strong, develop
strength. (cf. hámrus, ísug, báskug).

_purús_, (B) To do with strength or force. Nagpurús (nagbáskug)
siá sang íya nga hámbal. He talked loudly. Purusón (Baskugón) mo ang
pagpápà sang lánsang. Hammer the nail hard. (cf. báskug).

_púrus_, To walk about as if searching or looking for something
lost. (cf. kídos).

_purús-púrus_, Dim. and Freq. of púrus and purús.

_púrut_, (B) See púlut.

_purút_, See pulút.

_purutákal_, A chatterbox, a great talker, one who speaks very quickly
and volubly; to talk much and with great volubility. (cf. putákal,
purutíkol).

_purutíkol_, See purutákal. Purutíkol gid lang ang íya nga hámbal
nga índì masal-otán sing bínlud. He speaks so volubly, that nobody
has a chance to put in a word (----that not even a tiny particle of
rice can be squeezed in between his words).

_púrya_, (A corruption of the Sp. fuera) Out, outside; to go or
put outside; to eject, oust, beat (in games). Puryahí siá. Put him
outside. Remove him. Oust him. (cf. puría, púria).

_pusâ_, To crush, break by pressure. Pús-a (pusaá) ang ítlog, kamátis,
kalámay nga bilóg, etc. Crush the egg, the tomato, the piece of sugar,
etc. Ginpusâ níla ang kawáyan. They crushed the bamboo. Manók nga
napús-an (sang íya nga ítlog). A useless, unprofitable hen. A good
for nothing or useless fellow. (Lit.; A hen with a crushed egg in
its ovary).

_púsad_, See púdag.

_pusád-púsad_, To stamp the feet, etc. See pudágpúdag, pundákpúndak.

_pús-ak_, To throw down violently, drop with some force. See púsdak,
búndak, búgsak).

_pús-ang_, To dash to the floor, throw down, etc. See púsdak, pús-ak.

_pusangót_, Ill-humoured, frowning, offended; to frown, sulk, pout,
look--angry,--morose,--sullen, (cf. kósmod, purángot, púgwat, súngon,
súnggud, kúmud, ariwaróng).

_pusáy_, See pasáy, páskon--to eat only meat or other savoury
sidedishes without rice or bread.

_púsdak_, To throw down or drop with some force, push with impetus
(boxes, parcels, loads carried on the shoulder, etc.); to ram, drive
or strike against something with force. Indì mo pagipúsdak ang kahón,
kóndì pahigdaón (pabutángon, pabatángon) mo sing mahínay. Don't
drop the box, but put it down gently. Indì nínyo pagpusdakán ang
salúg sináng mga sáko nga may sulúd nga bugás, kay básì mabálì ang
síntas. Don't fling the sacks of rice down on the floor, for--the
floor-beams might break,--you might break the floor-beams. Nagubâ
ang baúl, kay pinusdakán níya siníng mabúg-at nga káhoy. The trunk
was crushed, for he threw this heavy piece of wood on it.

_púsgò_, A mass, cluster; to form a--compact mass,--cluster, to be
near--, close--, to come or gather close--, together, be or lie in a
heap or mass, collect in a heap, huddle together. Nagapúsgò gid lang
yanáng mga bitóon. Those stars form a veritable cluster. Ang mga sáhà
sang dágmay, ságing, etc. nagapúsgò sa íya púnò. Dágmay-layers,
banana-suckers, etc. grow in clusters around the parent
stem. (cf. púnsok).

_pusíl_, (Sp. fusil) Rifle, gun, musket, carbine, firearm; to fire at
(on), to shoot with a rifle or firearm, pot, bring down with one's gun,
etc. Pusilá ang píspis. Shoot the bird. Pinusíl sang polís ang buyóng
nga buút magpalágyo. The policeman shot the brigand that wanted to run
away. Indì mo siá pagpusilón. Don't shoot--, fire at (on)--, discharge
your gun (rifle, piece) at--, send a shot after--, him. (cf. lúthang).

_púslit_, To spirt, spurt, etc. See púswit, busawák, súmpit.

_púslut_, To slip out of, escape from the grip of, get away
from. (cf. palús, púdlus).

_púsnga_, To breathe through the nostrils, snort, emit (eject) air
with some force through the nostrils, as an angry buffalo, or the
like. Ginpusngahán siá sang karabáw. The buffalo got wild and snorted
at him. Kon magpúsnga ang karabáw madalî na lang inâ manúngay. If a
buffalo snorts in anger it will soon start attacking with its horns.

_pús-ok, púsok_, To pile up, heap together. (cf. tingúb, túmpok,
púnsok).

_pús-on_, The belly, stomach, abdomen. Paníg-a sang pús-on. A hard
stool, constipation, costiveness. (cf. pamús-on--to evacuate the
bowels).

_púsong_, A liar, boaster, braggart, teller of invented stories;
one who builds castles in the air; to tell stories, etc. (cf. hásò,
ginaóng, úsung).

_púspus_, To strip of leaves, etc. See póspos.

_pústa_, (Sp. posta) Bet, wager, stake; to bet, lay, lay a wager,
put on. Pustahí ang manók ko nga mapulá sing tátlo ka mángmang. Stake
(put) three pesos on my red cock. Ipústa ko ang ákon karabáw. I'll
bet my buffalo. Pilá ang pústa mo? What is your stake? How much did
you stake? (cf. tayâ).

_púsò, pusô_, See pósò, posô. Also: A kind of rice-dish.

_púsud_, Corner, recess, nook; navel; navel-string, umbilical cord;
to make corners. Napusúdan mo na ang tabungós? Have you made the
corners of the tabungós-basket? Sa púsud sang hulút. In the corner of
the room. Butangán mo sing abó ang púsud sang bátà. Put some wood-ash
on the baby's navel.

_púsug_, Thick (of a sheet, board, book, or the like); to become or
make thick. Napusúgan akó siníng líbro. The book is too thick for me,
looks very thick to me. Also: The almost solid part of a bamboo near
the ground. (cf. madámol, dámol).

_pús-ug_, To ram in, drive into the soil, plant, set up, as a post,
stake, or the like. (cf. ósok, búgsok, pulágsak).

_pús-uk_, See pús-ug.

_pusú-pusuán_, The calf of the leg. (cf. busúgbusugán, batíis).

_púsut_, Slushy, miry, wet, soft (of mud, dirt, etc.); to be soft,
slushy, etc. The composite form pusútpúsut is more commonly used.

_pusút-púsut_, Dim. and Freq. of púsut. Nagapusútpúsut iníng
lúnang. This mud is very soft (slushy, watery). (cf. mahómok, tubígon).

_púswak_, To spirt, spurt, squirt, gush out. (cf. píswak, busawák,
póswit, súmpit).

_púswit, puswít-púswit_, See póswit, poswít-póswit--to spirt,
etc. (cf. púswak).

_púta_, (Sp. puta) Harlot, strumpet, whore, prostitute. (cf. bigáon,
álpot, patótot).

_putá_, To divide, distribute, disconnect, disjoin. (cf. putáputá,
pamutá).

_pútak_, See púsut.

_putákal, putakál_, To talk much, be a chatterbox, etc. See purutákal,
purutíkol.

_puták-pútak_, Dim. and Freq. of pútak--to be watery, miry, slushy,
sticky. (cf. pusútpúsut).


_putá-púta_, Dim. of púta.

_putá-putá_, Put or placed separately, scattered, not contiguous or
joined, spread out singly, one by one: to put in separate heaps or
groups, set apart or at a distance from each other. Putáputá ang ákon
umá. My fields are scattered here and there, are not contiguous or
joined together. Ginputáputá níya ang íya humáy. He distributed his
rice in separate heaps or granaries. (cf. atákaták).

_pútat_, A kind of tree.

_putáy_, See bilát.

_putî_, White, light, fair; to whiten, lighten, become or make white,
to be or become light, to blanch, bleach. Nagputî ang íya bohók sa
katigulangón. His hair became white through old age. Naputián akó
siníng duág. This colour is too light (white) for me, appears to me
too light. Pintahí ang padér sing ápog, agúd magputî. Limewash the
wall that it may become white. (cf. bukáy, lágtì, ubánon).

_putían_, White; the white race. Ang mga putían. White people. The
whites.

_putík, pútik_, Whip, crop, rod, lash; to whip, cane, give the whip
(stick); strike (beat) with a rod, lash. Ginputík níya ang kabáyo. He
struck the horse with a whip. He whipped the horse. (cf. lábtik,
búnal, etc.).

_putík_, An ulcerous affection of the anus; fistula.

_putikón_, One who is affected with putík, referring to putík.

_putiókan_, The bee. (putyúkan id.).

_pútiong_, Button, knob, knot; to clasp, buckle, button on, tie up
in a knot. Ipútiong (putiongá) ang písos sa ímo nga pányo. Tie the
peso up in your handkerchief. (cf. pútyong, pítyong, botónes, botón).

_pútlak_, To seethe, be on the boil, be at the boiling point, boil
with a hissing sound (as sugar in a cauldron, etc.). Nagapútlak na
ang kalámay. The sugar is boiling (hissing), i.e. it may soon be
transferred from the cauldron to the trough to be stirred, (dried
and packed for shipment).

_pútlì_, Pure, virginal, unsullied, unstained, chaste, clean,
unspotted, lily-white. (cf. úlay, matínlò).

_púto_, See póto id. Putúha iníng bugás. Make a púto-cake from this
rice. Putóhi akó. Prepare some púto-cakes for me.

_púto_, Bankrupt, insolvent, etc. See póto.

_púto-búngbung_, A kind of púto-cake.

_putohán_, A form or mould, usually of wickerwork, for making
rice-cakes, especially "púto". (cf. lampáwan id.).

_putók_, A twist, coil or kink in a rope, yarn, cable, or the like;
to kink, etc. Nagputók ang kalát. The rope has knotted, kinked
(potók id.).

_putók-putokán_, The top, summit, peak, brow, highest point of a
mountain, hill, etc. (cf. alipokpokán).

_putóng_, Very irascible, quarrelsome, bad-tempered, getting angry very
soon and for a slight reason, void of consideration for others and for
their views. Putóng siá sing buút. He is narrow-minded. (cf. pikón,
tarádyon, ádyò, kutóskutós).

_pútot_, Small, young, tender, soft, immature (said particularly
of fruit).

_putót_, Dwarf, runt, pigmy; dwarfish, pygmean, short, small,
undersized, low of stature.

_púto-tíaw_, A kind of púto-cake.

_putót-irín_, A small or undersized cat; humorously used of small
persons.

_putóy-pútoy_, To exert oneself, make great efforts, do with zest and
zeal. Nagaputóypútoy siá sang pangabúdlay sa umá kag ang íya kinitáan
ginasugál lang sang íya asáwa. He spends himself working on the farm
and his earnings are gambled away by his wife. Nagaputóypútoy siá
sang kádlaw. He laughs with great glee or enjoyment. (cf. himúd-os,
panikasúg, paningúhà, patáypátay).

_pútput_, To break wind, fart. (cf. utút).

_pútro_, (Sp. putero) A stallion that runs after every mare he sees.

_putséro_, (Sp. puchero) A dish of boiled meat with vegetables, sauce,
spices, etc.


_pútson_, From putús--to enwrap, etc.

_pútson_, A fish-trap, a small fishing net.

_putúl_, Maimed; having a part cut off; short, shortened; to
maim, cut off (a finger, member, etc.). Putúl nga sárwal. Short
trousers. Napútlan (naputulán) siá sing isá ka túdlò, sing bohók,
etc. He had a finger, his hair, etc. cut off. (cf. pungól, púnggul,
potól.

_putúng_, Irascible, etc. See putóng.

_putús_, A small bundle, package or parcel; to pack, wrap up and
fasten together, make a parcel. Pútsa (putusá) ang ákon panápton. Wrap
up my clothes. Make up my garments into a parcel. Make a bundle
(parcel) of my clothes. Pinutús nga tabákò. Tobacco-leaves made up
in bundles. Iputús ko iníng papél sa tinápay. I'll wrap this paper
round the bread. I'll wrap the bread in this paper. Ipaputús mo sa
sologoón ang ákon inogílis nga panápton. Order the servant to pack
my change of clothes. (cf. baláhos, bágtong).

_pútut_, A young or small fruit, etc. See pútot.

_pútyong_, Button, knob. (cf. pítyong, botónes, pútiong).

_putyúkan_, Bee. (cf. putiókan).

_puút_, Stopped, discontinued, ceased, finished; to stop,
discontinue, desist, stay, give over, end, break--, leave--, off,
finish, make an end of, cease. Puút na ang ulán--or--nagpuút na
ang ulán. The rain has stopped. Pút-i (puutí) na lang ang pagsulát
mo. Stop writing. Magapapuút pa akó sang ulán kag ugáling malakát
akó. First I shall let the rain stop and then I shall set out (shall
go away). Pinút-an siá sang mga buyóng. He was stopped (waylaid)
by the robbers.

_púut_, To stifle, suffocate, impede breathing. Napúut siá sang
asó. He was suffocated by the smoke.

_púwak_, Throat, gullet, swallow, oesophagus. (cf. púak, tutúnlan,
tubúg).

_puwákì_, An indivisible part, a fraction. Kon partihón ang limá ka
dakô sa duhá ka táo may puwákì nga isá. If five centavos are divided
among two men, then one centavo remains over. (puákì id.).

_puwítis_, (Sp. cohete) Rocket, sky-rocket; fire-crackers.

_púya, puyá_, Embryo in an advanced state; a small child below four
years of age. (cf. ungâ, bátà).

_púya, puyá_, The sharp peg of a spinning-top or peg-top; pivot. Tops
called "trompo" have a puyá, those called kasíng have none, as a rule.

_púyas_, To find fault with, criticize adversely, disparage, use strong
language, chide, scold; gainsay, deny, give the lie to. Walâ sing
makapúyas sang íya sinâ nga ikaáyo, ikaláin, etc. No one can deny its
advantage, disadvantage, etc. Daláyon gid lang silá nagapinuyasáy. They
are always--finding fault with each other,--criticizing one
another,--quarrelling with each other. (cf. pamúrag, pamúlag, pamúsa,
pamulúgsò, híkay, múlay, pamuyáyaw, suáysúay).

_púy-as_, Clean, well hulled rice; to hull or pound rice very well,
so that the bankolít comes off as well as the husks. Puy-así ang
pináwà. Finish pounding the half-hulled rice.

_puyát_, Drowsy, sleepy, dizzy, rising late in the
morning. (cf. púyat).

_púyat_, To be or make drowsy, sleepy, to sleep long, lie in bed
till late in the morning (day) on account of lack of sleep during
the previous night. Nagmatá na si Kwán?--Walâ pa, napúyat siá
tungúd sang báyle kagáb-i. Has N.N. risen from sleep?--No, not yet,
he needs much sleep on account of last night's dance. Ginapúyat siá,
karón, kay nagab-ihán siá magpaúlì kagáb-i. He feels very sleepy now,
because last night he came home late (at a late hour). Napúyat siá
tungúd sang belasyón kagáb-i. He rose late this morning on account
of last night's wake.

_púyò_, See bilát.

_púyo_, Burse, purse, pocket, small sack; money bag. (cf. pálhuk).

_puyó_, A kind of fish.

_puyô_, To live, dwell, abide, stay, lodge, reside, have one's
home or residence, to live with. Sa diín ka nagapuyô? Where do you
live? Ginpúy-an (Ginpuyoán) níya iníng baláy sa sulúd sang duhá ka
túig. He lived two years in this house. He lived in this house for
two years. Anó ang pagtawág sang dálan nga ímo nga ginapúy-an? What
is the name of the street where you live (you live in)? Papúy-a siá
sa ímo baláy. Let him lodge in your house. Give him lodgings in your
home. Let him stay at your house. Ginpuyô níya siá. He lived with
her. Indì mo pagpúy-on yanáng babáe. Don't live with that woman. Don't
keep that woman (as your concubine). (cf. estár, lúntad, buhî, amoyóng,
ulî, paúlî).

_púyos, puyós_, A parcel, package; to bind or wrap up, fasten with
a knot. Isá ka puyós nga tabákò, kalámay, etc. A parcel or package
of tobacco, sugar, etc. Puyósi ang tabákò. Tie the tobacco up in a
knot (of your handkerchief, or the like). Diín ang pinúyos ko nga
panápton? Where is my parcel (package) of clothes? May kwárta siá nga
ginapuyósan sa púsud sang íya pányò. He has some money tied up in the
corner of his handkerchief. (cf. putús, bágtong, baláhos, balíghot).

_púypuy_, See póypoy--to be or become weak, etc. (cf. búdlay, álay,
lúya).

_puyúng-púyung_, Blindman's buff, Blind Harry; to play hide and
seek. (cf. butábúta).




Q


_q_, In the reformed spelling of Visayan "k" is used instead of "q"
or rather instead of "qu", for the two always go together. Therefore
Visayan words in "qu" must be looked for under "k", e.g. quilícot,
quíquic, etc. will be found under "k" spelt kilíkot, kíkik,
etc. (cf. remarks on letters "c" and "k").




R


_r_, The letter "r" in Visayan is pronounced as in English. Many
words that have "l" in Hiligáynon have "r" in Hinaráya and others
that have "r" in Hiligáynon have "d" in Hinaráya, e.g. walâ, warâ;
laláng, raráng; dulupláan, durupráan; bag-óran, bag-ódan; kalaparón,
kalapadón, etc.

_ra_, (B) This, that. (cf. diá, riá, rán, iní, inâ).

_ráad_, (B) Would to God that, may or might it be so, it were well
if----. Matawás akó ráad kanímo. (Maupúd akó kuntánì sa ímo). I should
dearly like to accompany you. (cf. dáad, úntà, kúntà, untánì, kuntánì).

_ráan_, (B) See ráad.

_raán_, (B) For rahán, a contraction of ra and the interjection "han"
(in Hiligáynon "ay"), e.g. imáw raán. (amó inâ ay). That is it.

_rabanít_, Old and useless, torn, bad, rotten, ragged, worn into
rags or tatters, tattered. Rabanít nga báyò, delárgo, pányò, etc. A
tattered jacket, pair of trousers, handkerchief, etc. (cf. gubát).

_rábanos_, (Sp. rábano) Radish.

_rabél_, (Sp. rabel) Rebec, an instrument somewhat similar to the
violin, and played with a bow.

_rabó_, Tastiness, quality of being savoury; to be tasty, toothsome;
to become savoury (said of fruit, tubers, squashes and the like). (labó
id.).

_rábo_, (Sp. rabo) Tail (cf. íkog).

_rábong_, (B) See dábong--dense, etc.

_rabót_, See rabanít--bad, old, useless, etc.

_rabót_, Weak, not strong, stale, bad (of tobacco, etc.).

_rábrab_, To tear, rend. Sín-o ang nagrábrab sang ákon báyò? Who has
torn my jacket? Rabrabá na lang ang dáan mo nga delárgo. Just tear
up your old pair of trousers. (cf. gísì, gíhay).

_rabútyal_, To run about freely, to run loose as horses, buffaloes,
etc., if they escape from an enclosure, or if their tether breaks.

_radáy-ráday_, To ramble, roam or wander about, to be an idler or
loafer. (cf. landólándo, haráyháray, lagáwlágaw, tiyógtiyóg).

_ragáak, ragaák_, To crash, crack as breaking wood and the like.

_ragámak_, See ragáak id.

_ragáng_, Stained, bloodstained; to become bloodstained. (cf. musagáng,
maragáng).

_ragá-rága_, (B) Winged ants. (cf. lagálága).

_rágas_, Thick, (said of paint, embroidery, beading, marking, low
relief-work and the like). (cf. madámol).

_ragásras_, To creak, scrape, make a noise as of slippers dragged
along the floor, or the like. (cf. ragósros).

_ragátnat_, To be munched noisily with the sound made
when raw radishes, carrots, etc. are eaten, to emit such a
sound. (cf. ragótnot).

_ragíngring_, To squeak, screak, screech, creak, utter sharp,
shrill sounds (as violins, etc.); to rattle, clatter. (cf. ragíting,
ringkádol, lungkágay).

_raginít, ragínit_, To crack or creak as ropes when strained to
breaking point.

_ragíting_, To screak, squeal, etc. See ragíngring.

_ragítrit_, To emit a sound as of clothes being torn.

_ragkót, rágkot_, (B) To be or become sticky, viscous,
adhesive. (cf. pilít, págkut).

_rágnat_, (B) A slight fever or cold; to affect with a cold or
slight fever. May rágnat akó.--Ginarágnat akó. I have a slight cold
or fever. (cf. lágnat).

_ragókrok_, A rolling, rumbling sound; borborygmus; to boom, roll,
reverberate. Ang ragókrok sang solóksolók. The rumbling of the
stomach. (cf. dagóok, dághob).

_rág-ol_, Thud, thump; to fall down with a thud, to thump, tumble
down with a dull or heavy sound. Indì ka magkádto sa pántaw, kay
básì marág-ol (maghurág-ol) ka. Don't walk on the kitchen-balcony,
for you might break through and tumble down. Anó ang nagrinág-ol
(nagahinurág-ol) sa sulúd? What is that noise inside? What is
falling down or flopping about inside there? (cf. lagábung; hurág-ol,
hinurág-ol id. and more in use).

_ragomô_, To crunch, emit a sound as of hard bread being chewed
with some force; to be crisp. Ang matíg-a nga tinápay kon kán-on,
magaragomô súbung sang sinánlag nga maís. Hard bread, when chewed,
crunches like roast corn. (cf. mahágpok).

_ragósros_, To be drawn, rolled, dragged or pulled along the ground
with a rustling noise; to drag or draggle on the ground. Sang
pagkahúlug níya sa bánglid nagragósros siá pa idálum. When he fell
on the slope he whizzed (rolled) to the bottom. (cf. ragásras).

_ragótnot_, See ragátnat id. Ang banáyan nga sagun-otón magaragótnot
kon kádton. When one eats the tough-fibred banáyan, there is a sound
as of chopping.

_ragóyroy_, A kind of plant.

_ragutóng_, (B) Full and quite ripe, said of rice-grain. Ragutóng
nga humáy. Rice-grain that is full and quite ripe. (cf. típsul).

_rahá_, (Sp. rajá) Rajah, king, prince, ruler, chieftain,
chief. (cf. hárì, dátò, pangólo).

_ráha_, (Sp. raja) Split firewood. (cf. gatóng).

_ráhà_, (B) To cook food, dress meat or vegetables, prepare for the
table by boiling, roasting, baking, broiling, etc. Magráhà ka sang
panyága, kárne, ísdà, etc. Cook the dinner, the meat, the fish,
etc. (cf. lútò).

_rahâ_, (B) Cooked, prepared for the table.

_ráhay_, To be well, feel fresh and strong or in fine
fettle. (cf. súlhay).

_raháyráhay_, Dim. and Freq. of ráhay. Raháyráhay (maraháyráhay)
karón ang íla pangabúhì. At present they are living quite
comfortably. Raháyráhay (maraháyráhay) ang íya památyag, kay
nakapalígos siá kaína. He feels quite well and fresh, for he has
taken a bath to-day. (cf. súlhay).

_ra-íng_, (B) Dirt, grime; dirty, soiled, stained, grimy,
sullied. (cf. gímang, hígkò, músing).

_rakô_, (B) Many, plenty, great numbers of, crowds of, multitude;
to multiply, increase, be or make many. Rakô nga mga táo ang
nagtaroróng. (Madámò nga mga táo ang nagtalámbong). Many people
attended or assisted. (cf. dakô, madámò, karák-an).

_ralab-ásan_, (B) Fish basket; fishing boat. (cf. lab-ásan,
lalab-ásan).

_ramák_, Million. (cf. hámbad, milyón).

_ramákan_, Millionaire. (cf. hambádan).

_rámas_, (B) Chili put in tubâ as seasoning. Ang katúmbal nga ginapusâ
sa tubâ amó ang ginatawág nga rámas. (inográmas). Chili powdered and
mixed into tubâ is called rámas.

_rámas_, To rub, scrape. Karón ramásan ko ang ímo dílà sing katúmbal,
kon dílì ka maghípus. I will rub your tongue with chili, if you don't
keep quiet. (cf. bányos, háplas).

_rámat_, (B) Weak, dim (of sight); to become weak or dim. Nagarámat
na ang panúluk ko--or--rámat na ang panúluk ko. My sight is getting
dim. (cf. lámat).

_ramát-ramát_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of rámat. (cf. lamátlamát).

_rámay_, Dry, withered banana leaves. (cf. lámay).

_ramáy_, A kind of rice. (cf. arabón).

_rámbat_, Slanting; oblique, diagonal, running across from corner
to corner; to slant, be slanting or oblique, be slant, arrange in a
slanting direction. Ang pílì sang íya báyò nagarámbat (rámbat). The
stripes in his jacket run from corner to corner (are neither vertical
nor horizontal). Rambatí ang bintánà sing káhoy. Place some pieces
of wood diagonally across the window.

_rambát-rámbat_, Dim. of rámbat.

_rámbing_, Entangled, ravelled, jumbled, in disorder, in confusion,
complicated; to get entangled or complicated. Nagarámbing ang
bunáng. The yarn is getting entangled. Nagarámbing (rarámbing) ang ákon
trabáho. My work is in a tangle (all six and sevens). I am very busy
with many things or occupied with many distracting labours. (cf. sabúd,
sabdánay, gomón).


_ramî_, (B) Soft, pliable, yielding to pressure. (cf. lamî).

_ramíg_, (B) Cold, etc. See lamíg, yamíg.

_ramí-rámi_, Quick, speedy, swift; to be quick, perform
quickly. Ramíramíha ang ímo pagkáon, kay may kadtoán kitá. Eat
quickly, for we must go. Ginramírámi níla ang pagsílhig, paglakát,
etc. They swept very quickly, they walked swiftly (with speed),
etc. (cf. dalî-dálì).

_rámò_, (B) Sweepings, dirt, refuse. (cf. ságbot).

_rámos_, (Sp. ramo) Palm, bough, branch, especially palms blessed on
Domíngo de Rámos--Palm-Sunday. May rámos ikáw nga nabenditáhan sang
Domíngo de Rámos? Have you got any of the palms blessed (that were
blessed) on Palm-Sunday? (cf. pálua, pálwa).

_rám-os_, (B) Stain, soil; to stain, soil, make wet, bespatter,
sully. Ginsábya na akó ti (kang) túbig kag narám-os akó. (Ginsábya
níya akó sing (sang) túbì kag nalám-os akó). He splashed (bespattered
me with) water on me and I got wet. Narám-os akó kang lalaó, hígkò,
dugô, etc. (Nalám-os akó sang lúnang, hígkò, dugô etc.). I was
stained with mud, dirt, blood, etc. Indì mo tána pagram-osón kang
lalaó. (Indì mo siá paglam-osón sang lúnang). Don't bespatter him
with mud. (cf. lám-os).

_ramúskal_, (B) To injure, destroy, harm, undo, damage. Ginramuskalán
na (níya) ang ákon hampángan, sinulát, etc. He damaged my toy, writing,
etc. (cf. ránggà, dáut, hálit, amolít, tístis).

_ramúsot_, (B) To crush to pulp, squash, squelch; to be pressed or
crushed to pulp. Nalapákan ang ságing kag naramúsot. The banana was
trodden upon and crushed. Ang pángkà maramúsot (Ang pakâ malamúsut)
kon igóon mo siníng bató. The frog will be squashed, if you hit
it with this stone. Indì mo pagparamusóton (pagpalamusóton) ang
mga páhò. Don't crush the mangoes. Ang manók nalígsà sang áwto kag
naramúsot (nalamúsut). The chicken was run over by the automobile and
crushed. (cf. pusâ, lumâ, báak, bókbok, etc. N.B. ramúsot (lamúsut)
implies that the crushing results in a pulpy formless mass and can
consequently not be used of dry objects or things that merely crumble
under pressure). (cf. lamúsut).

_ran_, (B) That. (cf. ra, inâ).

_ránggà_, (B) To break down, destroy, undo, smash to pieces,
demolish. Ang ámon baláy naránggà kang (nagubâ sang) bágyo. Our house
was destroyed by the hurricane. Índì kaw magránggà kang (índì mo pag
ranggaón ang) lamésa. (Indì ka maggubâ sang (índì mo paggubaón ang)
lamésa). Don't smash the table. Ranggaí tána kang ána kodál. Ranggaá
ang kodál na. (Gúb-i siá sang íya korál. Gúb-a ang íya korál). Break
down his fence. (cf. gubâ, láglag, lúmpag).

_rángsì_, (B) To grin. See lángsì, balangisí.

_rápta_, (B) To scatter, spread, extend. See lápta.

_rapunáya_, (B) A kind of medicinal plant. See lapunáya id.

_rára_, (B) Wicker work, basket-weaving; to make wicker work,
weave baskets. Raráha iníng baníg. Weave this mat. Raráhi akó sing
kálò. Weave a hat for me. Maálam ka magrára? Do you know how to weave
baskets? (cf. lála).

_rarámbing_, (B) Entangled, etc. See rámbing.

_raráng_, (B) Resource, contrivance, means, etc. See laláng.

_raráng_, (B) To dare, be audacious, impertinent. Ginrarangán níya ang
pagbukás sang ákon baúl. He dared to open my trunk. (cf. káhas, ahás).

_rári_, A kind of coarse-scaled fish, very flat and thin.

_rarím_, (B) Taste, etc. See lalím.

_rárong_, (B) Wounded, grievously injured, crippled; to cripple,
etc. See lalúng id.

_rároy_, (B) To become weak through hunger or exposure, become
exhausted. (cf. lúyà, hílab).

_rása_, (Sp. raza) Race, breed, stock, lineage. (cf. kalíwat,
kaliwátan, kabikáhan).

_rása_, Good; well; to be good, well, healthy, sound. Indì rása
(marása) ang íya památyag. He does not feel well. (cf. áyo, maáyo).

_rásak_, To spoil, undo, make useless, ruin. Ginrásak níya ang ákon
óbra. He ruined my work. Indì mo pagrasákon ang íya nga sinulát. Don't
spoil what he has written.

_rasák_, Spoilt, ruined, made useless, no longer of any avail. Rasák
na ang ákon ginkabudlayán sing dakô. What I spent so much labour upon
is ruined.

_rasón_, (Sp. razón) Reason, faculty of thinking; right, justice,
argument; explanation, account. (cf. ihibaló, panumdúman, katarúngan,
kasaysáyan, kabangdánan, etc.).

_rásras_, To tear off, grasp and pull or rend to pieces. See káskas
id. Rasrasá lang ang atóp nga kógon. Tear the cogon-roof off.

_rástra_, (Sp. rastra, arrastrar) To drag along, cause to perish or
die. Narástra ang ákon karabáw. My buffalo perished. (cf. lástra).

_raták_, Torn, rent, broken. (cf. riták).

_rátak_, To rend, cut or break into small pieces or parts. Ratáka lang
diáng (iníng) hénero. Tear this cloth into small pieces. Ginrátak na
(níya) ang amákan. He cut the bamboo-mat into small pieces. Tatlohón
mo lang ka gurút (gulút) ang ísdà, índì mo pagratákon. Divide the fish
into three parts only, don't cut it into many small pieces. (cf. rítak
id.).

_rátrat_, The sound produced by tearing or rending cloth, etc.;
to tear, rend, split. (cf. rábrab, rítrit).

_rawá-ráwa_, Trifles, matters that are not to the point or are of
no importance, addition, embellishment, flowers (of speech); to
mention frequently, converse about, speak of, refer to constantly,
talk about matters of little importance. Madámò siá sing rawáráwa kon
maghámbal. When he talks he makes many irrelevant statements, "beats
about the bush". Mga rawáráwa lang ang íya nga ginsúgid. He mentioned
nothing of importance, uttered mere commonplaces or platitudes, spoke
about trifles, was not to the point. Masúnsun siá nagarawáráwa tungúd
sang íya nadúlà nga kwárta. He frequently talks about the money he
lost. (cf. bulákbúlak, punípúni; móno, búkò, hámbal, wákal, búrà).

_ráwit_, To leave a trail or trace on the ground, as of spilt liquids,
grains, or the like. Nagaráwit ang maís sa dálan. The corn is making
a trail on the ground.

_rawít-ráwit_, Dim. and Freq. of ráwit. Nagarawítráwit ang túbig
sa salúg kay walâ mo pagamligí ang pagdalá sang pitsíl. There is a
dribble of water along the floor, because you were not careful in
carrying the pitcher.

_ráya_, (Sp. raya) Stroke, line, streak, dash, stripe. (cf. sámay,
guráy, kúdlit, kúris, bádlit).

_rayadílyo_, (Sp. rayadillo) Striped cotton duck; a prisoner's dress.

_ráyo_, (Sp. rayo) Ray, beam, streak of light; spoke of a wheel;
wheel; cart.

_ráyos_, (Sp. ráyo) Wheel; cart. (cf. ráyo, alíling, aríring).

_ráyray_, To tear, rend, pull apart. Indì mo pagrayrayón ang íya
báyò. Don't tear his jacket. (cf. rábrab, gísì).

_reál_, (Sp. real) A silver coin worth about twelve and one half
centavos, now out of circulation. Although the coin is no longer
current in the Philippines, people still calculate in reáles. Dóse
reáles. One peso and fifty centavos.

_rededór_, (Sp. rededor) Surroundings, environs, environment,
neighbourhood of a building, church, etc. (cf. maglíbut, katámbi).

_redóma_, (Sp. redoma) Flask, phial, decanter.

_regálo_, (Sp. regalo, regalar) Present, gift, donation, keepsake;
to make a present of, bestow upon. Iregálo mo lang sa íya iníng
relóh. Give him this watch as a keepsake. Ginregálo iní sa ákon ni
Fuláno. This was given to me as a present by N.N. (cf. dúlut, hátag,
bugáy, pádya, prémyo).

_regatón_, (Sp. regatón, regatear) A huckster, peddler, pedlar,
hawker, travelling chapman, especially a vendor (in the streets or
from house to house) of fruits and garden products; to peddle, hawk,
resell at retail, carry small goods about for sale. (cf. ligatón,
líbut, balígyà).

_régla_, (Sp. regla) Rule, statute, standard; monthly course,
menstruation, catamenia. (cf. palatúkdan; pamulanón).

_regulár_, (Sp. regular) Regular; ordinary, middling, fairly well,
usual, passable. Ang kléro regulár. The regular clergy.

_rehimiénto_, (Sp. regimiento) Regiment.

_rehistrádo_, (Sp. registrado) Registered, recorded, entered in a
register; investigated, searched, inspected. (cf. pinat-inán (pát-in);
pinágkit, napágkit (págkit); pinangusisáan (usísà)).

_rehístro_, (Sp. registro) Register, record-book, registration;
investigation, search, inspection; to inspect, search,
investigate. Panrehístro (which see) is more used as
verb. (cf. rehistrádo).

_rekádo_, See rikádo--condiment, seasoning, etc.

_rekámara, rekamará_, (Sp. recámara) Firing mortar, as frequently
used at the celebration of feasts. (cf. palúpok, rekámra).

_rekámra_, See rekámara.

_rekárgo_, (Sp. recargo) Surcharge, additional tax, especially
applied to a fine imposed upon those that are delinquent in paying
their cedula-tax.

_rekínto_, (Sp. requinto) Fife, kind of flute; fifer, flute-player;
a small guitar.

_reklámo_, (Sp. reclamo) Reclamation, complaint, objection; to
complain, have an objection. "reklámo" is frequently loosely used
for any kind of information or notification. (cf. yámo).

_relihión_, (Sp. religión) Religion.

_relihiósa, -o_, (Sp. religiosa, -o) Religious, one bound by religious
vows.

_relikáryo_, (Sp. relicario) Reliquary; shrine.

_relíkya_, (Sp. reliquia) Relic of a Saint.

_relóh, réloh_, (Sp. reloj) Clock, watch, time-piece. (cf. taknáan).

_relohería_, (Sp. relojería) Watchmaker's shop, shop, where clocks
and watches are sold.

_relohéro_, (Sp. relojero) Watchmaker; seller of clocks and watches.

_réntas_, (Sp. renta) Rent, tax, contribution, revenue. Réntas
intérnas. Internal Revenue. (cf. buhís).

_repáso_, (Sp. repaso) Going over a lesson; rehearsal,
practice of a piece of music, an artistic entertainment and
the like. Nakarepáso na kamó sang beláda? Have you rehearsed the
theatrical entertainment? May repáso karón sa hápon. There will be a
rehearsal this afternoon. Matámad silá magrepáso. They are too lazy
to practise. (cf. hanáshánas).

_reséta_, (Sp. receta) Recipe, formula, medical prescription; to
prescribe medicines or the like.

_resíbo_, (Sp. recibo) Receipt, deed; to make out a receipt or
deed. Resibóhi ang ákon ginbáyad sa ímo. Make out a receipt for what I
have paid you. Ginresibóhan níya ang dútà nga ákon ginprénda sa íya. He
made out a deed for the land I mortgaged to him. (cf. kalig-onán,
dokuménto).

_resolusyón_, (Sp. resolución) Resolution, decision, agreement,
solution, fixed determination, formal proposal (in a meeting,
etc.). (cf. kasugtánan, pagbulút-an, hágnà, panúgyan).

_retratísta_, (Sp. retratista) Photographer, portrait-painter.

_retráto_, (Sp. retrato) A portrait, picture, photograph,
photo. (cf. laráwan).

_reúma_, (Sp. reuma) Rheumatism.

_réy_, (Sp. rey) King. (cf. hárì).

_réyna_, (Sp. reina) Queen. (cf. hárì, hárà).

_réyna_, A rice-measure of twenty-five gantas to the bushel. Ipaágsa
ka sa ímo ang ákon talámnan kon sugút ikáw sa pagbáyad sa ákon sa
tuígtúig sing duhá ka púlò ka pásong nga humáy sa réyna (nga solókban,
pasongán). I'll let you have my land on lease, if you agree to pay
me a yearly rental of twenty bushels of rice. Old people use to say:
Ang duhá ka pásong sa probínsya, kon sókbon sa réyna, mahímò nga tátlo
ka pásong. Two bushels of the "sa probínsya" standard are equal to
three bushels, if measured by the "sa réyna" standard.

_riá_, (B) That. (cf. diá, inâ, yanâ).

_ribál_, (Sp. rival) Rival, competitor. (cf. kasúmpung).

_ribénta_, (Sp. reventa) Resale; retail.


_ribénta_, (Sp. reventar) Explosion; to explode, detonate,
burst, crack, be broken to bits by an explosion. Nagribénta ang
kámra sang nahauná nga pagpalupók. The mortar burst at the first
charge. Naribentahán akó kagáb-i sang túbo sang ákon kínke. Last
night my lamp-chimney cracked. (cf. lupók).

_ribentadór_, (From the Sp. reventar) Fire-cracker. (cf. puwítis).

_ribéte_, (Sp. ribete) Galloon, band, ribbon, narrow lace, etc. such as
is sewn around the cuffs of a sleeve or used for other like purposes.

_ríbit_, (B) To drop inadvertently, etc. See wígit.

_ribók_, Revolution, rising, sedition, commotion; excitement;
trouble. (cf. gamó).

_ribóok_, (B) Full, plump, having fat cheeks, etc. (cf. ribusól)

_ríbrib_, To undermine and eat away, to erode. Ginríbrib sang subâ ang
ámon umá. The river undermined and carried off our field. (cf. áb-ab,
kábkab).

_ribusól_, (B) See ribúok, but with the difference that ribusól
supposes a greater compactness or hardness than ribóok; ribusól is
more used for fat, stout arms and legs and ribóok for plump cheeks
and a thick fleshy neck.

_rigáhot_, To be or become hot, close, sultry; to get excited or
confused by overwork or the like; to be sticky or stuffy, feel very
uncomfortable as one who has perspired much and cannot change his
clothes. (cf. mabóhot, magamó, mapilít, maragkót).

_rigám_, (B) Dirt, filth, stain; to stain, soil, sully. (cf. hígkò,
rígkam).

_rigarás_, Rough, coarse, not smooth or even. Rigarás nga balás,
lamésa, etc. Coarse sand, a rough table, etc. (cf. garás).

_ríg-as_, (B) See líg-as--to complete the pounding of rice.

_rígay_, See arígay, lígay--to be nice (kind) to, etc.

_rígkam_, (B) See rigám--dirt, filth, etc.

_rígkam_, (B) See bígne, lígne, lígna, rígna--to overawe; to shudder,
etc. Narigkamán akó sa pagtán-aw siní. I shudder at the sight
of it. Indì ka magrígkam magkapút sinâ. Don't be afraid to touch
(grasp) that.

_rígna_, (B) See lígna, rígkam, etc.

_rigodón_, (Sp. rigodón) A kind of dance; rigodon, quadrille.

_rigól_, To insist on, be importunate; insisting, strict,
exacting. Rigolá si nánay mo, agúd báklan ka níya sang ímo
ginapangáyò. Ask your mother insistently, so that she may buy you
what you want. Rigól nga táo. An insistent, strict man. (cf. íd-id,
patúsà, olóólo, paayónáyon).

_ríhas_, (Sp. rejas) Grate, grating, grille, paling, railing; a
rail, pale.

_ríit, riít_, A haunted place; haunted, ghostly, weird,
uncanny. (cf. mahágnop).

_ríka_, Traces of food sticking to cooking vessels. Also used as a
verb. Narikáhan ang kólon sing madámò. Quite a lot of food remained
sticking to the rice-kettle. (cf. ríkam id.).

_rikádo_, (Sp. recado) Provision, especially in the way of spices
and seasoning, condiments.

_ríkam_, (B) See ríka.

_rikísa_, (Sp. requisa, requisar) Inspection, search, examination; to
inspect, search, examine; make the rounds. Saráng mo akó marikísa. You
may search me. (cf. pangusísà, paníid, panínuk, paníktik, panílag).

_rikobíkos_, (Sp. recoveco) Artifice, machination, contrivance,
winding ways and means. Madámò nga mga rikobíkos ang kinahánglan karón
sa pagpakasál. Many things are required now and many formalities have
to be gone through to get married. (cf. padúgì, pahitôhítò, padihútan,
pandihútan, patúga).

_rikódo_, (Sp. recodo) A turn, curve, bend; to curve, arch, bend,
turn. Rekodóha ang ági sang gúnting. Cut a curve (in a curve) with
your scissors. (cf. tikô, balitók, abóy, likô).

_ríkot_, Complicated, in a tangle, perplexing, requiring great
patience, said of cleaning a jungle, of fine lace-making, carving,
etc.; to be complicated, etc.

_ríma_, Lime, lime-tree. (líma id.).


_rimasâ_, Growing well, getting strong and fat, developing at
an extraordinary rate. Rimasâ nga tanúm, bátà, etc. Well-growing
(thriving) plants, a baby that is growing fast and getting strong, etc.

_rimáti_, (Sp. remate) Termination, end, completion, conclusion,
finish, stopping; the last peal of bells in bell-ringing; to end,
conclude, stop, finish; to ring off. Amó iní ang íya siní nga
rimáti. This is the end of it. Rimáti na iní sang bágting. This is the
last (concluding) peal of bells. The bells are stopping. Rimatíha ang
mga linggánay. Stop the ringing of the bells. Ring off. Narimáti na
ang linggánay? Have the bells stopped ringing? Kon índì mo paggawáron
ang síngsing nga naprénda mo sa ákon, pagarimatíhon ko. Unless you
redeem the ring you gave me as security, I shall consider it as my
own. N.B. The usual terms for bell-ringing are: bágting--bell-ringing
in general; the first peal of bells; rimáti, púlut, púrut--the last
or concluding peal of bells; tágsa (H), lágdà (B)--the intermittent
ringing or striking of a single bell between the bágting and the
rimáti. (cf. katapúsan, tápus; ripíke).

_rimédyo_, (Sp. remedio) Remedy, help, cure, resource, refuge,
reparation, means. Walâ na sing rimédyo, índì na makitáan sing
bulúng. There is no help any more, it is past cure. Ang íya balatían
walâ na sing rimédyo. His sickness is past cure. Tahór (makáwat)
siá nga waláy rimédyo. He is an inveterate (incorrigible) gambler
(thief). But it may also mean: He is a gambler (thief) that has not
become rich (does not prosper) in his profession. Sa súbung siní walâ
akó sing kwárta nga ibáyad ko sa ímo, ápang pagarimedyohán ko gid
sa sulúd sang isá ka simána. Just at present I have no money to pay
you, but I shall certainly find the money within the week. Anó nga
bulúng ang maáyo nga irimédyo sa síkmat? What is a good remedy for
back-ache (for rheumatism in the back)? (cf. palónos, paaliwánsan,
bulúng, ripára).

_rimidyáki_, (B) (A humorous expression) See rimédyo. Also: to take,
pilfer, purloin, help (oneself) to. (cf. lámang, kulámi, kúhà).

_rímis, rím-is_, (B) Sweetness; sweet; to sweeten, etc. See tám-is.

_rímo_, (Sp. remo) Oar; to row, paddle. (cf. gáud, gaúd, búgsay).

_rimô_, To harm, injure; soil, make dirty. Ang kuríng nagrimô sang
salúg sang balatonán. The cat has dirtied the floor of the reception
room. Narimoán sang idô ang ságwà. The dog has left its dirt--or--has
made a mess in the drawing room. (cf. rísmò, rigám, hígkò, músing,
bulíng).

_rímog_, (B) To weaken or spoil by mixture. Rimógi ang lánggaw sing
kán-on. Weaken the vinegar by putting rice into it. Indì mo pagrimógan
ang lánggaw, kay magatáhaw. Don't mix anything with (put any admixture
into) the vinegar, for it will lose its strength. Narimógan ang
lanahón. The juice of the coconut-meat is spoilt (so that no oil can
be got from it). (cf. límog).

_rimórki_, (Sp. remolque) Towage, tow-line; to tow, take in tow,
pull, haul. (cf. bútong, ságnoy, gánoy, gúyud, gúyguy).

_rímpual_, See the following rímpwal.

_rímpwal_, To struggle hard or make great efforts to escape, to strain
every nerve to break fetters, shake off a superimposed weight and
the like. Ang karabáw nga nagápus kag ginamarkahán nagarímpwal. The
buffalo that is tied and is being branded is making frantic efforts
to rise. (cf. pólok, polók-pólok).

_rinagámak_, A cracking or pattering noise (as of many stones falling,
many rifles detonating, etc.); to crack, crackle, crash, patter,
bicker. (cf. ragámak, ragáak, árak, bárak).

_rinagíngring_, Squeaking, screeching, a shrill sound (as of stringed
musical instruments); cracking (as of rifles, etc.); to whizz, hiss,
buzz, whir; to emit a shrill sound. (cf. ragíngring).

_rinamák_, Millions, by the million. (cf. ramák, hinámbad).

_rínda_, (Sp. rienda) Rein of a bridle; reins, rule.

_ringángha_, (B) Having large and wide open nostrils as a natural
deformity. Ringángha siá sing ilóng. He has very large and wide
nostrils. (cf. hungág).

_ringgóhot_, (B) See linggóhot, lininggóhot id. (cf. sarumbálì).

_ríngkab_, To open with force, prise open, force open. Ringkabá
ang baúl. Force the trunk open. Ginríngkab níla ang aparadór, kay
nadúlà ang lyábi They forced the cupboard open, for the key had been
lost. (cf. bíngkal).

_ringkádol_, To rattle, clatter (as wood tumbling down a staircase,
or the like; rattling, clattering. (cf. linagápok, linágot, lungkágay).

_ríntoy_, To be dizzy, confused. Nagaríntoy ang íya ólo. He is upset,
his head reels, or the like. (cf. lingín, língin).

_rióma_, (Sp. reuma) Rheumatism. (reúma id.).

_rípa_, (Sp. rifa) Raffle, lottery; to raffle, partake in a lottery,
buy a ticket in a lottery. Iparípa lang ang ímo arítos--or--paripáhi
lang ang ímo arítos. Dispose of your ear-rings by raffling
them. Ginaripáhan níla ang isá ka relóh nga buláwan. They are taking
part in a raffle for a golden watch. (cf. lóte).

_ripahán_, Place where a raffle is held; ticket bought in a raffle;
things disposed of by means of a raffle.

_ripára_, (Sp. reparar) To attend to, notice, bestow care upon,
provide well, prepare or make ready what is needed. Riparáha ang mga
bisíta. See to the visitors, attend upon the visitors. Ginripára
mo na ang tanán nga mga kinahánglan sa kosína? Have you got ready
everything needed for the kitchen? A, walâ níya pagriparáha. Why,
he did nothing, he neglected everything. (cf. hímos, híwat, tátap,
híkot, búhat, dipára).

_ripíki_, (Sp. repique) Chime, peal, solemn ringing of bells;
to ring the bells in a solemn peal. May tátlo ka ripíke karón
sa las dóse. There will be three peals of bells to-day at twelve
o'clock. Ripikéhi ang mga kalasálon. Ring a peal of bells for the
marriage-couple. (cf. basál, básal).

_ripínte_, (Sp. repente) Sudden, suddenly, unexpected, unforeseen,
all at once. (cf. gólpe, hinálì).

_ripólyo_, (Sp. repollo) White cabbage, a head of cabbage.

_ríras_, To cut or split burí-leaves and the like into strips
for weaving purposes. Rirása ang burí. Tear the burí-leaves into
strips. (cf. lílas).

_rirasán_, Machine or instrument for dividing leaves into strips for
weaving hats, baskets, etc., stripping-device, stripper. (cf. lilasán).

_ríray_, To cut into slices or pieces. Riráya ang kárne, ísdà,
etc. Cut the meat, fish, etc. into pieces or slices. (cf. gulút).

_rírì, rîrî_, A slit, cut; to slit or cut open; to disembowel, to
slit open and gut or eviscerate an animal. Riríi ang báboy, karabáw,
etc. Cut open and disembowel the pig, the buffalo, etc. Ginrirían
ko lang ang líog sang ákon báyò, kay gutúk. I simply made a slit in
the collar of my jacket, for it was too tight. Makahibaló ka magrírì
sang karnéro? Do you know how to gut a sheep? Kiskisí ánay sing maáyo
ang báboy kag ugáling rirían mo. First scrape the pig clean of its
bristles and then rip it open and gut it.

_rírò_, (B) Zigzag; to zigzag, wind, meander, to move along a line
with many short sharp turns or angles. Ang ámon subâ nagarírò. Our
river winds very much. (cf. tikô).

_rirô-rírò_, (B) Dim. of rírò. Dúro námon nga riró-rírò--or--dúro
ang ámon nga pagrirôrírò túbtub nga nakadángat kamí sa ámon umá. We
had to make many a detour before we reached our farm. Ginrirôrírò
námon ang paglakát, kay madámul ang lúnang sa dálan. We walked a
roundabout way, for there was deep mud on the road. Irirôrírò mo
lang siá sa pagtokád, kay matáas ang búkid. Lead him up the ascent
by a zigzag path, for the mountain is high. Riróa lang ang ímo
paglakát--or--rirôriróa lang ang ímo paglakát, kon índì ka makaági
sa dálan nga matádlong. Simply march by a circuitous route, if you
cannot go by the straight road. (cf. tikôtíkò, likôlíkò).

_risáda_, (Sp. rezada) Low Mass. May risáda (misa risáda) sa las seis
ang ága. There will be Low Mass at six in the morning.

_riságo_, (Sp. rezago) Remainder, residue, balance. (cf. bilín, salín).

_rísmò_, Dirt, filth; dirty, stained, soiled, sullied; filthy; to get
dirty, etc. Nagrísmò ang bátà, kay naghámpang sa lúnang. The child got
dirty, for it played in the mud. Rísmò nga hámbal, panápton, etc. Foul
language, soiled garments, etc. Narismoán akó sang íya nga pamáyò,
panúluk, batásan, etc. I am disgusted at the way she wears her dress,
with her looks, her conduct, etc. (cf. rigám, hígkò).

_rispondér_, (Sp. responder) To answer for, be responsible for, take
the responsibility for, take the blame of, to guarantee. (cf. sabát;
ákò, pangákò; sumálà).

_rispónso_, (Sp. responso) Responsory for the dead.

_rítak_, To tear or cut in small pieces. See rátak.

_riták_, Torn, cut. See raták.

_rítrit_, To rend, tear, split. See rábrab, rátrat.

_ródia, rodiá, ródya, rodyá_, Here; here is. (cf. rúgya, dínhi, dirí,
doón, rúgi, ári).

_rogó-rógo_, (B) To complain, be discontented, worried, dissatisfied,
apprehensive. Nagarogórógo siá kay walâ pa gihápon magpaúlì ang
íya anák. She is worried, because her son has not returned home
yet. (cf. lángkag, orooráwa, móno, morômorô).

_rókmol_, (B) To fall or tumble to the ground, collapse. Ang masakít
nga táo nagkarókmol--or--narókmol sang íya pagtíndog. The sick man
fell to the ground in trying to stand up.

_rókò_, (B) To be pensive, sad, thoughtful, ponder gloomily,
sit down in dejection. Anó ang ginarókò mo? Why are you so
thoughtful? (cf. búog).

_rólyo_, (Sp. rollo) To roll, coil; a roll, coil. Rolyohá ang
kalát. Roll up the rope. Isá ka rólyo nga alámbre. A roll or coil of
wire. (cf. balólon, lolón, lolós, lókot, bulús).

_roméro_, (Sp. romero) Rosemary; a medicinal plant, whose aromatic
leaves are much used as a remedy against headache, catarrh, etc.

_ron_, (B) Now, presently, at this time; already. (cf. na, karón;
nián, don).

_rónda_, (Sp. ronda) Night patrol, rounds made by a night watch; to
stay and watch at a guard-house, to make the rounds by night. Rondahán
nínyo ang bánwa. Go the rounds of the town.

_rondáhan_, A night patrol's guard-house, shelter for the
night-watch. (cf. bantáyan).

_roón_, (B) Here, etc. See doón, dirí, rúgya, dínhi, ródia, ári.

_ropéro_, (Sp. ropero) Clothes press, wardrobe, locker; laundry
basket, basket for the collection of soiled clothes. (cf. sulúdlan
sang panápton; sulúdlan sang lalábhan).

_rorô_, (B) Mild, gentle, etc. See lolô, lólot.

_rórog_, (B) To do well or thoroughly, make a good job of it, attend
to properly or with care. Malóoy kaw kadiáng bátà nga ílo kag rorógan
mo gid kang sagúd. (Malóoy ka siníng bátà nga ílo kag sagurón mo gid
sing maáyo). Have pity on this orphan boy and take complete care
of him. Si Fuláno narorógan gid kang gásto sa pagtoón, hay mayád
pa kató tóo ang ándang pagkabutáng. (Si Fuláno nagastohán gid sing
madámò (sing maáyo) sa íya pagtoón, kay maáyo pa sádto (nga tiémpo)
ang íla pagkabutáng). They had spent much money for N.N.'s studies,
for in those days they were still well-to-do. (cf. áyaw, paayáwáyaw,
busúg, búg-os).

_rórok_, (B) Driftwood carried along by a flood. (cf. lúluk, dágsà,
dinágsà, dái-a).

_rororógan_, (B) What is to be done well or thoroughly, something to
be attended to with care, as an orphan, an abandoned child, etc. to
be taken care of by the charity of others. (cf. rórog).

_rósa_, (Sp. rosa) Rose; rose-coloured. Rósas, the Sp. plural, is
more often used for the flower and rósa for the colour.

_rosál_, (Sp. rosal) Rose-bush; rose-garden, rosary (i.e. place where
roses are grown).

_rosaríto_, (Sp. rosario) Rosary, rosary beads, chaplet. May rosaríto
nga nawígit (nagkawígit) sa simbáhan. A rosary was lost (dropped)
in church.

_rosáryo_, (Sp. rosario) Rosary, chaplet; to say the rosary or
beads. Marosáryo kitá. Let us say the rosary. Ginarosaryohán níla
ang minatáy. They are saying the rosary for the dead.

_róskas_, (Sp. rosca) Screw and nut, screw thread; to screw, apply or
use a screw. Roskasí ang mga tápì, índì mo paglansangán. Use screws
for securing the boards, don't nail them.

_rótulo, rotuló_, (Sp. rótulo) Label, sign, inscription, title,
placard, poster, advertisement.


_ruáng, ru-áng_, The open space between lines; the width of cloth
between stripes; room, apartment, hall, open space. (cf. luháng,
luáng).

_rubál_, (Sp. robar in the sense of: to gain another's affection) To
flatter, wheedle, cajole, coax. Rubalá siá agúd hatágan ka níya sang
ímo kinahánglan. Coax him into giving you what you need. (cf. unís,
odót, utís).

_rúbas_, See lúbas, túbas--to shed, fall out, go to waste (of cereals,
etc.).

_rúb-as_, See lúg-as, túb-as--to spoil, expose (be exposed) to the
elements, etc.

_rubí_, (Sp. rubí) Ruby (jewel); ruby (colour).

_rúblo_, (Sp. rublo) Ruble, the monetary unit of Russia; a Russian
silver coin.

_rúbrika, rubriká_, (Sp. rúbrica) Rubric; red mark; rule, custom.

_rúbsak_, (B) To cave in, crush, be smashed, to smash (said of an
egg, a nut, bottle, pot, etc.). Nadágdag ang ítlog kag narúbsak
(nagkarúbsak). The egg dropped and smashed. Andam ka, agúd nga índì
marúbsak (magkarúbsak) ang botílya. Be careful or the bottle will
break. (cf. rúpsak id. and more commonly used; lumâ, pusâ which are
more applied to tubes, bamboos, or the like).

_rúdo_, (Sp. rudo) Rude, coarse, rough, uncultured. (cf. bukískis,
manól, bástos, uráis, bukídnon).

_ruéda_, (Sp. rueda) Wheel. (cf. alíling, aríring).

_rugák_, (B) Old, torn and useless. See rabanít, rabót, gubát.

_rúg-as_, To spoil, etc. See lúg-as, rúb-as.

_rúgi, rugí_, Here, here is. (cf. ródia, dirí, etc.).

_rúgnas_, (B) To wear out, use up. Ginarúgnas na ang báyò kang mánong
na (kang ána mánong). (Ginasagúlay níya (Ginaságad níya sang usár)
ang báyò sang íya maguláng). He is wearing out the jacket of his
eldest brother. Indì mo pagrugnasón ang ákon kálò. Don't wear out my
hat. (cf. sagúlay, dagumák, sarabóg).

_rúgon_, (B) To drop, fall down (of leaves, etc.). (cf. dágdag, húlug,
táktak, rúntay).

_rúgtas_, (B) To break, snap, part asunder, as a rope or the
like. Narúgtas (Nagkarúgtas) ang kalát. The rope snapped. Sín-o ang
nagrúgtas kang písì? (Sín-o ang nagútud (nagbúgtò) sang písì?). Who
has broken the string? (cf. útud, búgtò, búgras, lígtas, lúgtas).

_rúgto_, (B) There, over there. See dídto id.

_rúgya, rugyá_, (B) Here, in this place. (cf. doón, roón, dirí, dínhi,
rúgi, ródia).

_rulúdgud_, (B) A stone or the like used to rub the body with when
taking a bath. (cf. lugúd id.).

_rumál_, (Sp. domar) To tame, break in, subdue, train; to
gallop. Rumalá ang kabáyo. Break in or tame the horse. Irumál akó
sináng kabáyo. Kindly break in that horse for me. Batíd siá magrumál
sing mga kabáyo. He is an expert in training horses. (cf. ánad, hánas,
ántà, antâ).

_rumán_, (B) (Probably a contr. of rón man, karón man) Now again,
also now, shortly, presently, within a short time. Maágtò kaw rumán
sa Ilóngílong? (Mapailóngílong ikáw karón liwán?). Are you going to
Iloilo again (within a short time)?

_rúm-an_, (B) See rumán. Also: tomorrow. (cf. harúm-an, buás).

_rúmbà_, (B) See lúmbà--to race, run a race.

_rúmbang_, (B) See lúmbang--a kind of tree.

_rumbâ-rúmbà_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of rúmbà.

_rúmbo_, (Sp. rumbo) Bearing, course, direction, route, way towards;
beeline; to take the beeline, go straight towards. (cf. padúlung,
áyon, láktud, laktúran).

_rúmpag_, (B) To destroy, demolish, break up, smash up, break--,
smash--, to pieces, undo bit by bit. Rumpagá roláng (Gúb-a na lang)
ang dáan nga síya, lamésa, baláy, etc. Just destroy the old chair,
table, house, etc. Rumpagá ang mga puní kang simbáhan, hay tápus
ron ang piésta. (Kuháa ang mga puní sang simbáhan, kay tápus na ang
piésta). Take away the decorations in the church, because the feast
is over. (cf. lúmpag, búngkag, gubâ, ránggà, kúhà).


_rúmud_, (B) To pulverize, etc. See rúpud.

_rumúy-rúmuy_, See parumúy-rúmuy--to be idle, lazy.

_rúngkab_, (B) To break down, tear open, force an
entrance. (cf. lúngkab).

_rungkábil_, To fall down stairs, fall off the top of a densely
branched tree or the like, with several checks before reaching
the ground.

_rungkádol_, See ringkádol id.

_rungkagáy_, (B) See lungkagáy id.

_rungóy_, (B) Weak, feeble, frail. (cf. lúya).

_rúntay_, (B) To fall out or off, said of overripe grain, etc.

_rúpak_, To break, be destroyed, fall to pieces, break up. (cf. gubâ,
rúpsak).

_rúpday_, (B) To crumble, fall to pieces. Nagakarúpday na iníng
padér. This wall is crumbling, is falling to pieces. (cf. rúpud).

_rúpsak_, To smash, crush, be crushed, etc. See rúbsak.

_rúpud_, (B) To crumble, pulverize, crush. (cf. pódpod, módmod, rúmud).

_rúsdak_, To fall off, fall down (as fruit from trees, etc.) and
break or spoil. (cf. dágdag, húlug, rúntay, púlak).

_rútay_, (B) To compress or massage. See lútay id.

_rúyà_, (B) To tire, etc. See lúya, id.

_rúyo_, To exchange field-products, etc. gathered in one locality
with those gathered in another, so as to save transportation
charges. Nagaruyóhay silá sang íla humáy. They are exchanging their
rice. Ruyóhi akó sang ímo humáy sa umá. Exchange with me your rice
in the field, i.e. I'll take yours that is on the farm and you will
take mine that is in town, etc.




S


_s_, The letter "S" in Visayan is pronounced as in English. Words
beginning with "s" and having the prefix pan-, hi-, etc. frequently
change the "s" into "n", e.g. sabát--panabát; sámput--hinámput.

_sa_, To, at, from, in, on, etc. Article denoting dative
or ablative. Maghámbal ka sa íya. Speak to him. Sa baláy. At
home. Naghalín siá sa Manílà. He went away from Manila. He left
Manila. Sa ibán nga mga dútà. In other countries. Sa látok. On
the table. Sa hapónhápon--. Of an evening--. Every evening--. Sa
malayô. At a far distance. Sa madalî ukón sa madúgay. Sooner or
later. Nagabút silá sa lakát lámang ukón sakáy sa kabáyo? Have
they come walking on foot or riding on horseback? Sa kabáskug sang
unús nagkagubâ ang baláy. Through (on account of) the force of the
wind the house was destroyed. Makaduhá sa isá ka búlan. Twice a
month. Sa siní ukón sa yádto nga paági----. In this way or that
way----. At any rate----. Somehow----. Sa úpdan akó kag sa índì
malakát akó sa buás. Whether (Either) with or without a companion
I'll leave tomorrow. Dirâ sa may baláy. Over there where there
is a house. Sa makahibaló kag sa índì ang ákon ábyan, amó gid
ang nagkahanabô. Whether my friend knows it or not, that is what
happened. Sa pakúsug----. Forcefully, violently, with (by) physical
(moral) force----. Ginpakán-an níla sa ámon ang íla mga álì kag
dalágkò nga mga páhò nga kon sa diín pa katám-is. They let us eat of
their best and largest mangoes that were deliciously sweet. Sa dakô
nga kasubô nagtalíwan siá sa baláy nga sa diín siá nagpuyô sa sulúd
sang tátlo ka túig. Very sadly he left the house where he had stayed
for three years. (cf. kay).

_sa_, With persons or personified objects "sa" is used instead of
"sang" to denote the accusative, e.g. magpakáon ka sa íya, sa ímo
ábyan, sa makilímos, etc. Feed him, your friend, the poor beggar,
etc. But: magpakáon ka sang idô. Feed the dog. (cf. kay).

_sáad_, Promise, vow, engagement, undertaking, word, pledge; to vow,
promise, undertake, engage, bind--, pledge--, commit--, take upon--,
oneself, give--, pass--, pledge--, plight--, one's word. Ginsáad níya
nga----. He vowed (promised) that----. Ginsaáran níya akó nga----. He
promised me that----. N.B. The Frequentative panáad is more used,
especially in connection with promises involving a vow. (cf. túg-an).

_sáang_, To run or stretch side by side or parallel; mate or partner,
said of draught animals, etc. Saángi ang karabáw, kay mabúg-at ang
káro. Add another buffalo (Hitch up at the side of the buffalo another
one), for the cart is too heavy. Nagasáang iníng duhá ka búkid. These
two mountains run parallel to each other. May sáang ang báka ukón
walâ? Has the ox a mate or is he alone? (cf. tímbang, kaluyó).

_sáb-a_, Banana. (cf. ságing. N.B. In some places sáb-a is used for
bananas that are usually boiled before eating, whilst ságing denotes
all kinds of bananas).

_sábà_, To beat violently, throb vehemently or quickly (of
the pulse, heart, or the like); to feel the pulse, examine,
search, investigate. Nagasábà ang íya nga púlso. His pulse beats
violently. Ginsábà níya ang púlso ni Fuláno. He examined (felt)
N.N.'s pulse. He investigated N.N. (and his doings).

_sábad_, (H) Awkward, unwieldy, inconvenient, unsuitable due to too
great length; to be or become inconvenient due to great length. Ilámpus
sa báboy ang bastón, kay ang bagát (lám-ag) támà kasábad. Strike the
pig with the stick, for the bamboo-pole is too unwieldy. (cf. ságway
id.).

_sábad_, (H) Molestation, impediment, bother, nuisance; to hinder,
impede, harass, disturb, bother, vex, molest, trouble, put to
inconvenience, put obstacles in the way. Indì mo pagsabáran ang
íya pagsulát. Don't molest him whilst he is writing. Walâ gid man
níya pagsabári ang ginhándum ni Fuláno. He did not hinder N.N. from
attaining his desire. Sinabáran níya ang ákon paglakát. He impeded
my march. He kept me from setting out. (cf. balábag, pugúng).

_sábado, sabadó_, (Sp. Sábado) Saturday.

_sábak_, Lap, bosom; to take on one's lap. Sabáka ang bátà. Take the
baby on your lap.

_sabán_, To encroach upon, usurp, take hold of, trespass, seize
(against the will of the owner). Indì mo pagsabanón--or--pagsábnon
ang íya nga umá. Don't encroach on his land. Don't seize part of his
field. (cf. hámham, lámlam, láksam, sakáb, sakám, sáklam, ángkon).

_sáb-an_, For saubán from saúb--to creep or crawl under, hide
beneath. Ginsáb-an siá sang yáwà. He was possessed by the devil,
the evil spirit entered into him.

_sabát_, Answer, reply, return, rejoinder, retort, repartee,
response; to answer, reply, rebut, retort, rejoin, respond. Sábta
(sabatá) akó. Answer me. Sumabát siá sa ákon nga----. He replied
to me saying that----. Walâ pa nákon mabáton ang íya sabát. I have
not yet received his answer. Nagáway (Nagbagâ) silá kag maláwig
ang íla pagsinabtánay. They quarrelled and bandied words for a
long time. Walâ kitá sing isabát sa íya sinâ. We have nothing to
say in reply to him regarding that matter i.e. he is quite right,
we have no excuse or reasonable argument against him. Sábta siá sang
íya ginapamángkot. Answer his question. Sinabát ko siá nga----. I
answered him saying that----. (cf. bálus).

_sabáw_, Broth, sauce, any liquid condiment or concoction served with
solid food to make it easy to swallow as well as to aid digestion.

_sábay_, A partner in a dance, especially a female partner; to dance
in pairs, dance with a partner. Sín-o ang sábay mo? Who is your lady
partner? Sín-o nga laláki ang ginsábay kahápon ni Fulána? Whom did
Miss N.N. dance with yesterday? Indì ka magsábay sa kay Fuláno. Don't
dance with N.N.

_sábdan_, From sabúd--to twist around, etc.

_sábding_, To touch, come in contact with, brush against; to
graze. Nakasábding akó sing kólon kag namusíngan ang ákon kamót. I
touched a kettle and my hand got dirty. (cf. salapáy, sápding).

_sábdong_, To instruct, correct, point out a fault,
admonish. (cf. bádlong).

_sábdong_, To stop, hinder, put an end to, terminate, break up, put a
stop to, wind up, interdict. Sabdongá ang belasyón, kay gáb-i na. Stop
the wake, for it is late. (cf. uláng, puút, tápnà, palangán, táblaw).

_sábi_, (From the Sp. saber) To know, understand, comprehend;
to explain, describe. Mostly used in the negative forms
"índì masábi, dî masábi". Indì masábi nga kalípay, kasubô,
etc. An indescribable (inexpressible, unutterable) joy, sorrow,
etc. (cf. dîmasábi). (cf. sáysay, sáyod).

_sábid_, String, cord; appendage, adjunct, hindrance, impediment;
to tie or fasten to. (cf. tábid, tabíd).

_sabilá_, (Sp. zábida, zábila) A plant, whose leaves contain the
juice asíbar--aloe.

_sábio_, (Sp. sabio) Wise, intellectual, learned, prudent, well
educated. (cf. maálam, manginalámon, batíd, sagád, sampáton).

_sabít_, Enviousness, envy, covetousness, grudge; to covet, envy. Indì
ka magsabít sang íya sang ibán--or--índì mo pagsabitán ang íya sang
ibán. Don't covet what belongs to another. (cf. híkaw).

_sáb-it_, To hang on a peg, nail, etc. Isáb-it ang ímo kálò sa
lánsang. Hang your hat on the nail. Sab-ití ang lánsang sang ímo
báyò. Hang up your jacket on the peg. (cf. sáng-at, sáklit).

_sáblab_, To flame, burn well, flare up. Ang kaláyo nagasáblab. The
fire is flaring up. Pasablabá ang kaláyo. Make the fire burn
well. Húypa ang kaláyo, agúd magsáblab. Blow the fire, that it may
burn well, that it may burst into flame. (cf. dábdab, sádlab).

_sáblag_, Impediment, compromise, hindrance, obstacle, engagement,
preoccupation; to hinder, compromise, impede, prevent. Indì pa akó
makakádto dídto, kay may sáblag pa akó. I cannot go there yet, for
I am occupied. Anó ang nagasáblag sa ímo? What prevents or hinders
you? (cf. awát, libáng, uláng).

_sáblaw_, To curb, suppress, stand in the way of, prevent,
stop. Sablawá ang íya mga batásan nga maláin. Put a check to (Curb)
his bad habits. Ginsáblaw níya ang maláut nga katuyoán ni Fuláno. He
stood in the way of N.N.'s bad purpose. (cf. pugúng).

_sáblay, sabláy_, To put clothes and the like over something
narrow, so that the ends hang down on both sides. Isáblay ang báyò
mo sa salandígan sang síya. Throw your jacket over the back of the
chair. Sablayí lang sang ímo panápton ang barandílya sang balkón. Put
your clothes over the balustrade of the balcony. (cf. haláy with the
difference, that haláy always supposes a spreading out of what is
put over a line, etc.).

_sabláyan_, A clothes-line, clothes-horse, etc. (cf. sáblay, bílog).


_sáble_, (Sp. sable) Sabre, sword. (cf. súndang, binángon, talibóng,
etc.).

_sáblig_, To splash or throw water or any other liquid. Indì mo akó
pagsabligán sing túbig. Don't splash water at me. Don't splash me
with water. (cf. sábya).

_sáblok_, Insipidness, tastelessness (of rice eaten without
side-dishes, etc.); to be or become insipid. (cf. lás-ay).

_sáblok_, Voracity, greediness, gluttony; greedy, voracious,
gluttonous; to be or become greedy. Indì ka magsináblok. Don't
be greedy. Don't eat so greedily. Sáblok nga táo. A glutton,
gourmand. (cf. dalók).

_sábnit_, To sneak, grab, purloin, snatch away stealthily, seize
suddenly or furtively. Sabnitá ang íya tinápay, páhò, etc. Sneak
his bread, mango, etc. Sabnití akó sing isá ka pányo níya. Purloin
(Snatch) one of his handkerchiefs for me. (cf. lábnit).

_sáb-o_, Cramps of the stomach; indigestion, dyspepsia; to cause cramps
of the stomach. Ginasáb-o siá. He has cramps of the stomach. Sináb-o
(nasábo) siá kahápon. Yesterday he had an attack of cramps in the
stomach. Silíng níya nga nasáb-o siá, sing ugái apendisítis gid ang
íya nga balatían. He says he has cramps of the stomach, whereas in
reality he has appendicitis. (cf. busúg).

_sáb-og_, To sow, spread, broadcast. Isáb-og ang bínhì sa inaradóhan
nga dútà. Sow the seed in the ploughed land. (cf. sábud, sábwag).

_sabón_, After, afterwards, not just now, in time to come; but,
however. (cf. subón, palaabúton, ogáling).

_sáb-ong_, A large and thick rope, a cable. (cf. kalát, káble).

_sáb-ong_, To prepare thread or yarn for weaving on the warping-machine
or warping-board. Sab-ongí akó sing duhá ka delárgo. Prepare yarn on
the warping-machine sufficient for two pairs of trousers.

_sab-ongánan_, Warping-machine, warping-board.

_sabór_, (Sp. sabor) Taste. (cf. idilímdim). Tastiness, savouriness,
toothsomeness. (cf. kanámit, kaáyo, kadálig, karabó, lalím, kalalím).

_sábsab_, To take within (one's) range, to spread to and destroy, said
of fire, etc. Ginsábsab sang kaláyo ang túmpi nga humáy. The fire took
in and destroyed the rice-stack (stack of rice). (cf. ában, áb-ab).

_sabtánay, sábton, etc._ From sabát--to answer.

_sábud_, To agree, pull well together, live in harmony,
be compatible. Silá nga duhá walâ gid pagsábud--or--índì gid
magsábud. Those two never agree, do not pull together. (cf. sábun,
hisáhò).

_sábud_, To sow, broadcast. See sáb-og id. Also: Young rice-plants,
rice seedlings. May sábud pa kamó? Have you any rice-seedlings
left? Ang ímo sábud matáas na; saráng ka na makatánum. Your
rice-seedlings are high now; you can transplant them now. (cf. sábwag).

_sabúd_, To twist or throw around, pass round, give a turn round,
encircle. Isabúd ang kalát sa káhoy. Pass the rope around the
tree. Give the rope a turn or two round the tree. Nasábdan ang bagát
sang písì. The string was given a few turns round the pole. Sinábdan
sang mán-og ang sangá sang káhoy. The snake coiled itself round the
branch of the tree.

_sabudán_, A seed-plot, a plot of ground sown with cereals,
especially rice (the seedlings to be taken up and transplanted later
on). (cf. sábud, saburán).

_sabúlaw_, To be fluid, liquid; to thin out (of liquids). Sabuláwon
mo lang ang pagamidól sang ákon báyò. Use thin starch for my
jacket). (cf. lángyaw, básyaw).

_sábun_, To agree, etc. See sábud, hisáhò, hilitóhog, hiliúgyon.

_sabungáyngay_, Disarranged, loose, hanging down loose (of a woman's
hair, etc.; to hang down loosely, etc. (cf. búngday, búnghay).

_saburák_, See pasaburák, pasaburát.

_saburán_, Seed-plot, etc. See sabudán.

_saburát_, See saburák.

_sabút_, Pubes, pubescence.


_sabút_, To know, understand. (cf. sáyod, hibaló, máan. N.B. sabút
in this meaning is not used in and around Iloilo).

_sabúy_, To make use of customarily, to use, visit, frequent. Amó iní
ang palagwáan nga íya ginasabuyán sing daláyon. This is the theatre
he always goes to. (cf. sayó, salayó).

_sábwag_, To sow, scatter, spread, broadcast. See sáb-og id. Sabwagí
nínyo sing búlak ang dálan nga prosesyonán. Scatter flowers on the
road during the procession.

_sábya_, To splash or beat against, (said of water, wind, etc.). Ang
dágat nagasábya sa baybáyon. The sea beats (against) upon the
beach. Ginasabyahán kitá dirí sang matám-is nga dupóydúpoy
sang hángin. We are blown upon (fanned) here by the gentle
breeze. (cf. dápya).

_sabyokót_, Crease, wrinkle, crush, fold; creased, wrinkled, crushed,
full of folds or wrinkles; to crease. Iníng moskitéro madámò sing
sabyokót (yokót). This mosquito-curtain is full of creases. Nagsabyokót
ang ákon báyò. My jacket is (has become) creased. (cf. yókò, yokô,
yukót, bokóng, kubúng).

_sád-ang_, (B) To place on high, put on; hang up on a peg or
nail, put a kettle on a tripod, etc. Isád-ang ang ímo kálò sa
lánsang--or--sad-angí ang lánsang sang ímo kálò. Hang your hat on
the nail. (cf. sáb-it, sáng-at).

_sáday_, (B) To pass (go) to and fro, to flit or rush by
(repeatedly). Andot nagasári ikáw kang sáday haw? (Ngáa nagaságad ka
sang labáylábay)? Why are you passing here so often? What is the reason
of your--walking to and fro,--pacing up and down? (cf. ladáy-láday).

_sadáy-sáday_, Dim. and Freq. of sáday.

_sádia_, Cheer, festivity, solemn celebration; to be cheerful,
festive; to celebrate solemnly. Sadiahón náton gid ang piésta
sa siníng túig. Let us celebrate our Feast this year with great
solemnity. Ginasadiahán níla ang kaadláwan sang íla amáy. They are
celebrating the birthday of their father. (cf. sádya id.).

_sád-in_, Contr. of sa diín--where.

_sádlab_, See sáblab--to flame, flare up.

_sádngan_, A passive form of saráng--to be able to, etc. Indì gid silá
masádngan sang íla pangítà, sang íla pinatubás, etc. Their earnings,
their harvest, etc. is not sufficient for their needs. Walâ siá
masádngi sang íya humáy. His rice (i.e. the rice he harvested from
his own field) was not enough to cover all his needs.

_sádò_, A small water-jar, a jug. (cf. sárò).

_sadók_, A kind of broad-brimmed hat made of bamboo, the leaves of
tabún-ak or the like.

_sadól_, (Probably from the Sp. azadon) Hoe; to hoe. Sadolá ang
dútà. Hoe the ground. Apply the hoe to the ground.

_sádsad_, To trip, skip, dance, step nimbly or lightly.

_sádsad_, To step on, rest on, put one's foot upon; resting on,
supported by, founded upon. Iníng pagbulút-an nagasádsad--or--sádsad
sa Sánto Pápa. This law rests on the authority of the Holy Father. Kon
magsáut kamó magsádsad kamó sing maáyo. When you dance, pay attention
to the steps. Ang sádsad siníng káhoy madálum kaáyo. The tap-root of
this tree goes down very deep.

_sadsáran_, (H) Foundation, footing, support. Baláy nga
sadsáran. A house with a good foundation, i.e. of mixed or strong
materials. (cf. sádsad).

_sádto_, (H) (contracted from sa yádto) Formerly, at that time, long
ago; at, by, to, from, etc. that. Ang sinádto. Things that happened
formerly or in bygone days.

_sádya_, See sádia id.

_ságà_, A piece, division, portion of meat, fish, etc; to divide,
cut up in pieces. (cf. híwà, búgsò).

_ság-a_, To clean out a well, to bail out water (from a boat, cistern,
water hole, or the like). Sag-ahá ang túbig sa áwang. Clean out the
water from the well. Sag-ahí ang áwang. Clean the well. Take out the
water and dirt from the cistern. Iság-a iníng láta sa áwang. Use this
can to clean (bail out the water and mud of) the well with.

_sagábay, sagabáy_, To touch, rub against, come in contact with. Indì
ka magsagábay sang kaláhà--or--índì mo pagsagabáyon ang kaláhà, kay
mamusíngan ka. Don't touch or rub against the pan, or you will get
dirty. (cf. sábding, sápding, salapáy id.).

_ságad_, To do frequently or customarily, to be
wont--,--given--,--used--, to, to use to, do habitually. Indì ka
magságad (sang) pamuyáyaw. Don't be always cursing or using strong
language. (cf. sáli).

_sagád_, Habituated to, practised, expert, used to, a dab hand at,
"an old hand at". (cf. anád, batíd).

_sagádsad_, To know or try to find out, to observe, ascertain,
investigate, make sure of. Magsagádsad ka ánay sang nahanabô kag
ugáling maghámbal. First make sure of what really happened (the facts),
then talk.

_sagáhay_, To flow or boil over, overflow, inundate. Ang túbig
nagasagáhay sa kólon. The pot is boiling over. Ang túbig nagasagáhay
sa dálan, umá, etc. The water is overflowing the road, the field,
etc. Ang ákon talámnan ginasagaháyan sang túbig tungúd sang madámol
nga ulán. My field is under water owing to the heavy rains.

_sagáhay_, Interest of fifty per cent (in kind or money). Ang pílak
nga íya ginhulám sa kay N.N. pagabayáran níya sing sákà nga sagáhay. On
the money he borrowed from N.N. he will pay fifty per cent interest.

_sagáid_, To rub or brush against. Ang íya báyò nakasagáid sa padér
nga bág-o lang napintahán. His jacket rubbed against the newly painted
wall. (cf. sághid, ság-id, ság-ud).

_sagakád_, Discordant, disagreeing, unharmonious, not keeping time;
to be discordant, etc. (cf. salagakád).

_sagáksak_, Dull, hollow (of sounds); flat, out of tune (of the human
voice). See saláksak id. (cf. baság).

_sagákwal_, To grasp, seize, infold, enfold, clasp, embrace, take
hold of. (cf. hugákom, hakús, gamál, karipón).

_sagálsal_, Out of tune, discordant, inharmonious. (cf. libágon,
salagakád).

_sagámsam_, (B) To taste, savour, perceive or notice the taste of,
try the flavour of. Kon ginahilántan kaw, índì kaw makasagámsam kang
rarím kadiáng mángga. (Kon ginahilántan ikáw índì ikáw makatiláw
sang lalím siníng páhò). If you are suffering from a cold you cannot
appreciate the taste of this mango. Warâ ko masagamsamí ang sabór
na kará. (Walâ ko matilawí ang íya sinâ nga sabór). I did not notice
the taste. I never tasted that. (cf. tiláw, tám-id, dimól, dímdim).

_sagána, saganá_, The noise--, wash--, of rushing water, howling
or shrieking of the wind, etc.; to make such a noise. Nagasagána
ang túbig sang subâ, kay may bahâ. The water of the river rushes by
tumultuously, for it is in flood. Abáw, nagasagána ang hángin! How
fiercely the wind howls! (cf. hugánas).

_sagáng_, To prevent, stop, forestall, keep off, stave off, forefend,
fend off, ward off, parry a blow, hinder something from falling,
etc. Sagangá ang íya binángon. Parry the blow from his bolo. Sagangá
ang masakít, agúd índì matúmba. Save the sick man from falling to
the ground. Ginsagáng níya sa ígò gid nga tión ang pagkahúlug sang
bató. In the nick of time he kept the stone from falling. Isagáng sa
túbig ang isá ka púnud. Stop the water by a dam. Keep the water back
(Stem the water) by building a dyke.

_ság-ang_, The chin. (cf. soláng, suláng).

_ságap_, (B) To look for, try to find, seek, go in search of, search
for. Sagápa ang báboy nga nadúrà (nadúlà). Look for the lost pig. Anó
ang ginaságap mo? What are you looking for? Sagápi akó ti ságing
(sing ságing). Find some bananas for me. Nagaságap akó kang kálò ko,
pay warâ ko makítà ásta tulád kadiá (kadyá). (Nagapangítà akó sang
ákon kálò, ápang túbtub karón walâ ko makítà). I am looking for my hat,
but can't find it. (cf. sághap, lághap, pangítà).

_sagápa_, To meet, encounter, come together with, find. Dirâ
masagapáhan mo ang madámò gid nga mga dumulóong nga naghalín sa
nagakasarîsárì nga púngsud sang kalibútan. There you will meet many
men (strangers) from the various nations of the world.

_sagápay_, To overturn, overrun, come in contact with, sweep or
trail over. Tulúka, ginasagápay ang mga búlak sang higót sang
kánding. Look, the goat's tether is sweeping (trailing, dragging)
over the flowers. (cf. hábay).

_sagápra_, Rough, not smooth, uneven, not well planed, not well made
or done, said of floors, furniture, etc. (cf. sagúpra id.).

_sagâ-ságà_, Dim. and Freq. of ságà--to cut to pieces (bits), divide,
etc. Báboy nga sinagâságà. Pork cut up in small bits or pieces. Hashed
or minced pork. Political: Pork-barrel.

_sagátsat_, To give a rough answer, to talk or answer back,
retort. Indì ka magsagátsat (magsátsat) sa kay nánay. Indì
mo pagsagatsatán (pagsatsatán) si nánay. Don't answer mother
back. (cf. sátsat, panátsat, panagátsat, gasód, gásod).

_sagáwak, sagawák_, To flow out on a sudden, spirt out, gush out,
be spilt. Nabúong (Narúpsak) ang baríl kag nagsagáwak ang bíno. The
barrel was smashed (broken) and the wine gushed out. (cf. busawák,
búswit, súmpit, butaróg, púswak).

_sagáwsaw_, To walk or step into something; to try, investigate,
examine, go deep into a matter, to sound. Sagawsawá kon saráng kaw
makahurám ti (kang) kwárta na. (Sagawsawá (Tilawí) kon saráng ka
makahulám sang íya kwárta). Sound him as to whether you can borrow--his
money,--money from him (of him). (cf. sáwsaw, tiláw, túdag, usísà).

_ságbot_, (H) Rubbish, sweepings, dirt. (cf. rámò).

_ságda_, (B) To invite to partake of a meal, offer a seat at table for
the purpose of taking food. Sagdahá tána nga maígmà man rúgya. (Agdahá
siá nga manyága dirí). Offer him a seat at the dining table. Kang
pagabút ko rúgto ginságda nánda akó sa ihápon (nyápon). (Sang pagabút
ko dídto ginágda níla akó sa panihápon). When I arrived there they
invited me to have supper with them. (cf. ágda).

_ságdan_, For sagádan, sagáran from ságad--to do customarily, etc.

_sághap_, To seek, look for. See ságap, lágap.

_sághaw_, To glean, pick out, select, gather, cut the best ears
with the rice cutter, collect the best or passable ears from a bad
crop or from a crop spoilt by the action of birds, insects, etc. and
leave the rest alone. Saghawá ang humáy. Gather the best rice-ears
(and leave the rest in the field). Kúl-aw gid ang ámon pinatubás sa
karón nga túig; sinaghawán lang námon ang ámon talámnan. This year
we had a bad harvest; we just (picked out and) gathered the better
ears from our rice-land (and left the rest as pasture for the cattle,
etc.). Saghawá ang nabilín nga alányon. Gather what is left of the
rice-crop. (cf. ág-ag, panálà, panagílò).

_sághid_, To rub against, touch, graze, etc. See sagáid, ság-id id.

_sághoy_, To sigh, moan. The Freq. panághoy is mostly
used. (cf. tághoy, lághoy).

_sági_, (B) To use to, be wont to do customarily, frequently,
regularly, habitually. (cf. ságad, sáli, sári).

_ságib_, To transport, ship, carry (by boat). (cf. hákot).

_ságib_, To gather, collect, bring together, corner, take or buy all
that is for sale. Buút siá magságib sang tanán nga mga talóng, maís,
ítlog, manók, etc. He wants to get hold of all the eggplants, corn,
eggs, chickens, etc. Sagíba lang ang tanán. Just take everything,
gather or buy up everything. Sa pagtábon sang íya nga kinahánglan
íya ginságib ang tanán níya nga kinitáan. To cover his needs he got
together all he had earned, and spent it. (cf. típon, káka, hág-on,
píndak).

_sagíbang_, A term used in wrestling, and said of two wrestlers that
are simultaneously thrown on their backs, so that neither of them
wins. Nagasagibangáy silá. They were both thrown on their backs at
the same time. (cf. salagíbang).

_sagibín_, (B) To fetch--, bring--, take--, along together with
something else, to do or perform at the same time as some other
work, do in one go. Sagibiná rúgya ang maléta ko. (Ulayhoná dirí
ang ákon maléta). Bring along with you at the same time my suitcase
or handbag. Kon magbakál ikáw ti kálò nga búntal sagibiní akó ti
isará. (Kon magbakál ikáw sing kálò nga búntal ulayhoní akó sing
isá). If you buy a búntal-hat, buy one for me too. Isagibín akó sa
pagdará rúgto kang ákon páray. (Iuláyhon mo akó sa pagdalá dídto sang
ákon humáy). Take along with you my rice. Indì ron akó makasagibín
kang mga ságing mo, hay lám-ag ron kabúg-at ang mga kinárga sa trak
ko. (Indì na akó makauláyhon sang ímo mga ságing, kay támà kabúg-at
na ang mga linúlan sa ákon trak). I cannot take along your bananas,
because the load on my truck is already too heavy. (cf. dungán,
uláyhon).


_ság-id_, To touch, graze, rub or brush against. See sagáid, sághid id.

_sagídsid_, A loud, shrill cry, a piercing sound or tone; to emit
such a sound. (cf. sagítsit).

_sagíl-om_, (H) Duskiness, swarthines; to be or become dusky, dark,
swarthy, black. Nagsagíl-om ang íya guyá sa ínit. His face became
swarthy from the heat of the sun. (cf. ilóm, itúm).

_sagíl-óman_, Dark, brown, swarthy. (cf. ilóm, itúm, giróm,
kayumánggì).

_ságing_, Banana. (cf. sáb-a).

_sagíng-sagíng_, A kind of flowering plant with banana-like leaves;
small, narrow lines, stripes or streaks in cloth.

_sagípit_, To tuck under the arm, carry under the arm. Sagipíta
(Sipíta) lang ang líbro. Just tuck the book under your
arm. (cf. sípit).

_sagipót_, (B) To keep at bay, to catch by driving into a corner or
against a wall. Sagipotá (Bansoká) ang manók sa púsud kang (sang)
síklat. Drive the chicken into a corner of the bamboo partition and
catch it. Ginsagipót nánda ang báboy sa púnò kang kodál. (Ginbánsok
níla ang báboy sa púnò sang korál). They chased and caught the pig
at the fence. (cf. bánsok).

_sagirít_, To hiss, whiz, flit or run past with a whirring or humming
sound; a hiss, whiz, hum, whir. (cf. ságrit).

_sagír-om_, (B) See sagíl-om. Nagsagír-om (Nagsugír-om) ang uyahón
na sa ínit. (Nag-itúm ang íya nawóng sa ínit). His face became black
from the heat of the sun. (cf. itúm, ilóm).

_sagítsit_, A hissing or whistling sound; to hiss or whistle
through the teeth, to purl, murmur, gurgle (of flowing water,
etc.). (cf. sítsit, panítsit, panagítsit).

_sagiwatâ_, (B) Probably derived from sági and íwat. The passive
forms in -an (sagiwát-an) are mostly used in the meaning of: to
be precarious, be in difficulties, to eke out; to utilize to the
utmost, make a little go far, make good use of slender resources,
or the like. Bisán maisót lang ang sóhol na, pay ginasagiwát-an
na gid. (Bisán diótay lang ang íya sóhol, ápang ginapanginyawátan
níya gid). Though his salary is small, yet he makes good use of
it. Nasagiwát-an (Nawád-an, balasúbas) akó karón. At present I am
out of cash, am hard up.

_sagiwát-an_, See under sagiwatâ.

_ságmit_, To snatch, confiscate, take possession of. (cf. sábnit,
bútong).

_ságnoy_, To drag--, draggle--, trail--, draw--, along the
ground. (cf. gánoy, sagúmboy, gúyud).

_sagó_, (Sp. sagú) Sago, sago flour, sago starch, sago palm.

_ságo_, Decomposition, putrefaction, decay; to decompose, decay,
putrefy, said of corpses, etc. Ang bángkay may ságo (nagaságo)
na. The corpse is already beginning to decay. (cf. dúnut, dunút).

_ság-o_, To be refractory, etc. Paság-o--to resist, oppose, object to,
refuse to do. See súg-o, pasúg-o. (cf. paganót).

_sagódsod_, See sagúdsud--to shuffle, etc.

_sagóksok_, A kind of bird.

_sagóp_, To save one's life, etc. See sagúp.

_sagópra_, See sagápra id.

_ságpò_, (B) Boss, stud, cover, lid; to cover, emboss, stud, wrap
up, enwrap, put a lid or cover on. Ang bastón na may ságpò (níya may
tabón) nga buláwan. (The handle of) his walking stick is covered with
gold. (cf. tábon, táklub, soón, loón).

_ságpon_, From sagúp.

_ságpong_, To lop off, cut off (as the comb of a cock,
etc.). (cf. giláng, púnggul, putúl).

_sagráda, -o_, (Sp. sagrado). Sacred; consecrated; holy, venerable. Ang
Sagráda Família. The holy Family. (cf. baláan).

_sagráryo_, (Sp. sagrario) Tabernacle.

_ságrit_, To whir--, flick--, flit--, rush--, by with a hissing or
humming sound. Naságrit ang lisó. The bullet whizzed by, went past
with a hiss. Sinagritán akó sang tren, kabáyo. The train, horse,
rushed past by me. (cf. sagirít).

_ságsag_, To wear out (by use, etc.); get spoilt by overindulgence, too
much petting or fondling and the like. Ang mga bátà nga ginapalánggà
sing lakás magaságsag. Children that are too much petted will be
spoilt.


_ságsag_, And more frequently paságsag. To insist on, have a liking
for, be partial to,--attached to. (cf. patúsà, yánggaw, dúyug,
hinanarám).

_ságuà, saguâ_, See ságwà, sagwâ.

_ság-ub_, To draw water, fetch water. Magság-ub (or simply ság-ub)
kaw (ka) sa subâ. Fetch water from the river. Sag-ubí akó ti (sing)
túbig. Draw or fetch some water for me (from the well, fountain, river,
etc.). Iság-ub ang láta. Use the can to fetch water in. Matámad tána
(siá) magság-ub. He is too lazy to fetch water. (cf. agwáda).

_sagubáng_, (B) To do at once, have time or opportunity to do
something immediately, presently, quickly. Kon índì mo masagubangán
ang pagbúnak kang mga ulús ko, ihatúd rúgya sa baláy, hay itaó ko sa
ibá nga mga mamumunák. (Kon índì ka makalihát sa pagbúnak sang ákon
mga panápton, idúl-ong dirí sa baláy, kay ihátag ko sa líwan (ibán)
nga mamumunák). If you have no time to wash my clothes (at once), bring
them here and I'll give them to some other washerwoman. (cf. dalikát,
lihát).

_sagubáy, sagúbay_, To help, assist, support. See agubáy, ápin, tábang.

_sagúd_, To take care of, rear or bring up, train, guard, watch over,
look after with concern or care. Sagurá sing maáyo (Sagudá ti mayád)
ang bátà, báboy, talámnan (tarámnan), etc. Take good care of the
baby, the pig, the rice-field, etc. Isagúd akó siníng (kadiáng)
mga kánding. Look after these goats of mine. Pasagurá akó sang ímo
báka. Let me attend to your cow (for a share in her calves). Sín-o
ang magasagúd sang mga bátà, kay napatáy ang íla ilóy? Who will take
care of the children, now that their mother is dead? (cf. batití,
sapópo, tátap, sagúp).

_ság-ud_, To touch the surface of, come in contact with, knock,
strike, rub or brush against. Ang íya bútkon nagság-ud sa díngding
kag napílas. His arm knocked against the wall and was hurt. (cf. doót,
salapáy, sághid, ság-id, sagáid, súnggò, búnggò, lónggò).

_sagúdsud_, To shuffle--, draggle--, trail noisily--, over the ground
or floor (slippers, boots or the like). Indì ka magsagúdsud sang ímo
sinélas--or--índì mo pagisagúdsud ang ímo sinélas. Don't drag your
slippers so noisily over the floor.

_sagúksuk_, See sagóksok--a kind of bird.

_sagúlay, saguláy_, To spoil or wear out by constant use, deteriorate
or ruin through too frequent use. Indì mo pagsaguláyon (pagisagúlay)
ang bág-o mo nga kálò. Don't spoil your new hat by constant
use. (cf. dagumák, sarabóg).

_sag-úlì_, Change given; to give change for money paid in excess to
what was due. Diín ang sag-úlì? Where is the change? Nakasag-úlì ka
na sa íya sing tátlo ka sentimós? (Nakasag-úlì kaw ron kaná ti tátlo
ka sentimós?). Have you given him three centavos change? Isag-úlì
sa íya iníng sensílyo. (Isag-úlì kaná diáng sensílyo). Give him back
these coins as change. Sag-ulíi (siá, tána). Give him change.

_sag-ulî_, (_sag-úlì, sagúlì_), To run--, flow--, come--,
back. Nagsag-ulî ang túbig sa áwang. The water flowed back
into the well. Napatáy gid siá, kay walâ na makasag-ulî ang íya
ginháwa. (Napatáy gid tána, hay warâ ron makasag-ulî ang ginháwa
na). He died indeed, for his breath returned no more.

_sagúmboy_, To draggle or trail on the ground. See ságnoy, gánoy id.

_sagún-ot_, The tough fibres in various tubers like banáyan, kamóte,
radishes and the like.

_sagun-otón_, Fibrous, referring to sagún-ot, having fibres, stringy.

_sagúnsun_, In succession, without interruption, following one
close on the other; to follow in quick succession, succeed without
interruption. Ang amó nga palagwáon íla ginpagwâ sa tátlo ka gáb-i
nga sagúnsun. That play was staged by them on three successive
nights. Makátlo siá napilián nga sagúnsun sa pagkapangúlo-puód. Three
times in succession he was chosen Provincial Governor. Nagsagúnsun
gid lámang sa amó nga kátay ang ginatús nga mga áwto. In that parade
there were hundreds of automobiles forming an uninterrupted (unbroken)
line. (cf. sunúd; abútabút, abákabák).

_sagunyátì_, A tree much used and esteemed on account of its valuable
timber.

_sagúp_, To save, rescue, deliver, take up, pick up (a drowning man,
a person in misfortune, or the like). Sinagúp silá sa kalaláwran sang
isá ka dakô nga sakayán. (Sinagúp sánda sa kalaláwdan kang sángka
hánggud nga sakayán). They were picked up on the high seas by a large
steamer. Sagupá siá sa túbig sa madalî, agúd nga índì malumús, kay
índì siá makahibaló maglangóy; (Ságpa tána sa túbig ti madalî, agúd
nga índì malumús, hay índì ra kamáan (makamáan) maglangóy). Take him
out of the water at once, lest he should drown, for he does not know
how to swim. Sín-o ang nagsagúp sa íya (kaná)? Who picked him up and
took care of him? (cf. balótbot, luás, báwì, tábang, áyop, ayóp).

_sagúpra_, Rough, etc. See sagápra.

_sagúsò_, To entangle, make intricate, complicate. (cf. gómon).

_sagusô_, Entangled, complicated, topsy-turvy, disordered. (cf. gomón).

_sagwâ, ságwà_, Outside; reception room, sala, drawing room. (cf. gwâ,
saguâ, ságuà, balatonán).

_ságway_, Awkwardness, inconvenience, unwieldiness (on account of being
too long); to be or become too long for any given purpose. Ilámpus
sa báboy iníng biníklan, kay ang bagát nagaságway (maságway). Throw
this piece of wood (bamboo) at the pig, for the pole is too long
(too unwieldy) for throwing. (cf. sábad, maságway).

_ságyad_, To fell, hew--, cut--, down (a tree, etc); to beat gold or
silver. (cf. tapás, púkan, pulúd; panágyad).

_ságyap_, A small fishing net. The Freq. panágyap is more used as
verb. (cf. síhod).

_sáhà_, Layer, offshoot, offspring, sucker, seedling (of bananas,
etc.). (cf. gútuk).

_sáhat_, Fine thin fibres resembling the threads of a spider's web,
as occur in the centre of the stem of a banana-plant.

_sáhì_, Kind, class, variety; way, manner, method. (cf. bágay, sárì).

_sáhì_, As well, equally, for the same reason, mostly used with
pa. Nanáy, gintugútan mo ang maguláng nga manábad dídto, búsà
tugúti man kamí, sáhì pa nga may lúyag man. (Nanáy, gintúgtan mo
si mánong nga manábad rúgto, tî túgti man támon, sáhì pa nga may
lúyag man). Mother, you gave permission to our eldest brother to go
to the banquet, therefore allow us also to go, for we want just as
much to be present. Pabákli man akó sing (ti) bág-o nga delárgo,
sáhì pa nga mamiésta man akó (tákon). Have a new pair of trousers
bought for me too, for the same reason that I too am going to assist
at the feast. (cf. síhà id.).

_sahî_, Different, not equal, not the same; to become different,
etc. Nagsahî ang íla mga batásan. Their manners became different from
each other.

_sahián, sahían_, Difference. Walâ sing sahián iníng duhá ka
butáng. These two things are equal, there is no difference between
these two things.

_sahíd_, A large fishing net (with floats and sinkers). (cf. tsintsóro,
pókot, sápyaw).

_sahín_, Rest, remnant, etc. See salín.

_sahô_, Meet, proper, fit, decent. Dílì gid sahô nga----. It is
certainly not proper that----. Nagasahô iníng duág (antióhos) sa ákon
(mga) matá. This colour (These glasses) suits (fit) my eyes. (cf. ígò,
ángay, sinántò).

_sahô_, Liking, relish for, enjoyment, zest; to like, be pleased with,
enjoy, delight in. Makasahô akó siníng páhò, sang íya batásan, siníng
duág, etc. I like this mango, his conduct, this colour, etc. Ginasahoán
akó siníng mga puní. I am pleased with these decorations. Indì akó
makasahô sang sabór siníng búnga. I don't like the taste of this
fruit. Walâ sa íya sing makasahô. No one likes him. Indì akó makasahô
sa íya. I do not like him. Si Pédro ang íya sahô, si Hosé ang ákon
sahô. He likes Peter, I like José. (cf. úyon, wíli, lúyag).

_sahóg_, To disturb, interrupt, meddle with, give trouble,
interfere; to be perplexed, disturbed, in confusion. Indì ka
magsahóg sa ákon. Indì mo akó pagsahogón. Don't disturb or interrupt
me. (cf. túblag, awát, libáng, dúpag, lúpag, gamó, gúbat, libúg,
líntong).

_sahót_, To pay attention to, attend to. Nanáug lang ang mga bisíta,
kay walâ pagsahotá--or--walâ sing nagsahót sa íla. The visitors
(simply) left the house, for nobody paid them any attention. Isahót
mo akó ánay siníng bág-o nga mga nagsalákà. Please do me the favour of
attending to these new arrivals or fresh visitors. (cf. sapák, tátap).


_sáid_, (B) To finish, use or eat up all. Nasáid mo galî ang
kán-on? (Naúrut mo galî ang kán-on?). Have you really finished all the
rice? Nasáid ron (Naúrut na) ang káhoy, kwárta, maís, etc. The wood,
money, corn, etc. is finished or all used up. Saídon (Urúton) mo lang
ang kárne sa (panyága) ígmà, hay ang ihápon báklan ko ti bág-o (kay
ang panihápon pagabáklan ko sing bág-o). Use up all the meat there
is for dinner, as I shall buy a fresh supply for supper. Indì nánda
masáid kang káon ang ísdà. (Indì níla maúrut sang káon (sa pagkáon)
iníng ísdà). They cannot eat up this fish. (cf. úbus, tápus, úrut).

_sákà_, To ascend, go up, come up, step up, go up-stairs, enter a
house. Sákà (Sumákà) ka (kaw). Come up. Sakáa ang lubí (nióg). Climb
the coconut palm. Sakái akó sing duhá ka lubí, kay buút akó mag-inúm
sing butóng. (Sakái akó ti dárwa ka bílog nga nióg, hay mályag akó
mag-inúm ti butóng). Climb the coconut palm and pluck two nuts for me,
for I should like to drink some coconut milk.

_sákà_, Interest on a loan, etc. See túbò.

_sákà_, (B) To get into, to invade. Ginsákà ang ólo na (níya) kang
(sang) hángin. Wind got into his head, i.e. he has a severe head-ache
or is out of his mind.

_sakâ_, (B) To attack, invade, come to, assail. Ginsakâ
tána kang ános. (Ginaános siá). He is a victim of consumption
(phthisis). Ginasakâ tána kang táo (siá sang táo). She is pregnant,
has conceived.

_sakaán_, Ladder, gangway, ship's ladder, stairs, steps leading
up. (cf. sákà).

_sakáb_, To encroach upon, etc. See sabán, sakám, etc.

_sakáda_, To take--, scoop--, draw--, out. (cf. salók, sarók, kúhà).

_sakáda_, (From the Sp. sacar) Working men under contract to work for
a certain time at a farm, mill, etc.; to hire men for work on a large
farm, etc. Si Fuláno nagasakáda sing mga táo sa isá ka asiénda sa
Négros. N.N. is looking for men to work on a farm in Negros. Amó iní
ang mga táo nga ginsakáda níya sa Hámtik. These are the men he hired
or contracted for in Antique. Iníng mga táo nga isá ka trak pulús
tanán sakáda. This truck load of men has been contracted for work
(on a distant farm, or the like).

_sákal_, A bracket or wedge driven into a post or wall for the purpose
of supporting floorbeams, etc.; to provide with brackets, etc. Sakáli
ang halígi. Put a bracket on the post.

_sakám_, To encroach upon, seize, take, grasp, hold fast to, commit
forcible seizure, appropriate (unlawfully). Sakamón (Sákmon) ko
iní. I shall seize it, take hold of it. Ginísol níla ang ákon korál
kag sinakám ang ákon dútà. (Ginísol nánda ang kodál kag sinakám ang
lúpà ko). They put back the fence and encroached on my land. Ginsakám
siá sang kalisúd. He was overwhelmed with grief. (cf. sakúm, sabán,
sáklam).

_sakáng_, The fork, crutch, angle or junction formed by the legs of
a pair of trousers, by the legs themselves, or the like.

_sakár_, To ask, solicit, try to obtain, make efforts to get, desire,
covet. Nagasakár akó kay Fuláno nga agsahón ko ang íya dútà. I am
asking N.N. to accept me as his tenant. I am anxious to obtain the
lease of N.N.'s field. (cf. panakár).

_sakáte_, (Sp. zacate) Forage, fodder, cut grass as fed to horses,
cattle, etc. (cf. bungálon).

_sakatehán_, A zacate-field, land for growing fodder for animals.

_sakáy_, Riding on, travelling by; to ride, mount a horse, step
or get into an auto, embark on or board a boat, etc. Sakáy ka
sa áwto--or--sákyi ang áwto. Step (get) into the auto. Sakáy sa
bapór nagabút kahápon si Fuláno. Travelling by steamer N.N. arrived
yesterday. Maálam ka magsakáy sa kabáyo? Do you know how to mount or
ride a horse?

_sakayán_, Boat, vessel, ship, steamer, sailing boat, any water
craft or seagoing vessel. (cf. sakáy; salákyan--vehicle, carriage,
riding animal, or the like).

_sakayánáway, sakayán-áway_, Warship, warvessel, man-of-war.

_sakayánhángin, sakayán-hángin_, Aeroplane, airship.

_sakayánhubút, sakayán-hubút_, A fast boat or aeroplane.


_sakayánhúlas, sakayán-húlas_, Steamer, liner, steam boat, steam-ship,
steam-vessel.

_sakayánon_, Mariner, one of the crew of a ship, sailor, seaman.

_sakayánsumalálum, sakayán-sumalálum_, Submarine. (cf. sakáy, sálum).

_sákbay_, To put round an arm, a rope, etc. Sakbayí ang sáko sing
kalát kag yayóngan. Put a rope around the sack and carry it by means
of a pole. Sinakbayán níya ang masakít sang íya bútkon, agúd índì
matúmba. He put his arm round the sick man, lest he should fall.

_sákdag_, To help, aid, assist, succour, attend to, support. Sakdagá
ang íya mga kalisúd. Give him some aid (support) in his
distress. Ginsákdag níya si Fuláno sa íya nga kakulángan. He helped
N.N. in his need. Ang mga mananábang nga gadóy dílì salalígan sa
pagsákdag sing maáyo sang mga kasábà. Inferior lawyers are not to be
trusted to attend well to law-suits. (cf. búlig, tábang, ampáyo).

_sakíro_, To keep away from for a time (a calf from sucking or the
like). Sakiróha ánay ang tínday, kay pagagatásan ko buás ang íya ináng
(ilóy). Don't allow the calf to suck for the present, for I am going
to milk the cow tomorrow.

_sákit_, Grief, mental pain, mental suffering, sadness, sorrow, woe,
distress, affliction; to grieve, be sad or in sorrow, be sorry,
pained or distressed. Nagakasákit ang buút ko. I am grieved,
pained. Ang nasakítan ko gid (Ang nasakítan gid sang ákon buút)
amó ang----. What grieves me most is----. What I am chiefly sorry
for is----. Ginakasakítan ko gid ang kamatáyon sang ákon ilóy. I
am very sad on account of the death of my mother. Dílì nímo
igkasákit inâ. Don't be distressed at that. Dî mo pagpasakíton
ang ímo mga ginikánan. Don't grieve your parents. Walâ gid níla
pagigkasákit ang amó nga hitabâ. They were not sorry at all for what
happened. (cf. subô, kághà, lisúd, sakít).

_sakít_, Bodily or physical pain, suffering, ache, smart, twinge,
twitch, gripe, hurt, soreness, sting, torment, torture; to cause
pain, to pain, inflict pain, hurt, torment, torture, rack. Sakitá
siá. Let him--feel,--smart for it. Nasakitán siá sang kusî (kodót) ni
Fuláno. He felt the pain when N.N. pinched him. Indì mo siá pagsakitón
sing támà. Don't give him too much pain. Don't beat him too much.

_sáklam_, To encroach upon, usurp, take wrongfully, etc. (cf. sabán,
sakám, sakúm).

_sáklaw_, To take amiss, resent, fume, take--ill,--to
heart,--offence,--umbrage, get offended, angry, excited,
vexed. Nasáklaw akó siníng hámbal. I am offended at this kind of
talk. Ginpasáklaw níya akó sang lakás níya nga pamábà. He made me
angry with his endless mouthing. Indì mo siá pagpasaklawón. Don't
exasperate him or make him angry. (cf. ákig, súngon, súnggud, ugút).

_sáklay_, To take or carry in one's arms, put one's arms round, hug,
embrace. Saklayá (sal-ayá) ang masakít nga bátà. Take the sick child in
your arms. Ginsáklay (Ginsál-ay) níya sa dakô nga kasubô ang bángkay
sang íya anák. In her intense grief she took the corpse of her child
in her arms. (cf. sál-ay, sákbay, sápnay, púgus, hakús).

_sáklit_, To bind together, fasten with a rope one end of which
is provided with a hook; to snatch, take with a swift movement,
do something quickly or in passing; to do something on the sly or
stealthily, sneak away or off, take secretly. Saklití ang humáy nga
ginálab kag dálha dirí, kay tumpihón náton. Tie the rice that has been
cut and carry it over here, for we are going to stack it. Nagsáklit
siá dídto sing diótay nga tión. He stopped there for a moment in
passing. Saklitá ang isá ka papél dirâ sa lamésa. Take a piece of
paper from the table there. Saklití akó sing isá ka pliégo sa mga papél
nga dirâ sa aparadór. Get me a sheet of writing paper from the paper
in the cupboard. Nagsáklit siá sing ápat ka sentimós sa sagúlì sang
ákon kwárta. He took secretly four centavos from the change given me.

_sáklit, saklít_, A cord or string with a hook at one end (used
chiefly for binding bundles of fodder, for making rice-sheaves, etc.);
a climbing iron.

_sáklot_, To do something quickly or in passing, to stay or pass
a moment; to associate with, mix, take part in. (cf. sáklit, abáy,
támbong, pasilabút).

_sákmon_, From sakám and sakúm--to take, etc.

_sáko_, Coat. (cf. amerikána).


_sáko_, (Sp. saco) Sack, bag. (cf. bayóong, máy-ong).

_sákò_, To be occupied, keep busy, to be busy; have much to do, give
much work, be hard at work, hard at it. Nagasákò silá karón sang íla
pagtánum. They are at present very busy planting rice. Masákò ang
ákon trabáho. I have much work to do. Ginsákò níla ang pagpatíndog
sang bág-o nga baláy, kay madalî na lang pagakáslon ang nóbyo kag
nóbya. They have been working hard building the new house, for the
bride and the bridegroom are soon to be married. Sakóa siá sang íya
nga útang. Keep him busy with his debt i.e. remind him often of his
debt, so that he may make an effort to pay it.

_sákol_, To steam, stew, to cook in a piece of bamboo perforated
at the lower end to let the steam through from the kettle or pot
underneath. Sinákol nga kamóte, maís, etc. Sweet potatoes, corn,
etc., prepared in the way described.

_sakón_, A kind of large fish; greedy, voracious, gluttonous. Iníng
bátà daw sakón. This boy is very greedy, eats very much. (cf. dalók,
maámbas, mahákug).

_sákot_, To mix. Sakóta ang lubí, kalámay kag binókbok nga bugás. Mix
the coconut-meat with sugar and rice-flour. (cf. lakót, símpon, sámò).

_sakót_, Mixed, admixture. May sakót nga maís ang íla kán-on. Their
rice is mixed with corn. (cf. lakót, símpon, sámò, símbug).

_sákra_, (Sp. sacra) Altar-cards.

_sakraménto_, (Sp. sacramento) Sacrament.

_sakripísyo_, (Sp. sacrificio) Sacrifice; a prayer-book. (cf. hálad;
tulún-an sang mga palangadíon).

_sákrò_, Ill, evil, disease, sickness, illness; to
make--sick,--ill. Andam ka, agúd índì ka pagsakroón liwán. Take care
or you will get sick again. Si Fuláno ginsákrò sang isá ka simána
kag túbtub karón ginasákrò pa siá gihápon. (Si Fuláno ginsákrò kang
isaráng simána kag ásta tulád kadyá ginasákrò tána angód). N.N. was
taken ill a week ago and up till now he is still unwell. Ang sinámbit
nga mga sákrò amó ang íya ginabátyag. The ills mentioned are precisely
those he is suffering from. (cf. sángkò, masakít, molomasakít).

_sáksak_, To mix, mingle, jumble, adulterate, debase by mixture, throw
or put in (bad merchandise, fruit, etc. amongst good merchandise,
fruit, etc.).

_sáksak_, To chop up, hack to pieces, mince. Saksaká ang kárne, úbad,
etc. Chop up the meat, the edible core of the banana stem, etc. Kárne
nga sináksak. Minced meat. (cf. tóktok).

_sáksi_, Witness, testimony; to witness, testify, bear witness,
give testimony, give evidence. Saksihí ang kamatuóran. Witness to the
truth. Testify to the truth. Ginsaksihán akó níya sa ákon kasábà. He
was a witness in my lawsuit. (cf. testígos).

_sakúm_, To hold, grasp, seize, take in one's arms; to undergo,
undertake, shoulder. Sákmon (Sakumón) ko gid iní bisán mabúg-at. I'll
hold this, even if it is heavy. I am ready to undertake it, even if
(though) it is difficult. Ginsakúm níya ang amó nga kabúdlay. He
took that trouble upon himself. He was ready to undertake that
work. (cf. gamól, pangabága, sakám).

_sákup_, Subject, retainer, follower; member, dependant. To
subject, enlist as a member or dependant, accept as a servant,
etc.; to include. Pilá ang mga sákup mo? How many dependants have
you? How many people are dependent on you? Ang tanán nga ginsákpan
(ginsakúpan) níya. All his dependants (or subjects). Sákpa akó sa
ímo mga pangamúyò. Include me in your prayers. Sákpon mo siá sa
tíg-ang. Boil rice for him as well i.e. add an additional quantity
of rice, so that it will be sufficient for him also. Ang ámon báryo
sákup sang Munisípyo sa Miagáw. Our village is in the Municipality
of Miagao. Ginsákup níla ang búg-os nga bánwa. They subjected the
whole town to their rule. Magpasákup ka sa----. Join, or become a
member of,----.

_sákwa_, The trunk or stem of the banana near the ground with its
roots.

_sákyan_, From sakáy--to ride on, etc.

_sákyud_, To get up on, mount, ride. (cf. sakáy).

_sála_, (Sp. sala) Reception or drawing room, common living
room. (cf. ságwà, sagwâ, balatonán).

_sála_, To talk deliriously, be out of one's mind, to rave,
ramble, wander. Nagasála na ang masakít. The sick man is talking in
delirium. Ginasála ang masakít. The sick man is delirious. Nagasalála
lang silá. They are talking nonsense (like delirious persons).

_salâ_, Sin, fault, error, evil-doing, wrong-doing, transgression,
mistake, misdemeanour, misconduct, misbehaviour, fall, lapse, offence,
trespass, iniquity, demerit; to err, make a mistake, commit a fault,
transgress, deviate, miss. Ikáw amó ang may salâ. You are to blame. The
error, mistake or fault is yours. Nagsalâ siá. He erred. Magkonpesár
ka sang ímo mga salâ. Confess your sins. The phrase "salâ ko
kon----" often precedes an emphatic statement implying an oath:
"I swear that----". "May I be cursed if----". "May evil befall me
if----". "May God punish me if----". (cf. pakasalâ which is mostly
used in the sense of sinning, committing sin).

_sálà_, To strain, filter, percolate. Saláa ang tsa, kapé, etc. Strain
the tea, coffee, etc. Salái sang kapé iníng lánot nga hinabúl. Strain
the coffee through this hemp-cloth. (sárà id.).

_sálà_, (B) To leave behind, leave. Isálà (Ibílin) ang tsa sa
lamésa. Leave the tea on the table. Gindará ko ang bátà ko, hay warâ
akó ti saláan sa baláy. (Gindalá ko ang ákon bátà, kay walâ akó sing
bilínan sa baláy). I brought my child along, because I have nobody
left at home (to take care of it). (cf. bílin).

_salaán_, A strainer, sieve, cloth for straining or filtering. Salaán
sang túbig. A water-filter. (saraán id). (cf. sálà).

_salabát_, To touch, reach, hit. Andam ka, agúd dílì ka masalabát
sang (sing) lisó. Be careful, lest you should be hit by a
bullet. (cf. salabáy, salapáy).

_salábat_, A carefully prepared answer, a drawn-up reply or
rejoinder. (cf. sabát).

_salábay_, A very small moth injurious to blankets, clothes, etc. and
causing irritation when brought in contact with the skin; an insect
that is very harmful to cereals, as rice, etc.

_salabáy_, To attack or touch in passing, graze; strike, hit; give
a passing fit. Nagasalabáy sa íya ang pagkabúang. He is subject to
temporary fits of insanity. Ginasalabáy siá sang pagkabúang. He has
a temporary fit of lunacy. (cf. salabát, salapáy).

_salábdan_, (H) What is to--, can--, should--, be entwined, anything
round which something can be (should be) thrown, twisted, twined or
wound. (cf. sabúd).

_salabíhon_, (H) What is to be understood, retold, explained or
described; explicable, explainable, intelligible. Dílì salabíhon
ang íla kasádya kag kalípay. Their merriment and joy--cannot be
described,--are indescribable. Dìsalabíhon--what cannot be explained;
inexplicable, unintelligible. (cf. sábi).

_salab-ítan_, Peg, pin, rack, stand, etc., that on which something
can be hung. (cf. sáb-it, salang átan).

_salabláyan_, Line, clothes-line (for drying the wash,
etc.). (cf. sáblay, sabláyan, bílog).

_salábton_, (H) What is to be answered or accounted for, a thing
one--is responsible for,--must answer for,--must account for;
responsibility, liability. Dakô kaáyo ang ímo sinâ nga salábton. Your
responsibility for it is very great indeed. (cf. sabát).

_salabusáb_, Dishevelled, entangled, frayed, etc. See sarabusáb.

_salabúyan_, Often or customarily used, visited, frequented. Salabúyan
níya ang amó nga tiénda. He often goes to that shop or
market. Tinúngtung níya ang maléta sa látok nga salabúyan sang íya
tíò. He put the handbag on the table that was regularly used by his
uncle. (cf. sabúy, salayóhan, saláywan).

_sálad_, To start--, begin--, lay the foundation of--, a rice-stack,
wickerwork, etc.; cover the bottom of a receptacle to be filled. Saládi
(salári) ang tabungós, túmpi, etc. Begin weaving the tabungós-basket,
start making the rice-stack, etc. Kon nasaláran mo na ang kálò
ákon raráhon, kay maálam akó magrára, ápang índì akó makahibaló
magsálad. If you have finished the initial process of weaving the
hat, I shall weave it, for I know how to weave, but do not know how
to start (i.e. to arrange the splints, weavers, etc. previous to the
actual weaving). Ang isá ka pásong daw sa índì makasálad sa isá ka
malíndog nga nagasulúd sing katloán ka pásong. One bushel is scarcely
sufficient to cover the bottom of a rice-container holding thirty
bushels. Isálad iníng mga sókdap sa bakág. Use these bamboo-splints
to start weaving the carrier's basket.


_saláda_, (Sp. ensalada) Salad, any kind of vegetable mixed with
vinegar.

_salád-ang, saládang_, Fork. (cf. tenedor).

_saládang_, A screen or flooring put in between the fire and the
cooking vessel, whenever it is desired that the fire should not
come in immediate contact with the pan or kettle, gridiron, grate;
broiler, toaster.

_salad-ángan, saládngan_, Any kind of rack, stand, grating, etc. on
which articles are placed, as a hat rack, bottle stand, candlestick,
etc. (cf. sádang, salab-ítan, bulutángan).

_saládsad_, To grasp fully, know well, understand
perfectly. Nakasaládsad gid akó siníng mga butáng. Nasaladsarán ko
gid iníng mga butáng. I know these things very well (having gone into
them very thoroughly). (cf. sádsad, sayasát, hibaló, sáyod).

_sál-ag_, To deteriorate, worsen, degenerate, fall off, to be or
become bad, improper, fall below the standard; make a bad impression
upon, make shy or afraid. Nagsál-ag ang íya batásan. His conduct has
altered for the worse. Amó gánì ang nagpasál-ag sa íya. That made
him shy or nervous. Indì ka magkasál-ag. Don't be afraid. Sa íla
pagsal-agáy naúmid man ang íla mga ginsákpan. In their bad (strained)
relations their dependants were involved also. (cf. sáw-a, láin).

_sál-ag_, To fall out, disagree, quarrel. (cf. híbag, simáng, súay).

_sálag_, To cull, choose, select, pick out. (cf. sárag, ág-ag).

_salagakád_, (H) To sing out of unison, time or tune. Nagasalagakád
silá sa íla pangánta. They are singing out of tune, are not singing
in unison, not keeping together.

_salagasák_, Out of tune, etc. See salagakád.

_salagiáwan_, A kind of hawk. (cf. banóg; salagyáwan id.).

_salagiwít_, (H) See saragiwít--to leave a trace, trail, etc.

_salágsag_, Bamboo rafters supporting a thatching of cogon-grass,
nípà, etc. Also verb. Kon nasalagsagán na ang atóp pagaátpan náton
sing kógon. If the bamboo rafters are secured on the roof, we will
proceed to put on the cogon thatch.

_salag-úban_, (H) From where water is to be drawn, well, cistern,
water-hole, river, etc.; any vessel for drawing water. (cf. ság-ub).

_salagúnting_, Shears, poles tied together at the top from which
depends the tackle for hoisting, trestle formed by two or more bamboos,
etc. tied together at one end and opening out at the other somewhat
like a pair of scissors; hence the name. Butangán mo sing salagúnting
ang baláyan. Put a trestle under the girder. Salaguntingá kon sín-o ang
makáwat. Find out by means of a pendulum swinging on a three-legged
trestle, who was the thief. (A superstitious practice indulged in by
the ignorant).

_salagúron_, Dependants, members of one's household, those depending
on others for their support, those whom one is obliged to support;
one to be taken care of, needing the support of somebody else, thrown
on the charity of others. (cf. sagúd, salagurón).

_salagurón_, Animals to be tended or looked after; what is to be
taken care of, reared, brought up, as a calf, a puppy, a chicken,
etc. (cf. sagúd, salagúron).

_salagyáwan_, A kind of hawk. See salagiáwan id.

_salahóton_, Respectable, worthy of attention or
respect. Dìsalahóton--what is to be ignored, unworthy of attention
or respect. (sahót).

_saláid_, To do
something--thoroughly,--carefully,--exactly,--precisely,--scrupulously,--perfectly.
(cf. íd-id, taláid).

_salaít_, (H) Hook, angler's hook, fish-hook.

_salakaán_, What is to--, should--, be scaled, climbed, gone up to;
ascendable, climbable; interest, premium (on money). Utangán kag
salakaán. Capital and interest. (cf. sákà).

_salakán_, The legs, usually made of bamboo, attached to, and
supporting, the rice-mortar called "lusóng".

_salákay_, To damage, injure or overthrow by passing over, to overrun,
run over. Ginsalakáyan sang subâ ang ámon umá. Our field was washed
out by the flood. Sinalakáyan ang bánwa sang mga kaáway. The enemy
overran the place. Salakáya silá. Run over them. Ang túbig nagsalákay
sang ámon humáy. The water passed through our rice-field.

_salákot_, (H) Pl. form of sákot--to mix, etc.

_salakót_, A helmet or solar hat made of wickerwork. (cf. salokót id.).

_saláksak_, Dull, hollow, flat, cracked, discordant, dissonant, jarring
(of sounds as of a broken bell); out of tune, inharmonious (of the
human voice); to be dull, flat, etc.; to be a chatterbox. Nasalaksakán
akó sang íya nga tíngug. His voice seems to me to be out of tune or
discordant. (cf. sagáksak).

_salaksákan_, The kingfisher; a chatterbox.

_salákyan_, A vehicle, any kind of carriage or conveyance. (cf. sakáy,
sakayán).

_salalígan_, Reliable, trustworthy, meriting confidence, staunch,
true, trusty, constant, dependable, faithful, loyal, one to be depended
upon. (cf. sálig).

_salalók_, Ladle, scoop, spoon. (cf. salók).

_salálpan_, Setting, sinking, going down; west, occident,
sunset. (cf. sálup, kasálpan, katúndan).

_salalumón_, What is to----, can----, should----, be fathomed, dived
for; fathomable, comprehensible, intelligible, conceivable. Dílì pa
madálum ang áton salalumón. We have not to go down deep. We need no
profundity of thought. (cf. sálum, tulungkáron).

_saláma_, (H) Even, level, smooth, plain, equal; to be or make even,
equal, etc. Saláma (nagsaláma) na ang plása, kay natampukán ang mga
nalupyakán. The public square is level now, because the depressions
have been filled in. Salamáha ang dálan. Make the road smooth. Level
the road. Ginsaláma níya silá. He treated them all on an equal
footing. (cf. sáma, saráma, tápan).

_salamánka_, (Sp. salamanca) Sleight of hand, legerdemain,
prestidigitation, deceptive tricks, juggling; to be a prestidigitator
or juggler, perform deceptive tricks.

_salamankíro_, Juggler, prestidigitator.

_salámat_, Thanks, acknowledgment; thank you. Madámò nga
salámat. Many thanks. Si Fuláno nagapadalá sa ímo sing hugút gid
nga mga salámat. N.N. sends you his best thanks. Dîmaísip nga mga
salámat. Very many thanks to you. Thanks very much. Salámat sa maáyo
nga patíkang ni Fuláno----. Thanks to the good services (the timely
interference) of N.N.----. (cf. pasalámat--to give thanks).

_salamayón_, (H) Streaked, interspersed with. Salamayón sang dugô
ang íya nga dúplà. His spittle is streaked with blood. (cf. saramayón
id.; sámay).

_salámbaw_, A kind of fishing net; a primitive fishing boat, now
hardly ever used. (cf. sulámbaw, sulámpaw)

_salámbud_, (H) Anything used for twisting or winding round, a rope,
etc. (cf. sabúd, sámbud, balámbud, higót). Also pl. form of sámbud--to
wind, turn around an object.

_salamíng_, Glass, mirror, looking-glass, shaving-glass,
reflector. (cf. kátyà).

_salámò_, Mixed, mingled; to mix, mingle. (cf. sámò).

_salampáti_, Dove; turtle-dove. (cf. púnay).

_salampútan_, (H) Landing, place of arrival, goal, bourn, bourne,
termination, destination, place where one finally comes to rest or
to a standstill. (cf. sámput; apútan).

_salamputánan_, (H) See salampútan. Ang kamatáyon amó ang salamputánan
sang tanán. Death is the ultimate destination of all.

_salamuanán_, Blending; blended, mingled, mixed; spoilt, corrupt. Babáe
nga salamuanán. A bad woman. A prostitute (whore). (cf. sámò,
salamuánan).

_salamuánan_, Mixture, blending; race. (cf. sámò, samô, salámò).

_salamwáan_, Glass, looking glass, mirror; type, example, model,
picture, pattern. (cf. salamíng, palanganináwan, huluáran).

_salamwánan_, See salamwáan id.


_salámyog_, A single-stalked, branchless plant, whose tender shoot
is edible.

_salánà_, Leavings, gleanings, remnants, ungathered ears left on
a field.

_salandígan_, (H) A support for the back, as the back of a chair,
bench, etc. backing, support, something to fall back upon for help
or protection. (cf. sándig).

_salánduk_, Ladle, scoop. (cf. kalándus, salalók, garaló, sánduk).

_sál-ang_, A kind of mushroom. (cf. óhong, lígbos).

_salángat_, To hang on, get caught by. Ang buladór nakasalángat sa
sangá sang káhoy. Nasalangátan sang buladór ang sangá sang káhoy. The
kite caught in a branch of the tree. (cf. sáng-at).

_salang-átan_, A peg, pin, hook, nail, rack, stand, anything on which
clothes, etc. may be hung. (cf. sáng-at, salabítan, salad-ángan,
saládngan).

_salangáya, salangayá_, A rarely used plural form of sángya--to make
merry, etc.

_salánggon_, What is to--, should--, be hindered;
preventable. (cf. sagáng).

_salangiság_, (H) Orderless, unmethodical, unsystematic, in disorder,
without order, wanting coordination; to be in disorder, deranged,
disarranged, without a plan, without organized or concerted
action. Nagsalangiság ang paghíwat sang mga hilikotón sang íla
piésta. There was no organized effort made to prepare for their
feast-day.

_salangkúgi_, (B) A tree, whose bark yields a juice that is much used
as a hair-wash; salangkúgi-bark, salangkúgi-juice.

_salángsang_, (H) A length of bamboo split down to a certain depth
into narrow strips and opened out like a basket. It is used as a
stand for pots, water-cooling jars, etc.

_salángyat_, To become entangled, caught, as clothes when one walks
through briars, etc. (cf. salángat, sángat).

_salanlágan_, (H) Roasting pan. (cf. sánlag).

_salaolóhon_, (H) What is to--, should--, be memorized or learned by
heart; lesson. (cf. saoló).

_sálap_, The net-like integument that wraps the bottom of the branches
of a coconut palm. (cf. sárà).

_sálap_, A meshed hemp-cloth used for fishing nets, mosquito nets,
etc.; netting, fishing net; to fish with a sálap-net; to weave
hemp-cloth for fishing nets. Ginsálap níla iníng mga ísdà. These
fishes were caught by them in a hemp-net. Nagapanálap silá. They
are catching fish with a sálap-net. They are weaving hemp-cloth for
fishing nets. (sárap id.).

_salápad_, The broad or wide part of a knife, sword, etc. as distinct
from the point. (cf. lápad, lapád).

_salapát_, To miss, fail to hit; to spill on the surface or top of,
to dirty the seat of a toilet-room.

_salapáy_, To touch, brush, rub against, come in contact
with. Nakasalapáy ang íya bútkon sa díngding. His arm brushed against
the wall. Dukô (Kuúb) ka agúd índì mo masalapáy ang alámbre. Bend low,
lest you should touch the wire. (cf. sábding, sápding, salápding id.).

_salápding_, To touch, etc. See salapáy, sápding. Nasalápding ko ang
báso sa lamésa; nahúlug kag nabúung. I accidentally knocked against
the glass on the table; it fell down and broke.

_salapî_, Half a peso, fifty centavos. Tátlo ka salapî. One peso
fifty. (P 1.50).

_salápi_, After-growth, after-math, rice growing from the roots
of a first crop and yielding a second crop; to have or yield a
second crop. Nagasalápi ang ákon humáy. My rice is yielding a second
crop. Pasalapíha iníng humáy, kay tubígon ang talámnan. Let this rice
produce a second crop, for the field is soaked with water.

_salápid_, To braid, plait or twist. Salapída (--íra) ang ímo
bohók). Braid your hair. Ginsalápid níla ang kawó sang tabíg. They
plaited the string to fasten the rice-harvesting basket. Bohók nga
sinalápid. Braided hair. (cf. lúbid).

_salapínan_, (H) A shoemaker's shop or store, a boot-shop, shoe-store,
place where shoes are made and sold. (cf. sapín).


_salápò_, To detect, find, chance upon, happen upon, come upon (by
chance); to catch (a disease). Básì makasalápò ka sing íhaw; sákpon
mo akó sa paghingúlì. If you should find some fresh meat for sale,
buy some also for me. Nasalapóan níya ang balaúd--or--Nasalapóan
siá sang balaúd. He had an attack of dysentery. Masakít gid gihápon
ang íya solóksolók?--Indì sa gihápon, kóndì nagasalápò lang. Does he
always suffer from stomach-ache?--No, not always, but rather frequently
(on and off, occasionally).

_salapó_, (H) The pl. form of sapó--to find out, etc.

_salap-óngan_, (H) Landing, top or last step of a stair. (cf. sáp-ong).

_saláptan_, (H) House, home, dwelling, abode, shelter, refuge, place to
go to or live in, resting place; goal, end, termination. (cf. sapút,
pulúy-an, baláy, apútan, dalayonán; dalángpan, paaliwánsan, sáp-an;
katapúsan, alabútan).

_salapulán_, (H) Conference-hall, meeting-room, council-chamber,
office or hall for any deliberative assembly. (cf. sápol).

_salárang_, See saládang--fork, etc.

_saláryo_, (Sp. salario) Wages, hire, salary, allowance, remuneration,
emolument, stipend. (cf. sóhol, baláyran, swéldo).

_sálas_, Reception room, etc. See sála, but sálas is more in
use. (cf. ságwà, sagwâ, balatonán, sugilanonán).

_salá-sála_, Dim. of sála. A small drawing room, somewhat resembling
a reception-room or drawing-room.

_salá-salá, salá-sála_, Dim. and Freq. of sála--to be delirious,
wander, etc. To talk somewhat erratically or incoherently, be a
little delirious.

_salâ-sálà_, Dim. and Freq. of salâ--to sin, err, etc.

_salátan_, The south-east wind.

_salatánan_, The South-East.

_salat-úmon_, (H) What is to--, can--, should--, be guessed or
understood; intelligible, comprehensible. Dîsalat-úmon--fathomless,
incomprehensible, unintelligible, inconceivable. (cf. sátum).

_salaulúgon, salaulugón_, Praiseworthy, estimable, commendable,
laudable, meriting honour or exaltation; what is to--, should--,
be praised, exalted or highly esteemed. (cf. saólog).

_salawáyon_, (H) Reproachable, blameworthy, censurable, reprehensible;
what is to--, can--, should--, be corrected or reprimanded.

_salawíd_, To entrap, entangle, entwine, entwist. (cf. pakáb-ang).

_sálay_, To stay, remain (a rather long time), tarry,
linger. (cf. lúsgò, paoróm-oróm, paorós-orós).

_sálay_, To roast over live coals or a low fire; to spit, put upon
a spit, roast on a spit (particularly applied to the bony parts of
a slaughtered animal, as the head, ribs, legs). Masálay kitá sing
isá ka páa sang báboy. Let us roast a leg of pork. Saláya yanáng mga
gósok sang báka. Roast those cow-ribs. Saláyi akó sing pilá gid lang
ka gósok sang báboy, kay balónon ko sa buás. Roast just a few ribs of
the pig for me, because tomorrow I shall take them along as provisions
for the journey. (cf. bóog, íhaw, asál, sílab, ílab, sánlag, gánggang).

_sál-ay_, To put one's arms under another's back, let another recline
on one's arms, to support or carry in the arms (putting one arm
under a person's back and one under the knees, as is often done in
taking up a sleeping baby, lifting a sick person, a corpse, or the
like). Ginsál-ay ni María Santísima ang bángkay sang Aton Ginóo. The
Blessed Virgin Mary supported the dead body of Our Lord. Sal-ayá ang
masakít nga táo. Put your arms under the sick man's back (and lift
him up). Sinál-ay níya sing mahínay ang bátà nga nagakatulúg. She
gently lifted the sleeping child. (cf. aláy-ay, hamíl-ay).

_saláy_, A kind of tree.

_salayahón_, Cloth for skirts. (cf. sáya, sayahón).

_salayó_, (H) Inhabited, occupied; to live or dwell in, to be
inhabited, have social intercourse, frequent, visit, use. Salayó
iníng lugár. This place is inhabited, is much frequented or visited,
is full of life. Nagmíngaw iníng lugár, kay walâ na pagasaláywi
(pagasalayohí) sang táo. This place has become dreary, for it is no
longer inhabited. (cf. daní, damít, sayó, sabúy).


_salayóhan, salayohán_, (H) Customarily used, visited or
frequented. (cf. sayó, salayó, salabúyan).

_saláysay_, Plural form of sáysay--to explain, etc.

_saláysay_, Thorough, pure, proper, exact, precise, clear. Sa (sing)
saláysay--thoroughly, properly, etc. (cf. lubús, lúgus, maíd-id,
matúl-id).

_saláysáyon_, (H) What is to be explained or elucidated; explicable,
explainable; explanation, elucidation; to give an explanation, to
elucidate. (cf. sáysay).

_saláywan_, (H) See salayóhan, salayohán.

_salaywánan_, (H) Neighbourhood, environment, place often gone to or
much frequented. (cf. sayó, saláywan, salabúyan).

_sálba_, (Sp. salva) Salvo, volley, salute, a discharge of guns
or shots in honour of, or as a salute, the firing of several shots
together or in quick succession; pasálba--to fire off guns, etc. in
honour of a person or as a salute. Nagpasálba silá sang pagabút sang
pangúlopuód. They fired off salvoes on the arrival of the Provincial
Governor. Pasalbahí ang mga kalasálon sing duhá ka lupók. Let off two
shots in honour of the marriage couple. (cf. lupók, bárak, barákbarák,
labáklabák).

_salbabída_, (Sp. salvavidas) Life-preserver, life-belt,
life-buoy. (cf. gabayán).

_salbáhe_, (Sp. salvaje) Savage, barbarian, uncultured, uncivilized,
often used as a term of contempt. (cf. bástos, manól, waláy tinón-an,
tórpe, ignoránte).

_sálbid_, To entwine, twist round. Salbirá (--idá) ang duhá ka nahót
nga kalát. Twist two pieces of rope together. Salbirí sang tiíl mo
ang íya nga tiíl. Twist your foot round his.

_sáli_, (H) To do often, habitually or customarily, be in the habit--,
have the habit--, of doing, to use to, be wont to. (cf. ságad,
sári id.).

_sália_, To transfer (in small quantities) the contents of one vessel
to another. Saliahá ang túbig (sa) siníng alhíbi sa isá. Transfer
the water from this tank to the other one. Ginsália níla ang humáy
(sa) iníng malíndog sa tátlo ka tabungós. They transferred the rice
from this large container to three tabungós-baskets. (cf. pasáylo).

_saliagúm_, Fit, proper, suitable, adapted, apt, pertinent, idoneous,
apposite, harmonious, deft; indefinite, double-edged, cutting both
ways, ambiguous. Ang duág nga líla saliagúm, kay ángay sa maputî
kag ángay man sa maitúm. Lilac (colour) is apposite, for it goes
well with white and also with black. Si Fuláno saliagúm, kay maálam
magpangúma kag maálam man magpamánwa. N.N. is a deft man, for he knows
how to till the soil as well as how to take part in the administrative
affairs of the town.

_saliáy, sali-áy_, To lean upon, rest one's back upon--, against--,
something. Nagasali-áy siá sa mga ulúnan ukón sa butáka man kon
ginaabút siá sang íya balatían nga hápò. He rests his back upon the
pillows or against the back of a chair, whenever he suffers from
asthma. (cf. sándig).

_salíbo_, To pour over, sprinkle, besprinkle. Salibóha ang kaláyo
sing túbig. Besprinkle the fire with water. Pour some water over the
fire. (cf. saríbo).

_salibóbò_, To pour, fall (said of heavy rain). See talibóbò.

_salídhay_, (B) To pass by, flit by, fly past. Nagsalídhay tána (ra)
sa baláy námon kahápon kang hápon. (Naglígad siá sa ámon baláy kahápon
sing hápon). He passed by our house yesterday afternoon. (cf. lígad,
lubás, salíndab).

_salidíng_, Awry, sideways, leaning (of old houses, etc); reeling
(of a drunken person); squinting (of eyes); to be inclined, etc.

_sálig_, (H) To confide, trust in, rely upon, put one's trust in,
repose--, place--, have--, confidence in. Salígi siá kay matárung
siá nga táo. Trust him, for he is an honest man. Isálig mo sa
íya ang pagtátap sang ímo baláy. Confide to him the care of your
home. Indì mo pagisálig ang ímo kapaláran sa siní nga laláki. Don't
entrust (confide) your future (fate) to this man. Don't put your
fate (happiness) into the hands of this man. Saráng ka makasálig
sa íya sa (nga)----. You can trust him that----. Magsálig (Sumálig)
ka nga----. He assured that----. Have confidence that----. Depend--,
rely--, upon it that----. (cf. láum, sárig, hulát, paabút).

_salíg_, (H) Trusting, confiding, convinced of, believing,
thinking. Salíg akó nga maabút siá. In think (thought) he will (would)
come. I am convinced he will arrive. I was sure that he would come.

_salígbat_, To put in, step in, interrupt a conversation,
etc. Sumalígbat si Fuláno: "----. N.N. interrupted (the conversation)
saying: "----. Ginsaligbatán ni Fuláno ang ámon hambárò. Our talk
was interrupted by N.N. Saligbatá silá. Interrupt them.

_saligmatô_ To perplex, confuse, etc. See taligmatô.

_saligotóng_, To twist or turn aside, etc. See saligwatóng.

_salígsig_, The midrib of the buri-leaf. It is often inserted across
the warp between the sabláyan and bínting in a loom, in order to keep
the threads properly aligned.

_salígwatóng_, (B) To twist or turn aside, deflect the aim, hinder a
straight hit. Warâ mamúng-i ang mán-og, hay nagsaligwatóng sa kawáyan
ang bastón ko. (Walâ matám-i (maígò) ang mán-og, kay nagalángálang
(nakasángit) sa kawáyan ang ákon bastón). I did not hit the snake
fair, because my stick was deflected by the bamboo. (cf. salipád,
saligotóng).

_salíit_, (H) Very hot, burning (of heat); glaring, very pronounced,
prominent, visible from afar (of colours). (cf. tagítì; dagángdang,
dagáang).

_salík_, (H) To give a side-sweep, push sideways (with the horns,
etc.). Indì ka magpalapít sa kílid sang karabáw, kay básì isalík
ikáw. Don't go near the buffalo's flank, for he may strike you
sideways. Ginsalík siá sang báka kag nahúlug sa kalóg. The cow pushed
him aside with its horns and he fell into the ditch. (cf. sarík id.).

_salík_, (H) To make up yarn into skeins or small hanks, to
reel. Saliká ang bunáng. Make the yarn up in skeins. Arrange the yarn
in skeins.

_salikâ_, (H) To straddle, sit astride, bestride. Ginsalikaán
níya ang kabáyo--or--nagsalikâ siá sa kabáyo. He sat astride (He
bestrode) the horse. Nagasalikâ siá sa kawáyan. He sits astride the
bamboo. (cf. bákà, bakâ).

_salikán_, (H) A machine for making yarn up into skeins or hanks.

_salíkdò_, To take off, hide, appropriate, carry off. Sang pagkasúnug
madámò nga mga galamitón ginsalíkdò (ginpasalíkdò) sang mga táo. At
the time of (During) the fire much furniture was carried off by the
people. (cf. tágò, takáb).

_salíkdò_, To go out of one's way, avoid meeting another. See balíkdò.

_salík-sálik_, Dim. and Freq. of salík--to reel.

_salík-sálik_, See salíksik.

_salíksik_, (H) A small insect very injurious to young trees, bamboos,
etc. Also used as a verb. Ginasalíksik iníng káhoy. This tree is
infested with the salíksik-insect. Káhoy nga sinaliksikán. Wood that
has been injured by the insect called salíksik.

_salíli_, Substitute, Acting, deputy, proxy, locum tenens, delegate,
Vice--, vicegerent, representative; one who takes the place of another
or acts in his stead. (cf. tál-us, itál-us, ílis).

_salimáo, salimá-o_, A fit of bad temper, angry explosion; rage,
violent outbreak. Indì ka magpalapít sa íya karón, kay ginsalimá-o siá
(kay nasakáan siá sang salimá-o). Don't approach him for the present,
for he is in a fit of rage. (cf. baríno).

_salima-óhon_, Bad-tempered, ill-humoured; subject to fits of violent
temper. (cf. barinóhon).

_salimbabatáng_, The swallow (bird).

_salimbuáng_, To rave, be mad, act and speak like a madman, be
delirious (said of a sick person in high fever, in delirium tremens,
etc.). (cf. sáli, búang).

_salimpapáw_, Superficial, on the surface, Pharisee, hypocrite;
negligent, careless, desultory. (cf. halimpapáw).

_salimuáng_, See salimbuáng id.

_salín_, What is left, rest, remains, remainder; veteran; leave a
rest, leave something (behind). Salín sang kagúbot or ribók. Veteran
of the war or revolution. Salín sang pagkáon. The remains of a meal,
remnants of food. Saliní sing pagkáon si Fuláno, kay magaabút gid siá
sa dílì madúgay. Leave some food over for N.N.; for he will certainly
turn up before long. Kon walâ sing salín, walâ ikáw sing natilawán. If
there had been nothing left, you would have gone hungry. (cf. turá).

_salínà_, To chance upon, happen to come to, arrive at a place
accidentally or unexpectedly. Anó ang kabangdánan nga nakasalínà ka
dirí karón? Why do you happen to have come here? What chance brought
you here at this time? Kon makasalínà ka sa ámon índì ka malipát
(magkalipát) sa pagdúaw sa ámon. Whenever you chance to come to our
place, don't forget to pay us a visit. (cf. daláng, dánlag, típlang).

_salíndab_, To pass, flit by, etc. See labáy, lubás, salídhay.

_sál-ing_, A kind of bird.

_salíngsing_, (H) To grow, sprout in a circle, as the shoots round
a trunk or broken branch. Nagasalíngsing ang kawáyan nga nalumâ sang
hángin, ang púsug nga nabúgsok, etc. The bamboo broken by the wind,
the thick piece of bamboo stuck in the ground as a stake, etc. is
putting forth new shoots.

_salipád_, To be turned out of a straight line, to fly off in an
oblique direction, to deviate from a straight line, to hit or strike
at a tangent, to hit a glancing blow; glancing, grazing, at a tangent,
not direct, not straight. Nagsalipád ang binángon kag naígò ang ákon
tiíl. The bolo glanced off (deflected from a straight line) and hit
my foot. (cf. bariwás, saligwatóng, saligotóng).

_salíp-ak_, To split, cleave. Sinalíp-ak nga kawáyan. Split
bamboo. (cf. bís-ak, bí-al).

_salíping_, Shoot, sucker, ratoon; six-fingered, having a sixth finger.

_salipód_, To hide--, conceal--, oneself; take shelter. (cf. lipód).

_salíp-ong_, To pass, flit, rush through, enter momentarily the mind,
etc. as a sudden thought or idea. (cf. labáy, siláp-ong).

_salíp-ong_, To rise above, cover (as boiling water covers vegetables
that are being cooked). Kon masalip-ongán ang dágmay sang túbig ilúnud
mo ang balúnggay. As soon as the water rises above the dágmay, put
in the balúnggay-leaves. (cf. tábon).

_salipótpot_, To sneak away, shun or shirk, avoid labour, play truant,
leave one's job, be lazy. Indì ka magsalipótpot sa trabáho. Indì
mo pagpasalipotpotán ang trabáho. Don't shun work. Don't be
work-shy. Don't be lazy. (cf. pasalipótpot, ligóy, támad).

_salípsip_, (H) Notch, gash, prick, stab, cut (made with an edged or
sharp-pointed instrument); to cut, notch, gash, hack, prick, stab,
pierce. (cf. dulút, bunô; sarípsip id.).

_salipsipón_, (H) Notched, gashed, punctured, hacked with an edged
tool, etc. Káhoy nga salipsipón. A tree or piece of wood having many
notches cut in it.

_saliríng_, To lean or look sideways; to squint. See salidíng.

_salitána_, (H) A kind of plant. See karitána.

_salítre_, (Sp. salitre) Saltpetre, nitre.

_sálmo_, (Sp. salmo) Psalm, hymn. (cf. ambáhan).

_salmón_, (Sp. salmon) Salmon.

_sálmon_, The future passive of sálum--to dive, go down, sink in
water, etc.

_sálo_, (H) To eat together, partake of a common meal, eat out of the
same plate. Nagasaloháy silá. They are taking food together. Magsálo
lang kamó sa siníng isá ka pínggan--or--salóhi lang nínyo iníng isá
ka pínggan. Just eat together out of the one plate.

_salô_, To catch something thrown through the air as a ball, etc. Saloá
(sál-a) ang bóla. Catch the ball.

_sálog_, To mix, mingle, adulterate, bring into disorder. Maís, humáy,
etc. nga sinálog. Corn, rice, etc. mixed with other cereals or with
foreign matter.

_sálog_, See sálug--to grope in water.

_salóg_, See salúg--floor, pavement, ground.

_salók_, To scoop out, to take or lade out by means of a scoop. Saloká
sang payâ ang humáy nga ipíslong sa lusóng. Scoop out with the coconut
shell the rice to be pounded in the mortar. (cf. sarók).

_salokób_, A cover or protection for the head and shoulders made of
the leaflets of the burí palm. (cf. sugakúb).


_salokót_, See salakót.

_salók-salók_, Stomach. (cf. solóksolók which is more commonly used).

_salók-salók_, See pasalók-salók--to annoy, disgust.

_salólong_, (H) A gutter or channel made of wood, bamboo, galvanized
iron, etc. and used for conveying water. Also used as a verb. Salolóngi
ang balisbísan. Put a gutter under the eaves. Sinalolóngan ko na ang
alhíbi. I have now provided the water-tank with a gutter.

_salómo_, To go against the grain of, to do something in spite
of opposition or danger. Ginsalómo níya ang súpat sang káhoy sa
pagsapíyo. He planed the wood against the grain. Salomóha lang ang mga
bála, kay kon maáyo ang kapaláran mo maluás man ikáw gihápon. Simply
defy the bullets--or--go in the direction from which the bullets come,
for, if you are lucky (if the fates are kind, if such is your destiny,
if the fates have so decreed), you will escape anyhow. (sarómo id.).

_salón_, (Sp. salon) A large hall, parlour or assembly room; saloon,
dancing hall. (cf. balatonán).

_sálong_, Resin, rosin, pitch.

_salóngsong_, A kind of fish growing to about five feet in length.

_salópsop_, (H) To penetrate, go deep, enter deep. Iníng kasákit
nagsalópsop sa íya tagiposóon. This sorrow or pain entered deep into
(penetrated) his heart. Ginsalopsopán ang íya kasíngkásing sang amó
nga kasubô. That sorrow touched him to the quick, wounded his heart
deeply (salúpsup id.; cf. kágit).

_saló-sálo_, Dim. and Freq. of sálo. Also: Feast, banquet, dinner.

_sál-ot_, To squeeze in, insert, to get a turn, have a chance. Indì
akó makasál-ot sa pagbúlig sa ímo, kay dáyon (pírme) gid akó masákò. I
cannot find time to help you, as I am always very busy here. Madámò
gid ang buút magkonpesár nga ang ibán sa íla walâ makasál-ot. So
many wanted to go to confession, that some of them could not get
a turn. Sal-otí gid ang ímo mga buluhatón sa pagsulát sa ímo mga
ginikánan. Try hard to squeeze in among your various occupations the
writing of a letter to your parents. (cf. lihát, dalikát; panagíl-ot,
bál-ot, lútlut).

_sálsa_, (Sp. salsa) Sauce, dressing, gravy, liquid seasoning or
condiment. (cf. sabáw, sársa).

_sálsal_, To forge, to hammer (metals). Salsalá ang salsálon. Hammer
the iron. Salsalí akó sing binángon, wásay, etc. Forge a
bolo, a hatchet, etc. for me. Ang manugsálsal nagasálsal sing
píko sa íya pamandáyan. The smith is forging a pick-axe in his
work-shop. Ginpasalsalán níya ang íya bátà nga babáye sing mga pulséras
nga buláwan sa platéro (manugsálsal). He ordered the goldsmith to
make golden bracelets for his daughter.

_salsálon_, Iron.

_salsalonón_, Made of iron, iron; very strong.

_sálta_, (Sp. saltar) To leap, jump, bound, spring, fly
off. (cf. lúmpat, lúkso; ályas, ásik).

_salúbong_, To welcome, go out and meet, wait for,
expect. (cf. aláwálaw, sug-álaw, súgat, sugatâ). The term "salúbong"
seems to come from the Tagalog dialect.

_salúd_, (Sp. salud) Health. Salúd! To your health! Health!

_salúd_, A bamboo-vessel tied to a (clipped) severed fruit-stalk of
the coconut palm for the purpose of collecting the slowly dripping
tubâ; eavesdropper; intruder, meddler.

_sálud_, To place under, put underneath in order to catch
or gather. Salúra ang tubúd. Catch the droppings in a vessel
placed underneath. Salúri sing salúd ang tubúd sang swák. Hang a
bamboo-vessel to catch the drops oozing from the fruit stalk of
the coconut palm. Salúri akó sing ulán. Catch some rain-water for
me. Isálud iníng láta sa ulán. Put this can out to catch rain-water.

_saludár_, (Sp. saludar) To salute, greet. Saludahí siá. Salute
him. (cf. támyaw, abíábi, búgno).

_salúg_, Floor, pavement, ground. (salóg id.).

_sálug_, To grope in water or mud, fish with the hands. Salúga ang
ísdà. Grope for and catch the fish with your hands. (cf. panálug).

_salúgsug_, A splinter, especially one that has got under the
fingernail.


_salúgsug_, To permeate, impregnate, pervade, imbue. (cf. húgum,
húpog, látum, tudúk, salópsop).

_sáluk_, To take a meal together, agree, pull together. (cf. hisáluk).

_salukî_, To feel nausea, feel sick, have one's stomach turned,
feel like vomiting. Nagasalukî ang ginháwa ko. I feel like
vomiting. (cf. dígwà, taká).

_sálum_, To dip, dive, sink in or under. Sálum or magsálum ka sa
túbig. Dive into the water. Sálma ang lansétas ko. Dive down and get
my knife. Sing masamí iníng línaw ginasálman sang mga bátà. The boys
often dive in this quiet sheet of water.

_salungkakâ_, Loose, not tight or firm; superficial,
insincere. (cf. halungkakâ, talungkakâ).

_salúnò_, To fool, trick, cheat, wheedle, cajole, persuade. (cf. hásò,
hulánò).

_sálup_, To go down, disappear, enter. Nagsálup na ang ádlaw. The
sun has gone down. Papáa ang lánsang sing maáyo agúd magsálup sa
tápì. Hammer the nail well, that it may enter the board. Pasálpa ang
pabílo sang sugâ. Turn down the lamp-wick. Pasálpi ang halígi sing
lánsang. Drive a nail into the post.

_salúpap_, To soak, steep in fluid, moist, wet, drench. Nasalupápan
ang tinápay sang lánggaw. The bread was soaked in vinegar. (cf. húgum,
húlum, húpug, basâ).

_salúpsup_, To penetrate, etc. See salópsop.

_salurán_, Place under a faucet, tap, pipe, or the like; any place
where liquids, trickling or flowing from above, may be collected in
vessels put underneath. (cf. sálud, salúd).

_salúsò_, Cut off, interrupted, intermittent; to cut off,
prune, trim, lop off. Hápò nga salúsò. Intermittent (difficult)
breathing. (cf. útud, utúd, utúdutúd).

_salút_, (H) Unlucky, unfortunate, miserable, bad, evil; cursed,
damned; to become bad, evil, etc. Masalút áyhan ang bág-o nga
túig? Will the new year be a bad one, I wonder? (cf. sarót, buísit).

_sálwan_, To be hit accidentally. Andam ka, kay básì masálwan ka sang
binángon, bató, bóla, etc. Look out, for you may be hit by the bolo,
stone, ball, etc. (cf. salô).

_sam_, (B) See sángka.

_sálya_, To transfer, transfuse. See sália.

_sáma_, Equal, peer, compeer, match; to equalize, smooth out, be or
make equal, level, even, smooth. Wa'áy sáma. Without peer, unequaled,
unsurpassed, peerless, unrivalled. Nasáma (nagkasáma, nagkasaláma)
silá nga tanán. They were all equal,--became all equal, level,
etc. (cf. saláma).

_sámad_, To injure seriously, maim, cause an injury, wound, harm,
hurt. Nasamáran (Nasamádan) siá. He was seriously injured. Nasámad
(nagkasámad, nagkasalámad) silá nga tanán. They were all injured
(hurt, wounded). Sín-o ukón anó ang nakasámad sa ímo? Who or what
caused you the injury? (cf. dáut, pílas, hálit).

_samád_, Injury, defect, wound, hurt, harm, flaw; injured, hurt,
wounded. (cf. sámad, pilás, pilasón).

_samál_, Having a firm hold or grasp, resting secure; to grasp or hold
on firmly to; touch, come in contact with (accidentally); to meet,
encounter, chance or happen upon, come to pass as a coincidence. Sámla
(Samalá) ang pagúyat mo sang báso, kay kon dílì makapalús. Hold the
glass firmly, for otherwise it may slip off. Samál pa ang pagtángday
sang págbo sa baláyan. The rafter is still resting securely on
the girder. Samál gid ang íya pagúyat sang píspis. Ginpasamál gid
níya ang íya kamót sa píspis. He got a firm hold of the bird with
his hand. Nasamál níya ang píspis. He (accidentally) touched the
bird with his hand. Sang ámon pagkádto dídto nasamál námon ang íla
tábad. When we went there it just came to pass that they were having
a feast (banquet). (cf. kibít--to be supported insecurely, etc.;
sám-ang, kapút).

_samalági_, (B) Tamarind. See sámbag, samlági.

_samálang_, To meet, encounter, come--, light--, upon. Sín-o
ang nasamálang mo kahápon sa kalsáda? Whom did you meet on the
road yesterday? Indì ka magági dirâ, kay masamálang rao áyhan
ang mga buyóng. Indì kaw magági dián, hay básì masamálang mo
ang mga buyóng. Don't go that way, for you may encounter the
robbers. (cf. sumálang id.; sugatâ).

_samaláyhaw_, A young cock, cockerel. (cf. sumaláyhaw id.).


_sám-ang_, To be firmly secured, fixed, attached to, settled
down; to have a firm hold or grip on. Ang baláyan nasám-ang na sa
halígi. The girder is now firmly secured to the post. Indì na siá
magpaúlì dirí, kay nakasám-ang siá dídto sa maáyo nga lugár. He
will not come back here any more, for he is settled there in a
good place. Ipasám-ang--or--pasam-angá ang kruz sa ibábaw sang
simbáhan. Fasten or secure the cross well on the top of the
church. (cf. samál, pág-on, líg-on).

_sámay_, Stripe, streak, line; to stripe, line with stripes,
to streak. Mapulá ang sámay sang íya báyò. His jacket has red
stripes. Samáyi sing itúm ang ákon delargóhon. Weave black stripes
into the cloth for my trousers. (cf. rámbat, sámri).

_samáyà_, To accost or address again, become reconciled to, renew good
relationship after a quarrel. Nagasamayaánay na silá nga duhá. The two
of them are on speaking terms again. Magsamayaáy kamó. Get reconciled
to one another. Samayáa siá. Conciliate him. Be reconciled with him.

_samáy-sámay_, Dim. and Freq. of sámay. Also: lined, striped, streaked,
mixed, checkered.

_sámba_, To gratify fully, make content, satisfy. Kon índì mo masámba
ang íla lúyag amó inâ ang halinán sang íla lilibákon. If you don't
gratify their wish they will begin to find fault with you. Sambahá
nga dáan ang kabatáan, agúd índì na magsámok karón kon magkáon ang
mga tigúlang. Feed the children well beforehand, so that they may
not be troublesome when the grown-ups take their meal.

_sámbà_, A diagonal (slanting) cut, bevel, lip, as on that side of a
bayóng (bamboo-tube) where the water is poured out; to bevel, make a
lip or bevel. Sambaí ang bayóng. Make a lip on the bayóng. May sámbà
na ang bág-o nga bayóng? Has the new bayóng a bevel at its opening?

_sámbad_, See kámbad, sámbud, balámbud, sabúd--to encircle, twist
round, etc.

_sámbag_, (H) The tamarind. (cf. samlági, samalági).

_sambálì, sambáli_, To twist, contort the limbs, as in wrestling,
dancing, etc.

_sámbat_, To surround, intercept, cut off one's escape, head back, head
off. Sambatí siá. Head him off. Intercept him. (cf. lámbat, lipót).

_sámbat_, To take hold of, cling to (anything floating, as a drowning
person does); to save shipwrecked people. (cf. gabáy, sagúp).

_sambigî_, Not straight, not parallel, awry, twisted, deviating
from a straight line, crooked, bent, curved, out of line, out of the
straight. (cf. hiwî, kiwî, tikô).

_sámbil_, Having a hanging lower lip as a natural defect;
pasámbil--to pout, put forward or project the lower lip. Indì mo
akó pagpasambilán. Don't pout at me. (cf. yabî, yámbì, hálhal;
hílhil--drop-lipped).

_sambilád_, Turned up (that should be turned down); at the back, behind
(that should be in front); outside (that should be inside); careless,
slovenly, slovenlily arranged. Sambilád ang íya pamatádyong. Her
skirt is put on anyhow. She wears her skirt carelessly arranged.

_sambirí_, Streaked, striped, etc. See sámri. (cf. sámay, rámbat).

_sámbit_, To mention, refer to, allude, bring forward, quote, cite. Ang
nasámbit (sinámbit) sa hitáas----. The above-mentioned----. What was
mentioned above or before----. The said N.N.----. Indì mo pagisámbit
ang ákon ngálan. Don't mention my name. Don't cite me. Don't use my
name. Sambití siá sang ímo kinahánglan. Make mention to him of your
needs. Mention to him what you stand in need of. (cf. hinámbit).

_sámbit_, Enough, etc. See sámbut.

_sámbo_, To grunt, snort angrily. Ginsambohán ang bátà sang báboy. The
pig grunted fiercely (angrily) at the boy. Kagáb-i nagsámbo ang
báboy sa idálum sang baláy. Last night the pig grunted excitedly
under the house.

_sámbol_, Pregnant, big with child, near the time of giving birth;
big, thick, stout; to be near delivery, etc. Masámbol (nagasámbol)
na siá. She is near her time. (cf. búsyad, burántoy, mábdus, búsung).

_sámbri_, Streaked, etc. See sámri.

_sambuángan_, A kind of palm that somewhat resembles the betelnut palm.


_sámbud_, To wind, bind, roll, twist around. Sambudí (--urí)
ang kawáyan ti písì (sing písì). Wind a string round the
bamboo. (cf. sámbad, sabúd, balámbud).

_sambuláwan_, A kind of tree and the timber it yields.

_sambulawán_, Imitation of gold. See simbulawán.

_sambúnut_, Tumult, row, wrangle, skirmish, fight; to have a row,
come to blows, fight. (cf. sinambúnut, áway, sambúwà, sangúwà).

_sámbut_, Enough, sufficiency; to be enough, be sufficient, suffice,
cover all the needs, content. Iní índì makasámbut sa ákon nga
kinahánglan. This is not enough for my needs. Dî masámbut ang íya
paghingamó sa pagmánggad. His desire for wealth cannot be satisfied,
is insatiable. (cf. ígò, áyaw, túman, árus, ángay, bastánte).

_sámbut_, To reach, attain, compass, encompass, contrive, can. Madámò
siá sing apó nga dílì masámbut sang kamót ang pagísip. He has so many
grandchildren that they cannot be counted up on (the fingers of)
his hand. Indì silá makasámbut sang pamaligyáon. They cannot cope
with the demand. Walâ masámbut sang mga mangingisdà sa pagpanakúp,
kay madámò gid ang mga ísdà. The fishermen could not catch all the
fish, because there were so many. (cf. lámbut).

_sambúwà_, See sambúnut. Also: one round (of wrestling, boxing,
etc.). (cf. sangúwà).

_sámdong_, To admonish, advise, correct. (cf. pugúng, sábdong,
bádlong, sawáy).

_sámgon_, From samóg.

_samí_, To happen often, be frequent. See masamí.

_samít_, To taste, try the flavour of, test. Samití iníng sabáw. Taste
this sauce. Nakasamít ka sang ámon púto? Have you tasted or tried
our puto-cake? Walâ gid sa ámon sing nakasamít sang íla tábad. None
of us partook of their banquet. (cf. tiláw, sámsam).

_sámkon_, To conceive. See panámkon.

_samlági_, Tamarind. (cf. sámbag, samalági).

_sámò_, To mix, mingle with, blend, temper, put in an admixture
of. Samói sing itúm ang pínta nga mapulá. Mix some black with the
red paint. (cf. símbog, sákot, lakót).

_samô_, A mixture of; mixed, mingled with, blended,
tempered. Ginabátyag ko dirí ang makalulúyag kag samô nga kaámyon gíkan
sa mabulákon nga kaúmhan. I enjoy here the delightful and mingled
odours from the flowery fields. Ang íya kasubô may diótay nga samô
nga kalípay. There is (was) some slight consolation in her grief.

_samóg_, (B) To be, become, or make wet, moist, damp, sodden, soggy,
to moisten. Nasamóg kang tún-og ang mga ulús ko. (Nahumúg sang
tún-og ang ákon mga panápton). My clothes were damp with dew. Sámga
kang túbig ang bugás nga borokbókon. (Humóga sang túbì ang bugás nga
bolokbokón). Moisten with water the hulled rice that is to be crushed
to powder (pulp). (cf. hún-og, humóg, húmog, hám-og, húpug, etc.).

_sámok_, To disturb, interfere with, meddle in, distract, be
troublesome. Indì ka magsámok sa ákon nga nagasulát. Indì mo pagsamókan
ang ákon pagsulát. Don't disturb me while I am writing. Don't distract
me in my writing. (cf. túblag).

_samóng_, To join, mingle in (with) introduce oneself into a
company. Sang pagkasúnug sang bánwa madámò nga mga makáwat ang
nagsamóng sa mga táo nga nagatalábang. When the town was on fire many
thieves mingled with (introduced themselves among) the men that gave
their help to save. (cf. dápon, sulúd).

_samót_, To speak indistinctly, clip one's words, pronounce the last
vowel-sounds short in almost every word, pronounce defectively. Indì mo
pagsamotón ang paghámbal. Don't clip your words. Samót ang panghámbal
na kanákon. (Búklas ang panghámbal níya sa ákon). He spoke to me with
a very defective pronunciation. Indì kaw maghámbal ti samót nga pitô,
kóndì pitó. (Indì mo pagbuklasón ang "pitô", kóndì imítlang mo nga
"pitó"). Don't say "pitô", but pronounce "pitó".

_sámpad_, The door or gate of the innermost part of a fish-corral or
fish-trap called "punút".

_sampáda_, To meet, encounter, come together. Nagsampadaháy silá. They
met each other. (cf. sugatâ, sumálang, samálang).

_sampádong_, To strike, beat, slap (one's ears or head). Sampadónga
(tána, siá). Give him a good slap. Slap his ears. (cf. támpà, huyáp,
sámpal, tampúyong).

_sámpak_, To haft or hilt a knife, sword, etc.; to set the point of a
lance, or the like, in a shaft; to load a boat to its full capacity;
to drive in a knife, etc. up to the hilt; furnished with a blade or
with an iron point; loaded to full capacity.

_sámpal_, To beat or strike against, push, shove, impel. (cf. dáldal,
sámpay). Also: to slap (on the mouth, one's mouth). (cf. sampádong).

_sampálak_, To come together, meet. (cf. sumálang, sugatâ, sampáda).

_sampalíya_, A kind of vegetable bitter in taste and resembling in
shape a small cucumber. (cf. amargóso).

_sámpan_, On the side, neither face-up nor face-down, (placed) on
(its) side. (cf. takílid).

_sámpan_, A sampan, a skiff or boat propelled with a scull. (The term
is Chinese).

_samparádo_, See samporádo--chocolate mixed with rice-porridge or
the like. (Sp. champurrado).

_samparahón_, Subject to fits of great excitement or irritability,
one having periods of violent temper. (cf. alabúton, sarápwon, pikón).

_sampárak_, To meet, encounter. (cf. sumálang, sampálak).

_sámpat_, Fit, suitable, adapted; equipped, furnished, prepared;
nice, savoury, tasty, toothsome; to be or become fit, etc. Iníng
pagkáon sámpat sa ákon ginháwa. This food is according to my taste
or liking. (cf. ígò, síbò; úyon, sángkap).

_sampáton_, Accomplished, expert, perfect, well equipped, well
instructed, able, all-round. Pamatán-on nga sampáton. An accomplished
youth. (cf. maálam, hímpit, lántip).

_sámpaw_, Lying above or on top of something, superimposed,
superincumbent, overlying; to lie above another, be or put on
top of something else. Kuháa ang ákon tulún-an nga nagasámpaw
sa diksyonáryo. Fetch my book that is lying on top of the
dictionary. Isámpaw ang báhaw sa tiníg-ang kon mahúbsan. Put the
cold rice on top of the (freshly) boiled rice as soon as the water
has evaporated. Sampawí lang ang tabungós sang ímo bakág. Put your
carrier's basket on top of the tabungós-basket.

_sámpaw_, A snag-tooth, straggle-tooth; a double tooth growing behind
another tooth; a badly developed or prominent molar tooth. (cf. lipíd,
bág-ang, sígmit, ángkod, panóok, panóop).

_sámpay_, To impel--, push--, bear--, carry--, along, cast
ashore, drift, drive (of waves, wind, etc.). Ang madulús nga hángin
nakasámpay sang sakayán sa baybáyon. The strong wind carried the boat
towards the shore. Ang íya nga bángkay sinámpay sang mga balúd sa
baybáyon. The waves drifted his corpse ashore. Ginasámpay siá sang
kusúg nga índì makítà. He is being carried along by an unseen force
(influence). (cf. dágsà, dái-a, dáy-a, dáldal).

_sampayód_, Limping, halting; to limp, walk with a halt or
limp. (cf. kunád).

_sámpì_, To strike, beat, buffet, splash against (of wind, water,
etc.). Ang hángin nagsámpì sa baláy, ang balúd nagasámpì sa baybáyon,
etc. The wind buffeted the house, the waves beat against the shore,
etc. (cf. sámpay, sábya).

_sampínit_, Thorn, briar. (cf. sapínit).

_sámpok_, To rush upon, fight head to head, collide with force,
particularly applied to fighting cocks. Bulagá ang mga manók nga
nagasámpok. Separate the cocks that are fighting. Pasampoká iníng duhá
ka manók. Let or make these two cocks fight each other. Nagsinampókay
ang habágat kag amíhan. The south-wind and the north-wind contended
against each other (for supremacy).

_sampokmáya_, A constellation of stars.

_samporádo_, (Sp. champurrado) A dish of chocolate mixed with
rice-porridge or the like. (cf. samparádo id.).

_sampunáya_, Full of life and cheerfulness, delightful, pleasant to
stay or live in. (cf. masádya, hamungáyà; masím-ong--dreary, lonely).


_sámpung_, To reach a high goal, arrive at the top of, to top, come
to the end of an ascent. (cf. sáp-ong id.).

_sampúngan_, The landing or top of a staircase, the end of a climb
or ascent, a high goal reached. (cf. sap-ongán).

_sámput_, To arrive at, come to, reach, gain, make. Bág-o pa lang
akó magsámput dirí. I have but lately arrived. I have just come
in. (cf. abút, sapút, dángat).

_sampútan_, Place to go to or arrive at. (cf. apútan, sangpútan).

_sámri_, Streaked, striped, check, checkered, cross-striped (with both
vertical and horizontal lines); to be or make streaked, etc. Ang sámay
sang íya báyò sámri (sámbri, sambirí, kurúskúrus). The stripes in his
jacket run crosswise. (cf. dándan--striped with only vertical lines;
rámbat--slanting, sloping, diagonal).

_sámsam_, To taste, relish; munch, chew audibly, smack. (cf. sagámsam,
samít, tiláw, óm-om).

_sámtang_, (Probably contr. of sa hámtang). As long as, whilst,
meanwhile. Sámtang nga walâ akó sing pílak, índì akó makabakál sing
áwto. As long as I am without money (I have no money), I cannot buy
an auto. (cf. miéntras).

_samuhán_, To form a company, unite resources; to
cooperate. (cf. kambúya).

_sámwad_, To prosper, progress, go on well, flourish. (cf. úswag,
sányog, kaayohán).

_san_, (B) See sángka.

_sanáaw_, (B) Bright or light with the dawn of day, etc. (cf. bánag,
banágbánag, banáag, hanághánag).

_sánag_, Clearness, brightness, light, lucidity, luminousness,
luminosity, brilliancy, effulgence, refulgence; consultation,
diagnosis, inspection, act of consulting; to be or make clear, shine,
etc. Ang sánag sang ádlaw. The light of day, the brightness of the
sun. Nagasánag na ang búlan. The moon is shining brightly. Pasanági
ang ságwà. Light up the reception room. Pasanága ang sugâ, índì mo
pagpakiróton. Turn up the light of the lamp, don't turn it down. But:
(Note the accent). Kon masanagán ang íya sinâ nga kamatuóran mahibaloán
náton kon diín ang katarúngan. When the truth of it is made clear,
we shall know who is right or where to lay the blame. Nasanagán na
ang íya nga salâ. His fault is made clear now.

_sanám_, A kind of ant having a painful bite.

_sánaw_, To be bright, light, etc. See sanáaw, bánag.

_sánaw_, To ooze out, etc. See sánay.

_sánay_, To ooze out, flow, drip, trickle. (cf. tubúd, ágay, ílig).

_sánda_, (B) They. (cf. silá).

_sándad_, To knock or stumble against, to stub one's toe against,
to kick against, trip over, make a false step. Nakasándad akó sa
bató. I struck my foot--, I stumbled--, against a stone. Nasándad
ko ang kólon. I stumbled against the rice-pot. Andam ka, kay mabúung
ang bangâ kon masándad mo. Be careful, for the water-jar will break
in pieces, if you trip over it or knock against it.

_sándag_, To support, hold up, put one's arm around, take care of,
protect. (cf. sákbay, sál-ay, sákdag, tábang).

_sandágan_, Help, protection, support, refuge, asylum. (cf. sáp-an,
aláypan, dalángpan, paaliwánsan).

_sandána_, A tree with an odoriferous wood, often used as incense.

_sandápal_, One handbreadth too short; crippled.

_sánday_, (B) It stands for sánda ni (silá ni). Sánday Pédro. (Silá
ni Pédro). Peter and his friends or his family. Sánday sín-o ang mga
nagalabút? Who are they that have come here?

_sandí-ay_, To lean against, etc. See sándig.

_sándig_, To lean against for support, rest against, rely upon,
rest one's back on. Nabulingán ang íya likód, kay nasandigán níya ang
mahígkò nga díngding. His back was soiled, because he leant against the
dirty wall. Sandigí ang halígi. Lean against the post. Magsándig ka sa
binubuót sang Diós. Rely on God's will. Sándig gid siá sa kalíwat. He
is a chip off the old block. Ang íya mga sumulúnud nagasalándig gid
sa íya. His followers have confidence in him.


_sandíya_, Melon, water-melon. (cf. melón).

_sándol_, To collide, run up against. See sángdol.

_sandúgò_, Blood relations, kith and kin, belonging to the same
family. (cf. sindúgò).

_sánduk_, To scoop out, ladle out, bail out, draw water, etc. Sandukí
akó sing tubig. Draw some water for me. Isánduk iníng payâ sa tubâ. Use
this coconut-shell to scoop out the tubâ with. (cf. salók, sarók,
kándus).

_sandúkò_, A kind of long bolo with a curved point. (cf. ginúnting).

_sang_, (H) Genitive and Accusative of the definite article, ang. Ang
atóp sang baláy. The roof of the house. Ang kahulúgan sang amó nga
tagâ (tinagâ)----. The meaning of that term----. Nagpúlut siá sang íya
kálò nga nadágdag. He picked up his hat that had fallen down. Ginúrut
níya sang káon ang kán-on. He ate up all the (cooked) rice. Kinagát
siá sang idó. He was bitten by the dog. The dog bit him. (cf. kang).

_sang_, (H) Particle of time: When, as, at the time of, whilst,
since,--ago. Sang úna nga tiémpo----. Formerly----. Sang paghalín
ko sa baláy maáyo gid ang ákon láwas. When I left home I was very
healthy. Sang may tátlo na ka túig----. Three years ago----. Sang
pituádlaw nga tinalíkdan----. Last week----. Kútub sang----túbtub
sa----. From----until----. Sang dídto akó sa Manílà----. When or whilst
I was in Manila----. Sang isá sinâ ka ága (hápon, gáb-i, etc.)----. One
morning (afternoon, evening or night, etc.)----. (cf. kang).

_sang_, (B) See sángka.

_sangá_, Branch; to branch, fork, ramify, form branches. Nagsangá na
ang káhoy. The tree has branched out. Sa ginsáng-an sang dálan----. At
the cross-road, at the place where the road branches off, at the fork
of the road.

_sángal_, Mortise; to mortise a beam into a post, or a joist into
a girder.

_sángal_, Rein, reins; to rein, pull at the reins, check or stop by
a pull at the reins.

_sángal_, To stuff, pack, cram, into the mouth, to gag. Isángal
iníng kamóte sa bábà sang bátà. Stuff this sweet potato into the
boy's mouth. Ginsangálan níla sing pányo ang íya bábà, agúd índì
makahámbal. They stuffed a cloth into his mouth, in order to make it
impossible for him to speak. Sinangálan sing tinápay ang íya bábà. His
mouth is full of bread.

_sáng-an_, Cross. (cf. krus, sangá).

_sángat_, To hang on to, etc. See sáng-at.

_sáng-at_, To hang, insert or hook on, attach or connect with. Isáng-at
ang alámbre sa lánsang. Hook the wire on the nail. Ginsáng-at ko
ang ákon kálò sa salab-ítan. I hung my hat on the peg. Sang-atí sing
kárne ang salang-átan. Hang some meat on the hook. (cf. sábit).

_sang-átan, sangátan_, A place where, or a thing to which, something
is attached (as by a hook). (cf. sángat, sáng-at).

_sangáy_, Namesake; to have the same name. Nagasangáy silá. They
have the same name. Sín-o ang sántos nga sangáy mo? Who is your
patron-Saint? Who is the Saint, whose name you bear? (cf. tokáyo).

_sángdol_, To collide with, run up against, run into, butt or strike
against, ram (a ship). (sándol id.).

_sángga, sánggà_, Partner in a game; to be partners in a game, in a
dance, etc. Nagasanggahánay silá sa sugál. They are partners at cards.

_sánggà_, To put underneath, as a saucer, or the like. Sanggaá sang
pínggan ang báso. Isánggà ang pínggan sa báso. Sanggaí ang báso sang
pínggan. Put the plate under the glass.

_sánggab_, A diagonal (slanting) cut, bevel in bamboo tube,
etc. (cf. sámbà).

_sánggab_, To get stuck, to foul, run foul of (a root, stump,
etc.). Nagsánggab ang káro sa tuúd. The cart fouled the stump of a
tree. See súnggab id.

_sanggawád_, Acolythe. (cf. akólito).

_sánggì_, To twist, tear, break, split off a branch, etc. See
bánggì. Sanggiá ang isá ka sangá. Break off a branch.

_sánggit_, To seize, snatch, take hold of. (cf. sáklit, tában, ágaw,
kúhà, lábnit, lámang).


_sánggol_, A cock without comb; combless; to clip, dock or cut off
(the comb or caruncle of a cock, etc.). Sanggolá ang pirahón sang
manók. Sanggolí ang manók (sang íya nga pirahón). Cut off the cock's
comb. Ipabúlang ko iníng sánggol sa buás. I'll fight (i.e. make fight)
this combless cock in the cockpit tomorrow.

_sánggot_, A curved knife that somewhat resembles a sickle and is
chiefly used for cutting back the fruit-stalk of a coconut palm, in
order to make the tubâ flow freely; to cut with such a knife. Sanggotí
iníng lubí, kay mainúm kitá sing tubâ. Tap this coconut palm (Use
your sánggot on this coconut palm), for we want to drink tubâ.

_sanggótan_, Fit or suitable for being tapped (with the sánggot) for
the production of tubâ, applied to coconut palms. May lubí ka man nga
sanggótan? Have you also some coconut palms in a condition for tapping?

_sanggurút_, Very irascible, hot-tempered, bad-tempered,
choleric, irritable, one who gets angry at the slightest
provocation. (cf. pikón).

_sanggúwà_, See sangúwà--contest, bout, round, fight.

_sánghid_, To prove, test, put to the test, assay, try by means of
the touchstone. Ang buláwan ginasánghid sa sanghíran. Gold is tested
by the touchstone. Sanghirá inâ. Put it to the test. (cf. tiláw).

_sanghíran_, (H) Touchstone; examination, proof, test, trial, ordeal.

_sángit_, To hook in, be caught, stick to, cling to. See sángat,
salángat.

_sángka, sang, san, sam_, (B) The equivalent of isá ka--one, a,
e.g. sángka (sang) ádlaw. One (a) day. Sángka turô. A drop. Sángka
túig. Santúig. A year. Sángka búlan. Sambúlan. A month (ago). (cf. (H)
Isá ka--ádlaw,--tul-ó,--túig,--búlan).

_sángkad_, Width, breadth, wideness, broadness; to broaden, widen,
become wide. Nagsángkad na ang plása, kay ginhálin níla ang isá ka
kátay nga baláy sa katúngdan náyon. The public square has been widened,
for they have removed a row of houses on its western side. Sangkará
(--adá) ang dálan. Make the road wider. Nasangkarán akó siníng
báyò. This jacket is too wide for me. (cf. lápad, áblang).

_sángkap_, Outfit, tools, equipment; well equipped, provided; to
equip, furnish, provide with. May sángkap siá sa pagpamánday. He
has carpenter's tools. Sángkap na iníng baláy sa tanán nga mga
galamitón. This house is now well provided with furniture, etc. Maáyo
siá nga pánday, ápang kúlang sing sángkap. He is a good carpenter,
but lacks (is lacking) tools. Sángkap gid ang paglubúng sa kay
Fuláno. N.N. was buried with full ceremonies. Ginsangkapán níla ang
bág-o nga baláy sing matahúm nga mga galamitón. They provided their
new house with beautiful furniture.

_sángkay_, To throw a stone, ball, etc. as in the game of skittles,
marbles and the like (in order to hit, knock out or scatter). Sangkayá
ang bató. Throw the stone. Sangkayí ang ákon dalógdog. Have a throw
at my dalógdog-nut.

_sángkò_, See sákrò. Ginsángkò ang bátà sang hilánat. The baby
contracted a cold.

_sángkò_, To reach, extend to. Ang humáy níla sa idálum sang baláy
sángkò sa panálgan. Their rice underneath the house reaches to the
floor. (cf. dángat, lámbut).

_sángkol_, Fit, suitable, adapted, qualified, competent, thorough,
consummate, up to the mark or standard. Dílì siá sángkol sa amó nga
palangakóan. He is not competent for such an office. Sángkol siá nga
búang. He is a perfect fool. He is a consummate ass. (cf. tángkol).

_sánglà_, To tie--, hitch--, hang--, on to. Isánglà mo yanáng dútà
sa bánko. Mortgage that land to the bank. (cf. sángat).

_sánglad_, (B) Remainder, that is left, that is over; to remain over,
be left. Pilá ang sánglad (nasánglad) sang daúg mo? How much of your
winnings is left? (cf. bilín).

_sánglay_, (Sp. sangley) Chinese trader, Chinaman,
Chinese. (cf. ínsik).

_sánglit_, Therefore, since, because, as, in as much as, whilst,
whereas; seeing that. Mahapús iní sa íya, sánglit manggaránon siá. It
is easy for him, because (since, seeing that) he is rich. (cf. kay,
bangúd, tungúd).

_sánglit_, Example, instance, type, pattern, illustration, case in
point, model. (cf. sanglítan).


_sanglítan_, Example, etc. See sánglit. Wa'áy sanglítan
(sánglit). Without example, i.e. unique, unsurpassed, without a
peer, unrivalled, peerless, supreme, consummate, exceeding (above)
all standards. (cf. pananglítan).

_sanglitánan_, See sanglítan, pananglitánan.

_sángod_, To surfeit, eat much, be voracious, gluttonous,
greedy. Nasangodán akó siníng bátà ko. This child of mine eats very
much. Kasángod siníng bátà! How greedy this boy is!

_sángod_, Craw, crop; hamper, basket for provisions. Iníng bátà daw
may sángod, kay madámò gid sing káon. This boy seems to have a hamper
somewhere, for he eats so much. (cf. balonbalonán).

_sángpad_, The ornamented head or beak of a boat, rostrum.

_sángput_, To arrive, reach, come to, attain. Nagasángput
(nagahinángput) na siá sa ikapúlò kag waló ka pagsukát. He has reached
(attained) his eighteenth year. (cf. sámput, abút, hinangát).

_sangpútan_, Goal, place to go, place to live in or to stay at. Walâ
siá sing sangpútan. He has nowhere to go. (cf. apútan, sampután).

_sángra_, (Sp. sangrar) To bleed, draw blood, to make an
incision. Sangrahí ang íya hubág. Make an incision in his boil. Lance
his boil.

_sángsang_, To stuff food into the mouth, to gag, etc. See
sángal. Sangsangá--sangála).

_sángsang_, To be or become vehement, fierce, violent, heavy (of war,
fighting, work, etc.). Nagasángsang na ang íla pagináway, ang íla
pagginamú sa sulúd sang bánwa, ang íla pagtánum, etc. Their fighting
is now heavy, the commotion or excitement in the town is at its height,
they are very busy planting rice, etc. (cf. sákò).

_sángtan_, From sángat, sáng-at.

_sáng-ul_, To hang to, stick to, hook in, be caught or detained (as
by a hook or the like). Nakasáng-ul ang íya panápton sa símsim sang
kawáyan. His clothes caught in the bamboo branches. (cf. sáng-at,
salángat).

_sangúwà_, Tumult, fight; one round (of boxing, etc.). (cf. sambúnut,
sambúwà).

_sángyà_, A fishing net, seine; to catch (fish) in a net. (cf. síhod).

_sángya_, To make merry, be gay, to sport, romp, frolic, be cheerful
or joyful. (cf. sádya, dágyang).

_sángyad_, To trail, draggle on the floor or ground. Ang íya
nga sáya nagasángyad sa dútà. Her skirt is trailing along the
ground. (cf. gúyud, gánoy, sagúmboy, ságnoy).

_sángyaw_, To be or become public, leak out, get abroad, become
known. (cf. balahúbà, bántug, lápnag, bantálà, etc.).

_sanidád_, (Sp. sanidad) Health; Bureau of Health.

_sanípa_, (Sp. cenefa) Border, band or stripe at the edge of a stuff;
hangings, hanging drapery, valance, flounce, trimming. (sinípa id.).

_sanít_, An equal division or distribution of property or of an
inheritance; to divide or distribute on a basis of equality, to give
an equal share to: to deal equally with, treat without distinction,
be impartial, do something in an even or uniform way. Ginasanít
sang Diós ang pagtátap sang ngatanán. God takes equally care of
everything. Paghabúl nga sinanít. Weaving in which the warp and the
woof are alike in material, colour, or the like.

_sanitáryo_, (Sp. sanitario) Health officer, Sanitary Inspector.

_sánlab_, (B) To flame; flare up, blaze, burn brightly (of lights
and fire). (cf. sáblab, sádlab, dábdab, síga, haráhará).

_sánlag_, To roast (coffee, etc.). Sanlagá ang kapé. Roast the
coffee. Sanlagí akó sing diótay nga maís, kakáw, etc. Roast for me
a little corn, cocoa, etc.

_sánsaw_, Dried and sugared edible sea-grass (guláman,
aguláman). Powdered and mixed with water, etc. it makes a refreshing
drink. On account of its lightness in weight it has become a synonym
for: light, easy, without worry or trouble, e.g. sánsaw gid ang ákon
ólo, sánsaw na ang íla hunâhúnà, etc. I am perfectly at ease, they
do not worry any longer, etc.

_sánta_, (Sp. santa) Saint, saintly, holy (fem.). Ang Sánta
Iglésya. Holy Church. Ang Simána Sánta. Holy Week. Sánta
Katalína. St. Catharine. (cf. sánto, sántos).

_sántan, santán_, A plant and its flower.

_sántik_, To press--, knock--, strike--, rub--, against. Isántik ang
íya úlo sa díngding. Strike his head against the wall. Nasantikán ang
káhoy sang íya úlo. He knocked his head against the tree. (cf. búnggò,
súnggò).

_santíkan_, Flint-stone, flint, stone from which fire is kindled by
means of steel and tinder. Santikí ang santíkan sang aséro túbtub nga
magkalayó ang bárok. Strike the flint with the steel till the tinder
catches fire.

_sánting_, Serious, grave, dangerous (of a disease); vehement, fierce,
violent (of a quarrel, fight, war, etc.); to be serious, etc. Sánting
na ang íya pagbátì. His condition is now serious. He is dangerously
ill. Nagsánting ang íla ilináway. Their fight become fierce. They
fought each other savagely. (cf. sugúng, saúlsául, búg-at, sángsang).

_sánto_, (Sp. santo) Saint (male); saintly, holy. (cf. matárung,
baláan).

_sántò_, To agree, be conform to, harmonize; to rhyme (in
poetry). (cf. kasántò, sinántò).

_sántol_, A kind of tree with edible fruit.

_santolón_, A pious or saintly person; also used in contempt:
sanctimonious, hypocrite, goody-goody.

_sántos_, Holy. Ang Sántos. The Sanctus (the beginning of the Canon
of the Mass). Ang Sántos nga Mísa. Holy Mass. Sántos nga táo, sántos
nga babáye, etc. A holy person, a holy woman, etc. Nasantosán akó sa
íya. He seems to me to be a saint. (cf. matárung, baláan).

_sanúng_, To be or become vehement, fierce, serious, grave, run
high. (cf. sagángsang, sugúng, sángsang, sánting).

_sanúng_, To mix with, mingle, enter, go among, make one's appearance
among others, worm one's way into. (cf. samóng, sulúd).

_sányag_, To be visible, open, free, not hidden behind trees or the
like. Nagsányag na ang íya baláy, kay walâ na sing lipúd. His house
is visible now from afar, for the trees, etc., that concealed it are
no longer there. (cf. pántaw).

_sányog_, Determination, resolution, intention, firm resolve,
fixity, fixedness, stability; determined, fixed, appointed, stable,
steady, progressive, thriving; to intend, purpose, resolve, make up
one's mind, be determined, fixed, stable. Sán-o ang sányog mo nga
mapailóngílong? When do you intend to go to Iloilo? What day have
you fixed (appointed) for going to Iloilo? Sanyogá na lang ang ímo
hunâhúnà sa pagtoón, índì ka na magdúmdum sa pagpangúma. Make up your
mind to study and do not think of farming any more. Nagasányog na
ang íla palatikángan. Their business is thriving. (cf. dáyon, túyò,
pát-od, líg-on, pág-on).

_sáog_, To crawl, creep, glide. Ang mán-og nagasáog sa dútà. The
snake glides along the ground. (cf. kámang).

_saóg_, To put to hard use, wear out by use. (cf. saguláy, dagumák,
sarabóg).

_sáog_, To convey, transport logs, timber, etc. by land or
sea. (cf. dalá, gúyud).

_saogán_, A hollow way, channel, creek, narrow passage, a winding or
secret way. (cf. sáog--to creep).

_saoló_, To learn by heart, memorize, commit to memory. Saolohá sing
maáyo ang mga palangadíon. Learn the prayers well by heart. Nakasaoló
ka na sang ímo leksyón? Have you learned your lesson by heart? (cf. sa,
ólo).

_saólog_, To praise, exalt, extol, celebrate, honour, laud, belaud,
panegyrize, eulogize, magnify, glorify, speak highly of; exaltation,
honour, glory, praise, celebration, panegyric, eulogy. Saológa
siá. Exalt (Praise) him. Ginasaólog níla ang íla Sántos nga
Patrón. They are exalting their Patron Saint. Nagtilípon silá sa
pagsaólog sang kaadláwan sang íla piésta. They have come together to
celebrate their feast-day.

_saól-sáol_, Grave, serious, dangerous, critical, but not so
grave as sánting; trying, hard, difficult (of conditions, life,
etc.). (cf. sugúng, malisúd, pigádo, lapígot).

_sá-ot, sáot_, Dance, dancing; to dance. Indì kamó magsáot. Don't
dance. Saóta siá. Dance with her. Ginsa-ótan níla kagáb-i iníng
baláy. Last night they held a dance in this house. (cf. báile).

_sa-otán, saotán_, Dance-hall, place for dancing. (sáot).


_sapâ_, (H) sápà, (B) Brook, brooklet, rivulet, rill, rillet, runnel,
burn, beck, small river, tributary, watercourse, stream. (cf. ílog;
subâ--a (large) river).

_sapâ_, To rely on, take refuge with, trust to the protection
of. Nagasapâ lang siá sa (sang) kinitáan sang íya tiyà. She relies for
her living on the earnings of her aunt. Ginasáp-an lang níya ang íya
nga mánong. He is dependent upon his eldest brother. (cf. saúp id.).

_sápad_, The integuments of entrails, the fat surrounding the
entrails. (cf. sapáy).

_sapák, sápak_, To mind, pay attention to, take notice of, regard,
treat with respect. Walâ níya pagsapaká (pagsapáka) ang maáyo nga
lináygay sang íya mga ginikánan. He paid no attention to--, took no
notice of--, disregarded--, the good counsel of his parents.

_sápak_, Recollection, mind, thinking, regard, consideration for
consequences. Walâ siá sing sápak. He does not mind (does not think of)
what may happen. He is careless about the future. He is unconcerned
about consequences. Naghalín siá sa baláy nga waláy sápak kon diín siá
makádto. He left the house without knowing where to go to. (cf. tápang,
tarápang).

_sápal_, Fermented rice; to cause rice to ferment. Sapála ang
bugás. Ferment the rice.

_sáp-an_, Refuge, asylum, protection. (cf. saúp, sapâ).

_sáp-ang_, A vegetable creeper.

_sapá-sapá_, A kind of large fish; a skate.

_sapâ-sápà_, Dim. of sápà, sapâ,--a brook, brooklet, small watercourse,
rill.

_sápat_, Beast, brute, animal, creature.

_sapatéro_, (Sp. zapatero) Shoe-maker, cobbler.

_sapatílya_, (Sp. zapatilla) Small shoe or boot, slipper, ladies' boot.

_sapatnánon_, Beastly, animal, brute, brutal, brutish,
savage. Sapatnánon nga batásan. Beastly conduct. Sapatnánon nga
kaduyugán. Animal instincts or inclinations. (cf. sapátnon, sinápat,
sápat).

_sapátnon_, See sapatnánon id.

_sapátos_, (Sp. zapato) Shoes, boots, foot-wear. (cf. sapín).

_sapát-sápat, sapát-sapát_, Dim. of sápat. Also: Vermin, insect,
parasite, or the like.

_sapát-sapáton_, Brutish, etc. See sapatnánon.

_sapáw_, Above, over, on top of, on the surface of; to be above,
be on top of, cover the surface of. Naghiláw ang maís nga tinanók,
kay walâ masapawí sang túbì. The boiled corn is raw yet, because the
water did not cover (rise above) it. Kon maghúlum ka sang kárne sa
lánggaw pasapawán mo, agúd índì maanó bisán pilá ka ádlaw. If you put
the meat in vinegar see to it that it be well covered (with vinegar),
so that it may retain its freshness for many days. (cf. sámpaw, hapáw).

_sapáy_, The fatty integument surrounding the entrails of certain
animals, especially those of the pig.

_sapayán_, Relation, reference, regard, connection with, but very
frequently used in the phrase waláy sapayán--notwithstanding,
nevertheless, in spite of, without consideration or regard
for. Malágnat ang íya láwas, ápang waláy sapayán nagapangabúdlay
siá sa umá. He is suffering from a slight cold, but nevertheless
(all the same) he is working on the farm. (cf. pasapayán).

_sápding_, To touch, graze, come in contact with. (cf. sábding,
salapáy).

_sápdon_, From sapúd.

_sápi_, To strike or touch after having bounded off something else,
as a billard ball making a caram shot (cannon) or the like. Ang íya
manohán nasápi sang ákon. His ball (marble, stone, etc.) was struck
my mine at the rebound. My ball cannoned off his.

_sapín_, (Sp. zapin) Shoe, boot. (cf. sapátos, bótas, butítos).

_sapínit_, A kind of thorn, briar.

_sápior, sapiór_, Driver of an automobile or (in England) of a motor
car, chauffeur. (sapyór id.).

_sapí-sápi_, Dim. and Freq. of sápi. Also: helping, assisting; to help,
assist, lend a hand, take a hand in, eke out. Ang maís sapísápi sa
humáy, ang banáyan piánpían. Corn is a valuable addition to rice,
and banáyan also helps to eke out the rice. Ang páray karakapítan,
ang maís tereteniénte, ang banáyan piánpían, ang kamóti sapísápi. (Ang
humáy kolokapítan (kolokapitán), ang maís toloteniénte, ang banáyan
piánpían, ang kamóti sapísápi). Rice is captain (i.e. comes first),
corn is lieutenant (i.e. comes second), the tuber called banáyan comes
third, the sweet potato fourth (as food). (cf. piánpían, bulígbúlig,
tabángtábang, abángábang).

_sapí-sápi_, Kite-flying, kite (with a tail); to fly such a
kite. (cf. pinakâ, sinángula, buladór).

_sapíyo_, (Sp. cepillo) Plane; to plane. Sapiyóhi ang tápì. Plane
the board. (sepíyo id.).

_sápla_, To graze, slice off the surface, shave off, make a superficial
wound with a cutting instrument or the like. Ginsápla níya ang
kalabása sang kótsilyo. He pared off the rind of the squash with
the knife. Nasápla sang binángon ang ákon bútkon. My arm received
a surface wound from the bolo. Saplahá sang sadól ang mga matáas
kag tampokán ang mga libaóng, agúd magsaláma ang dútà. Hoe (dig)
something off the hillocks and fill in the hollows of the ground,
that the land may become level. (cf. hapáw, báklis, gádras).

_sáplid_, A strickle; to strickle, strike--, level--, off (with a
strickle or the like) the surplus from a heaped-up measure; to gain,
profit; to take in, involve, implicate. Nakasáplid siá sing isá ka
gatús ka mángmang. He gained a hundred pesos. (cf. kalís).

_sáplid-balábad_, Striking to and fro, to right and left,
killing two birds with one stroke, fishing in troubled waters;
battledore. (cf. sáplid, balábad).

_sáplud_, To be or become acerb, pungent, sour, sharp; insipid,
unpalatable. (cf. áplod).

_sáplung_, To lop off, etc. See ságpung.

_sápnaw_, To content, satisfy, etc. cf. áyaw. Walâ masapnawí ang
íya ginháwa sang kárne, kay kúlang. He was not satisfied with--, his
hunger was not appeased by--, the meat, for there was too little of it.

_sápnay_, To take into one's arms, put the arms around, hold (a child,
etc.) lying on the hands and forearms placed together in front of
the bearer. (cf. sákbay, sál-ay).

_sápnot_, Roughness opposed to slipperiness; to be rough, sticky,
difficult to haul, pull, drag, swallow, etc. (cf. ápgot; dánlug,
tánlas).

_sapó_, To come upon, light upon, happen upon, find out, detect, notice
by chance, become cognizant or aware of. Nakasapó siá--or--nasápwan
(nasapohán) níya nga----. He found out that----. Sa walâ gid madúgay
nasápwan níla ang maláut níya nga kaduyugán. Before long they became
aware of his evil propensities. (cf. kítà, sáyod, álam).

_sápò_, To come in, rise, increase (of the tide). Nagasápò pa ang
táub. The tide is yet coming in, is on the increase.

_sápò_, To fill a hollow tooth, put some medicine into the hollow
of a tooth, etc. Sapói ang ngípon mo. Put some medicine into your
hollow tooth.

_sápol_, To talk things over, discuss, hold a meeting or session,
try to come to an agreement; to consult, confer with. Sapóla siá
kon anó ang íya lúyag. Talk it over with him to find out what
he likes. Nagsinápol silá kahápon. They had or held a meeting
(session) yesterday. Ginsápol níya si Fuláno. He consulted (conferred
with) N.N. Ginsapólan níla ang pagbúhat sang bág-o nga dálan kag
ginkasugtánan níla nga----. They discussed the making of the new road
and agreed that----. (cf. báis, típon; kasápul, kasapulán).

_sapól_, To know, understand, grasp, comprehend. Walâ akó makasapól
kon anó sádto ang kabangdánan. I could not comprehend what was the
reason of that. (cf. hántup, hangúp, hibaló, sáyod, áto).

_sáp-ong_, To reach the top, come to the highest point, obtain a
high-placed goal. Sap-ongí gid ang alipokpokán sang búkid. Try to reach
the top of the mountain. Nakasáp-ong na siá sa (sang) palangakóan nga
íya ginhándum sang madámò na nga (mga) túig. He has finally obtained
the office to which he has aspired for so many years. (cf. dángat,
abút, águm).

_sap-ongán, sap-óngan_, The top or highest point to be reached;
the landing of a stair, top of a ladder, goal of one's desires, etc.


_sapópo_, To take care of, nurture, nourish, rear, bring up, attend to
all one's wants. Sapopóha siá sing maáyo. Take good care of him. Sang
nawád-an siá sang íya ilóy, ang íya nga tíyà amó ang nagsapópo sa
íya. When she was bereft of her mother, her aunt took care of her
(brought her up). (cf. sagúd, sagúp).

_sapóti_, (Sp. chapotear) To mix or shuffle cards, often with the
intention of cheating. Sapotíha ang baráha. Shuffle the cards.

_sáprat_, Untidy, slovenly, dirty, etc. See damák, rísmò.

_sápsap_, To chip, cut, trim, dress wood, etc. Sapsapí ang halígi
túbtub nga magpayósan. Dress or trim the post to a taper. Taper the
post. (cf. básbas).

_sápsap_, A small fish with flat, circular body shaped like a disc;
it is easy to catch.

_sápsuy_, Chinese broth or sauce taken with shark-fins, etc.

_sápua_, Skim, scum, film; to skim a boiling liquid or the
like. Sapuahá ang bukál sang tiníg-ang. Take the scum off the
boiling rice. Sapuahí ang kalámay. Clear the surface of the (boiling)
sugar. Scum the sugar. (sápwa id.).

_sapúd, sápud_, To fish out, snatch--, pick--, up something that has
fallen into the water, a lost article, etc.; to seize, intercept, catch
(a run-away, or the like). Sápda siá. Seize or catch him. (cf. sagúp,
dakúp).

_sapúra_, To come upon (accidentally), light upon, happen
upon. Nakasapúra akó dirâ sing madámò nga mga lígbus. I found there
many edible mushrooms called lígbus. (cf. sapó).

_sapút_, To arrive, come to, come home. Walâ pa magsapút ang mga
bátà. The children have not come home yet. Nagsalapút na silá. They
have come now. Pasaputá (pasápta) siá. Order him to go home. Give
him shelter. Lodge him in your house. (cf. sámput, abút).

_sapút_, Clothes, garment, apparel; cloth, cover or lining of cloth,
shroud, winding-sheet, pall; to cover or line with cloth, etc. May
sapút na ang lungón. The coffin has now a covering of cloth,--is
covered with a pall. Saputí ang lungón. Cover the outside of the
coffin with cloth. Liálía nga sinapután. A stretcher covered with
cloth. Daliá na ang pagsuób sang ímo mga sapút. Dress yourself
quickly. (cf. panapút, panápton).

_sápwa_, Scum, skim, etc. See sápua.

_sápya_, To beat or strike against, drive or dash against (of waves,
wind, etc.). (cf. dápya, sámpay, dáldal).

_sápyaw_, A seine, large fishing net. (cf. tsintsóro, pókot).

_sápyod, sapyód_, A net, snare (for catching birds, fish, etc.).

_sapyór_, See sapiór, tsóper--chauffeur, driver.

_sápyot_, Weak, exhausted, tired. See hápyot.

_sárà_, The netlike integument that grows at the bottom of a branch
of a coconut palm.

_sárà_, (B) To strain, filter, percolate. See sálà.

_saraán_, (B) A filter, strainer, percolator. See salaán.

_sárab_, (B) To burn, singe, scorch, roast. (cf. sílab, sírab).

_sarabánda_, (Sp. zarabánda) To roam about, go from place to place,
be a loafer or an idler. Anó man ang ginasarabánda mo? Why are you
always roaming about? Igò lang siá sang sarabánda. He is a mere loafer
(an idler). He is doing nothing but walking about idly from place to
place. (cf. tiógtióg, landólándo, lagáwlágaw).

_sarabóg_, (B) To wear out, spoil, ruin, make shabby or useless by
too frequent use. Indì mo pagsarabogón (pagisarabóg) ang madálig kag
bág-o mo nga térno. (Indì mo pagidúgmal (pagisaguláy) ang matahúm
kag bág-o mo nga térno). Don't make your fine new suit (of clothes)
shabby by wearing it always. Don't ruin your beautiful new suit of
clothes by constant use. (cf. dagumák, saguláy, dúgmal).

_sarabusáb_, (B) Frayed, chafed, fretted, ravelled; to ravel
(transitive and intransitive), to be or become frayed, loose, torn
(of clothes, threads, etc.). Nagasarabusáb ang sóol ko (ang ákon
pakô). Nasarabusabán ang ákon sóol (pakô). My sleeve is getting
frayed. My sleeve is ravelled (ravelling out). (cf. tingkarág).


_sárag_, To cull, gather, choose, select, to separate the large ones of
a kind, to pick out the ripe ones, etc. Sarága ang mga páhò. Separate
the large mangoes from the small ones. Ginsárag níya ang mga kalabása
nga dalágkò. He gathered the larger squashes. Sarági iníng hardín sing
mga balátong. Pick the best beans from the garden. (cf. árag, ág-ag).

_saragiwít_, (B) To leave a trace on the ground, as of
spilt water, grains, etc., to form an irregular trail; to be
inharmonious. Nasaragiwitán ang dálan sang maís nga nadágdag sa
sáko. The road had a trail of corn that had fallen (had dribbled)
out of the sack. Nagsaragiwít ang íla pagámba kaína. Their singing
a short while ago was out of tune. (cf. ráwit, rawítráwit).

_sarahán_, A place open to all, free of entrance. Sarahán nga lugár
iní; índì ka mahangáwà (mangáwà). This place is free to all; don't
be afraid.

_sárak_, To upset--, disturb--, interrupt--, a conversation,
or the like, by not holding one's tongue. Indì mo pagsarákan ang
ámon sugilánon. Don't disturb our conversation. Kon kís-a madámò ang
nagasárak kon magtelépono ikáw. Sometimes many voices disturb you, when
you are sending off a telephone message, when you are--phoning,--using
the phone. (cf. túblag).

_saráksákan_, The kingfisher. (salaksákan id.).

_sarák-sárak_, Dim. and Freq. of sárak. Also: To prattle, talk
nonsense, be a great chatterbox. (cf. búrà, lamádà, lásang, hádak).

_saralíkwon_, (B) Dependents, people to be supported or to be taken
care of; engagement, occupation. (cf. salagúron, salagurón; libáng,
awát).

_saramáylo_, Confused, mixed up; awkward, clumsy, dull, stupid.

_saramayón_, (B) Streaked. See salamayón.

_saramíhay_, (B) Slovenly, careless in dress, etc. See damílhay.

_saramílhay_, (B) See saramíhay id.

_saramónggay_, (B) See saramónggo.

_saramónggo_, (B) To be mixed or lie about in disorder. Nagasaramónggo
gid lang ang mga táo sa simbáhan, ang mga galamitón sa sulúd sang sála,
etc. The people in church are distributed unequally (a motley crowd),
the furniture in the reception room is lying about in disorder,
etc. (cf. dúm-ok).

_sarampáda_, (B) To ramble in conversation, talk nonsense, be erratic
or incoherent (of speech). (cf. lamádà, lásang, langgádà).

_saramúylo_, Confused, etc. See saramáylo.

_saramúylo_, (B) See sárnas id.

_sárang, sár-ang_, To put on, etc. See sád-ang.

_saráng_, Ability, capability, power, capacity, means; to be able,
capable, can. Walâ siá sing saráng sa pagbáyad sang íya útang. He
hasn't the means of paying his debt. Makasaráng ka sinâ--or--masarangán
mo inâ? Can you do that? Kon mga saráng, bulígi akó. If at all
possible, help me. Saráng ka na makasulúd sa íya kwárto. Now you may
enter his room. Walâ siá sing ígò nga ikasaráng kag ikasángkol sa amó
nga palangakóan. He hasn't the proper capacity and fitness for such an
office. Sang duhá ka táknà nasarangán pa nínyo ang pagtabók sa subâ,
ápang karón índì na mahímò. Two hours ago you could have crossed the
river, but now it is impossible.

_sarangiság_, (B) To disagree, be at variance, confused, in disorder;
disunited, inharmonious, unsystematic. Nagsarangiság ang panúgid sang
mga sáksi. The witnesses contradicted one another. (cf. salangiság).

_sarángsang_, (B) See salángsang id.

_sarangúlà_, A kind of kite. See sinángula.

_sárap_, (B) See sálap--hempen netting, etc.

_saráptan_, (B) See saláptan--A place to go to, house, etc.

_sarápwon_, (B) Very irascible, etc. See samparahón, pikón, tarádyon.

_sararát_, (B) Unrefined, unpolished, untidy, especially applied to
persons that are not particular at all as to where they urinate or
evacuate the bowels.

_sararók_, (B) Ladle, etc. See salalók. (cf. kalándus, salánduk).


_sarasabádo_, (B) Every Saturday. (cf. solosábado).

_sará-sára_, Roast rice ground. It is usually mixed with cacao,
or the like.

_sarawót_, (B) Usual, customary; to use or employ habitually. Imáw diá
(Amó iní) ang báso nga ákon sarawót (ginasarawót). This is the glass I
always use. I always use this glass. Sarawotá (isarawót) lang diá nga
(iníng) kotsílyo. Always use this knife. (cf. sabúy, sayó, gámit).

_sáray_, To arrange, put in order, regulate. Saráya ang mga síya. Set
the chairs in their proper position (places). Put the chairs in
order. (cf. húsay, kamáda, kaláging).

_sarayó_, (B) A frequent visitor; to have social relations or
intercourse with, etc. See salayó id. (cf. sayó, sinalayó).

_sarayohán_, (B) See salayohán, saláywan, saráywan.

_saráywan_, (B) From sarayó. See salabúyan.

_sárba_, (B) To bear, suffer, tolerate, put up with, abide. Indì
masárba ang batásan siníng bátà. The character (disposition) of this
boy is unbearable. One cannot put up with this boy's ways. (cf. batás,
ántos, íro).

_sardínas_, (Sp. sardina) Sardine. Fish imported in cans. (cf. tóloy).

_sargáte_, (Perhaps from the Sp. zaragatero) Noisy, rowdy; clown,
funny fellow. (cf. payáso).

_sarhénte_, (Sp. sargento) Sergeant.

_sári_, (B) To do customarily, etc. See sáli, sági, ságad.

_sárì_, Class, kind, variety, variation, sort. (cf. bágay, sáhì,
sarîsárì).

_saríbo_, (B) To sprinkle, throw or dash water upon. Isaríbo ang
túbig nga diá (iníng túbì) sa mga bága, hay uríngon (kay ulíngon)
ko. Sprinkle this water on the live coals, for I want some bits
of charcoal (for the smoothing iron, etc.). Saribóha kang túbig
(Saribóhi ti (sing) túbig) ang mga bága. Sprinkle the live coals with
water. (cf. wisík).

_saríg, sárig_, (B) See salíg, sálig--to trust, etc.

_saríg-sárig_, Dim. and Freq. of sárig. Also: to trust that someone
else would do what one should do himself. (cf. hiriláum).

_sarihán_, (B) Habituated, accustomed, usual; to do habitually,
to wont to, be wont to, use to. (cf. sári).

_saríit_, (B) See salíit--very hot, etc.

_sarík_, (B) See salík--to skein, etc.

_sarikán_, (B) See salikán--a winding machine.

_saríksik_, (B) An insect that attacks trees, etc. See salíksik id.

_sariksikón_, (B) Worm-eaten, etc. See saliksikón id.

_saríngsing_, (B) See salíngsing id.

_sarípsip_, (B) To cut, notch, make indentations, prick, sting,
pierce the skin or bark, etc. See salípsip.

_saripsipón_, (B) See salipsipón.

_saríri_, (B) An out-house at the back of a house;
kitchen. (cf. digamohán, kosína). (cf. paláypay, padóros--an out-house
at the side of a house, side-room, lean-to).

_sarîsárì_, Various, divers, assorted, mingled, varied, diverse,
diversified, mixed. Sarîsárì nga mga puní ang ginbutáng níla sa
árko. They put varied decorations on the arch. Manugbalígyà sang
sarîsárì nga mga butáng. A vender of various (different) kinds of
goods. Ginsarîsárì níla ang pagpínta. They painted in variegated
colours. Sarîsaría ang tinóla sa panyága. Make several kinds of
side-dishes for dinner.

_sarísári_, See sarîsárì.

_sarísì_, Torch, flambeau.

_sariwáol_, Difficult, tiresome, irksome, wearisome, toilsome, full
of toil; to become toilsome, etc. Sariwáol ang íla pangabúhì. Their
life is toilsome, difficult. Nagasariwáol ang íya pagpuyô dídto. His
stay there has become wearisome. (cf. siriwáol).

_sárnas_, An expression used like pahídlaw, pahídlì, when remonstrating
with someone or finding fault with him. (cf. bóyboy, pamóyboy,
saramúylo).

_sárò_, (H) See sádò.


_sáro_, (B) See sálo.

_sarób_, (B) To dip one's hands or feet into water, to splash, dash
water or other liquid about (in play). Ang bátà nagasarób kang (sang)
túbig sa tádyaw. Ginasarób kang (sang) bátà ang túbig sa tádyaw. The
child is dipping its hands into the water contained in the jar. Sarobá
ang túbig sa palanggána, sa tádyaw, sa kanál, etc. Splash (Dip your
hands or feet into) the water contained in the wash-basin, in the jar,
in the ditch, etc. (cf. lóog, úbug).

_sarók_, (B) See salók.

_saróksok_, A kind of bird of prey with a long tail.

_saról_, (H) See sadól.

_sarómo_, See salómo.

_sarórong_, (B) See salólong.

_sarórot_, To submerge, go down, sink. Nahúlug siá sa subâ, kag
nagsarórot (sinarórot). He fell into the river and sank. (cf. túgdang,
lúgdang; sálum--to dive).

_saróso_, To run at and bark as a house-dog at passing strangers,
to attack. Ginsaróso akó sang idô. The dog ran towards me and
barked. Pasarosóha ang mga idô sa mga kánding. Let the dogs charge
and bark at the goats. Sarosóha siá. Attack him. Go for him. Fly at
him. (cf. soróso).

_sárot_, (B) Very ugly, nasty, naughty or bad; a forceful expression
bordering on a curse and not infrequently used by grown-ups against
annoying children. Dáw sárot ka, yámat. You're a little imp; drat
you! (cf. kalaímnan, maláw-ay, sutíl; yáwà, líntì, gátud; yámat).

_sarót_, (B) Difficult, trying, miserable, wretched (of times,
conditions, life, etc.). Sarót gid ang pangabúhì sa karón nga
túig. Life this year is very hard or difficult. (cf. huyúthúyut,
salút, buísit, lapígot).

_sarótsot_, Voluble, quick of speech, having a fluent or flippant
tongue; dense, near together (of plants, etc.); to talk flippantly,
be voluble of speech, etc. (cf. garót).

_sársa_, Sauce, etc. See sálsa.

_sarsyádo_, A dish of meat or fish with sauce or gravy, vegetables,
etc.

_sartén_, (Sp. sarten) A frying pan; any kind of metal or enamelled
utensil for the table or for use in the kitchen.

_sárò_, Water-jar. (sádò id.).

_sarukút_, A broad-brimmed hat of wickerwork. See salakót, salokót.

_sarumbálì_, To move about in all directions as restless crowds of
people, ants, etc. (cf. surumbálì id.).

_sarúngkay_, (B) To disperse, scatter, shift, shove or push with one's
feet. Sarungkayá iníng túmpok nga dakáldákal. Scatter this heap of
gravel with your feet.

_sárwal_, Trousers, pantaloons, pants, breeches. (cf. puróy, delárgo,
bahág).

_sásà, sâsâ_, The fibre of the leaf-stalk of the buri-palm. It is
used for making ropes, mats, etc.

_sâsâ_, To beat or crush so as to loosen up the fibres (of leave-stalks
or the like). Sàsaá ang pakláng sang burí. Beat the leaf-stalk of
the burí-palm into fibre. Sàsaí akó sang tángkap siníng pángdan, kay
gamíton ko nga pínsil. Hammer the end of this screw-pine to separate
the fibres, for I am going to use it as a brush. (cf. tâtâ).

_saserdóte_, (Sp. sacerdote) Priest. (cf. párì).

_sástre_, (Sp. sastre) Tailor. (cf. manugtábas).

_satín_, (Sp. saten) Sateen.

_sáto_, Tip-cat, a game played with a bat (palakóg, parakóg) and
a small piece of wood with ends cut to a point (palanák, paranák);
to play that game. Nagasáto (nagasináto) silá. They are playing the
sáto-game. They are playing tip-cat.

_sátsat_, To talk or answer back, retort, remonstrate. (cf. sagátsat,
panagátsat).

_sát-um_, To fathom, guess, perceive, conjecture, surmise, understand,
comprehend, observe and find out. Sat-umá kon anó ang íya nga
ginhámbal. Find out the meaning of what he has said. Nasat-umán níya
sing maáyo ang mga húlag ni Fuláno. He very well understood N.N.'s
movements. Nasat-umán níya nga----. He found out that----. (cf. hangúp,
hántup, hilúm, sayásat, hibaló).


_saúb_, To crawl or creep underneath, take up one's abode under cover
of. Ang mga úlud nagasaúb sa nípà. Small vermin seek shelter under
a nípà-roof. Ginsáb-an (sináb-an, sinaubán) siá sang yáwà. The devil
entered into him. He was possessed by the devil.

_sáug, saúg_, See sáog--to crawl; saóg--to wear out.

_sáug_, To go down, descend. See panáug, náug. (cf. usáog).

_sáuì, sauî_, Bad luck, etc. See sáwì, sawî.

_saúlug_, To extol, etc. See saólog.

_saúp_, To take refuge, go to for protection, shelter, board and
lodging, etc. Ang bátà nga ílo nagsaúp sa íya nga tíyà. The orphan
child sought shelter with her aunt. Walâ siá sing sáp-an (saupán). He
has nowhere to go for shelter or protection. Ginsáp-an níya ang íya
panínoy. He took refuge with his godfather. (cf. áyop, ayóp, dangúp).

_sáut, sá-ut_, To dance. See sá-ot.

_saután, sa-után_, Dancing hall. See saotán.

_sáuy, sá-uy_, To walk straight through (water, mire, slush), take
a short cut, wade through water or mud, take the bee-line. Magsáuy
lang kamó sa talámnan. Saúyon lang nínyo ang talámnan. Walk straight
through the rice-field. Saúya lang ang pagtabók sa subâ. Walk (wade)
straight through the river. (cf. láktud, latás, óbog).

_sáw-a_, To be or become disgusting, loathsome, cause a dislike,
aversion or antipathy, be improper or unbecoming, especially applied to
things exposed that should be covered or hidden from view. Nasaw-ahán
akó sa íya. I have taken a dislike (an antipathy) to him. Magapasáw-a
(mapasáw-a) sa táo ang pagílis mo sa nabúksan nga bintánà. It will
be improper (It will look bad), if you change your clothes with
open windows. Ginasaw-ahán siá sa pakigsímpon sa amó nga katipúnan,
kay básì nabalahúbà na ang maláut níya nga binúhat. He was ashamed
(He did not like) to join that party, for (as he thought) his wicked
deed may have become known already. Nagkasáw-a (nasáw-a) siá sinâ. He
dislikes that. He considers it improper or unbecoming. (cf. láw-ay,
kasáw-a, masáw-a).

_sawá_, (B) Snake. (cf. mán-og).

_sáwa_, Wife, etc. See asáwa.

_sawâ-sawâ_, To hover between life and death, be on the point of
dying. Ginasawâsawaán na si Fuláno. N.N. is at present hovering
between life and death. (cf. tagumatáyon).

_sawáy_, To blame, scold, reprimand, chide, reproach, correct,
admonish. Sawayá ang maláin níya nga batásan. Reprimand him for his bad
conduct. Ginsawáy níya akó sang (sa) isá ka butáng nga walâ ko mabúhat
(pagbuháta). He reproached me for a thing I had not done. Magsawáy
ka sa íla kon may masawayán ikáw. Admonish them, if you think they
need correction. (cf. bádlong, básol, túdlò, etc.).

_sawáy_, Brass, bronze.

_sawáyang_, A kind of portable fish-trap worked by from three to five
men. (cf. suáyang).

_sáwhung_, Stench; to stink, emit a strong smell. (cf. báhò, bahô).

_sawî_, To be or become unlucky, unfortunate, bad, wretched. Nagkasawî
ang íya pagpuyô dídto. It was unfortunate for him to live there. Bisán
kon magkasawî pa----. Even if it should be worse----.

_sáwì_, Bad, unlucky, unfortunate, cruel, merciless. Sáwì nga
kagawián. Bad habits. Sáwì nga kahimtángan. An unfortunate
position. Sáwì nga kapaláran. Cruel fate. (cf. maláin, buísit,
mapíntas, sarót, salút).

_sáwid, sáw-id_, Snare, trap; danger; to ensnare, entrap, entangle;
to endanger. (cf. siód, síd-an; katalágman).

_sáwsaw_, To go or step into water, mud, etc.; to dip or soak
in. Nakasáwsaw akó sa lúnang (lalaó). I stepped into the mud. Indì
ka magsáwsaw sang ímo kamót sa túbig. Don't dip your hand into
the water. Isáwsaw mo ang tinápay sa sabáw. Dip the bread into the
sauce. Ginsawsawán níla ang bíno sing mamón. They soaked some cakes
in wine. (cf. sagáwsaw).

_sáya_, (Sp. saya) A gown, robe, skirt with a train, skirt as worn
with the so-called mestiza-dress.

_sayahón_, Cloth for skirts. (cf. salayahón).


_sayál_, (Sp. sayal) A skirt without a train.

_sayáng-sayáng_, To walk about ostentatiously, etc. See pasayángsayáng.

_sayásat_, To comprehend, understand, know, grasp. Walâ siá makasayásat
sang ginsilíng ko sa íya. He could not understand what I said to
him. (cf. sáyod, sát-um, hibaló, etc.),

_sayási_, To comprehend, understand, know. Ang dílì ko masayási
amó----. What I cannot understand is----. (cf. sayásat).

_sáyaw_, An action-dance; to dance a war-dance or the like with many
gesticulations and throwing out of the arms and legs.

_sáyhò_, A hippocentaur, centaur, a fabulous monster, half man and
half horse. (cf. táyhò).

_sáykwa_, A vegetable plant that resembles the patóla.

_sáylo_, To go over to, change place, pass over or shift to another
site, opinion, condition of life, etc. Nagsáylo siá sa pihák. He
went over to the other side. Sáylo (magsáylo) ka sa síya nga sa
likód mo. Change over to the chair behind you. Saylohá ang kodál
sa pihák. Shift the fence to the other side. Nagsáylo siá sa mga
makiangáyon. He went over to the democratic party. (cf. háylo, báylo).

_sáy-o_, To go to or visit a place (by chance, unexpectedly, for
the first time); to flit through, pass, enter, waft, be wafted (of
a thought, wind, or the like). Natingála akó nga nakasáy-o ka dirí
sa ámon. I am surprised to see you here. I am astonished that you
have come to pay us this (first) visit. Isíkway mo sa gilayón ang
panumdúman sa mga buyúng kon magsáy-o sa ímo hunâhúnà, kay nagapahádluk
sa ímo. Forget (Dismiss from your mind the thought of) the robbers,
because you are frightened when you think (are reminded) of them. Kon
maghuyúp sing mabáskug ang hángin nagasáy-o dirí ang kahumút sang
mga búlak gíkan sinâ nga pamulákan. When the wind blows strongly,
the fragrance of the flowers is wafted over here from that garden.

_sayó_, To frequent, move about, live, have social relations
(intercourse) with, etc. See salayó, sinalayó.

_sayód_, Aware of, acquainted with, informed, familiar with. Sayód
gid kitá nga tanán nga----. All of us know perfectly well that----. We
are all familiar with the fact of----. (cf. sáyod).

_sáyod_, To know, be conversant with, be acquainted with, have
knowledge of, be aware of. Makasáyod ka sang kadulúnan sang umá ni
Fuláno? Do you know the boundaries of N.N.'s farm? Nakasáyod akó
sinâ--or--nasayóran (nasáyran) ko inâ sing maáyo. I know that well,
I am well acquainted with the facts in the case. Makasáyod ikáw sang
kahulúgan sang púlong nga "palítog"?--Húo, nakasáyod akó sinâ, kay ang
"palítog" kon sayóron amó ang pagkúhà ukón pagkáwat sang íya sang ibán,
súbung ábi sang "ginpalítog níya ang pílak sang bánwa". Do you know
the meaning of the term "palítog"?--Yes, for palítog, when explained,
means to appropriate or steal what belongs to another, for instance
"he stole or embezzled public money". Makisáyod akó kuntánì sa ímo
sang kasaysáyan sang----. I should like to ask you the explanation
of----. (cf. hibaló, hangúp, sát-um, áto, etc.).

_sáyon_, To be or become easy, facile. (cf. hapús, hulás).

_sayón_, To continue, progress, go on, last, endure. (cf. dayón,
sányog).

_sáy-ong_, Stud, boss, inlay, plating. Ang íya bastón may sáy-ong nga
buláwan. His walking stick is inlaid with gold. (cf. halúp, támpok).

_sáy-ong_, Cord, string, fetter, shackle, band; to bind, tie,
fasten. (cf. higót, gapús, gápus).

_sáysay_, To explain, show, make clear, define, interpret, expound,
comment upon, describe, teach the meaning or importance of. Isáysay
mo inâ sa ákon. Explain that to me. Saysayí akó sang kahulúgan sináng
pagbulút-an. Make clear to me the meaning of that law. Dî masáysay
ang katahumán sang lángit. The beauty of heaven cannot be expressed,
is beyond description. (cf. túdlò, ásoy, panáysay).

_sayúp_, Fault, error, fallacy, slip, miss, blunder, oversight,
trip, stumble, misconception, misapprehension, misunderstanding,
mistake; to commit a fault, to err, make a mistake, be mistaken,
be in the wrong, be in error, to do wrong. Walâ siá sing sayúp. He
is not at fault. It is not his fault. He is not to blame. Nakasayúp
ka karón, índì ka magliwán. You made a mistake this time; don't do it
again. Nasáypan (nasayupán) níya ang pagmítlang sang ininglés. He made
a mistake in English pronunciation. Pasaylohá lang kon anó ang ákon
nga nasáypan. Pardon whatever mistakes I may have made,--all the faults
I have committed. (cf. salâ, tálang, pakasalâ, masinaláypon, kasáypan).

_sebúyas_, (Sp. cebolla) Onion. (cf. báwang, bombáy).

_séda_, (Sp. seda) Silk. (cf. sóklà).

_sedalína_, (Sp. seda) A kind of cloth made of silk mixed with cotton;
silk thread.

_segída_, (Sp. seguida) Succession; continuation. En segída--at once,
fortwith, immediately, without delay. (cf. dáyon, gilayón, lági).

_segúndo_, (Sp. segundo) A second (of time).

_segúndo,--a_, (Sp. segundo,--a) Second. Segúnda máno. Second
hand. (cf. ikaduhá).

_seguridád_, (Sp. seguridad) Security, certainty; surety, bail,
bond. (cf. kaligonán; pangalíg-on).

_segúro_, (Sp. seguro) Sure, surely, certain; secure; in a weakened
sense: probable, likely; to secure, make sure of. Seguróha nga dáan
ang íya báboy, kay kon dílì básì báklon sang ibán. (Seguróha lági ang
báboy na, hay kon índì báklon kang ibá). Make sure at once of his
pig, for otherwise someone else may buy it. (cf. líg-on, malíg-on,
pág-on, mapág-on).

_séis_, (Sp. seis) Six. Sa las séis. At six o'clock. (cf. ánum,
sa ikán-um ka táknà).

_seisiéntos_, (Sp. seiscientos) Six hundred. (cf. ánum ka gatús).

_seisílyos_, (Sp. seisillo) Sextolet; a kind of game at cards.

_sekánte_, (Sp. secante) Blotting paper, blot-sheet, exsiccative.

_sekretáryo_, (Sp. Secretario) Secretary, actuary, amanuensis,
scribe. (cf. tiglikúm).

_sekréto_, (Sp. secreto) Secret; to do or speak secretly. Isekréto
mo lang sa íya inâ--or--sekretóhi siá sinâ. Tell him that in
secret. (cf. tágò, tinágò).

_sékta_, (Sp. secta) Sect, branch; the teaching of a
sect. (cf. búnghay).

_sekulár_, (Sp. secular) Secular, not belonging to a religious
order. Ang kléro sekulár. The secular clergy.

_seladór, seladóra_, (Sp. celador, celadora) Zealator, monitor,
monitress.

_selebrár_, (Sp. celebrar) To celebrate. Selebrahá gid ang kaadláwan
ni tátay. Celebrate father's birthday without fail. Ang pándut dídto
naselebrár sa dakô nga kasádya. The feast there was celebrated with
great solemnity (pomp). (cf. pahimánsag, híwat).

_selebrasyón_, (Sp. celebración) Celebration.

_semána_, (Sp. semana) Week. (cf. simána, pituádlaw).

_semanahán_, A weekly paper, weekly. (semána).

_seménto_, (Sp. cemento) Cement.

_seméstre_, (Sp. semestre) Semester, six months, half a year.

_seminarísta_, (Sp. seminarista) Seminarist; student in a seminary.

_semináryo_, (Sp. seminario) Seminary, school, college, especially
one for the education of candidates for the priesthood.

_séna_, (Sp. cena) Supper. (cf. panihápon).

_senísa_, (Sp. ceniza) Ash. Miércoles de Senísa. Ash-Wednesday. Also:
remnants, remains, residue, especially said of fruit left after what
is good has been taken. (cf. abó; bilín, diringóyngoy).

_sensílyo_, (Sp. sencillo) Simple, plain; small change, coins;
to change money, give change. May sensílyo ikáw? Have you (got)
change? Have you any small change? Sensilyohí akó siníng napúlò ka
mángmang nga papél. Give me coin for this ten-peso note. Would you
please give me change for this ten-peso note?

_senténsya_, (Sp. sentencia) Sentence; to sentence. Nasentensyahán
siá sing duhá ka búlan sa bilanggóan. He was sentenced to two months
imprisonment. (cf. památbat).

_sentigrádo_, (Sp. centigrado) Centigrade.


_séntimo, sentimó_, (Sp. céntimo) Centavo, half a cent American
money. (cf. dakô).

_sentimyénto_, (Sp. sentimiento) Sentiment, feeling;
resentment. (cf. balatyágon; aligótgot, kaákig).

_sentinéla_, (Sp. centinela) Sentinel, sentry, watch,
guard. (cf. manugbántay, bántay).

_sentripugádo_, (Sp. centrifugado) Centrifugal; refined in a rotary
pan. Kalámay nga sentripugádo. Refined sugar.

_séntro_, (Sp. centro) Center, centre, middle, midst; center-piece
(ornament) for the centre of a table, etc. (cf. tungâ).

_senyál_, (Sp. señal) Sign, mark, signal, token, reminder, book-mark,
identification-mark. (cf. tándà, timáan).

_sényas_, (Sp. seña) Token, password, watchword, nod, sign,
signal, dumb motion (show), hints given by secret signs or by
gesticulation. (cf. sínyas id.).

_senyór_, (Sp. señor) Mister, Mr., Sir, master,
gentleman. (cf. ginó-o). Ang Senyór Obíspo. The Lord Bishop. His
Lordship.

_senyóra_, (Sp. señora) Mistress, Mrs., lady, gentlewoman, madame,
dame. (cf. gínang).

_senyoríta_, (Sp. señorita) Miss, young lady. (cf. gíning).

_senyoríto_, (Sp. señorito) Master, young gentleman. (cf. soltéro,
olitáo).

_sepé_, (H) An expression used to drive away a cat. (cf. sikâ).

_sepíyo_, See sapíyo--plane.

_septiémbre_, (Sp. septiembre) September. (cf. kangarólsol).

_séptimo_, (Séptimo) Seventh. (cf. ikapitó).

_sepultúra_, (Sp. sepultura) Sepulture, interment, funeral,
burial, entombment; grave, tomb. Permíso de sepultúra. Burial
Permit. (cf. lubúng).

_séra_, (Sp. cera) Wax. Séra sang putyókan--bee's wax.

_será_, (Sp. cerrar) To close, shut, lock, fasten; a lock; shutter,
a wing of a door or window, the lid of a box, etc. Serahí ang
ganháan. Lock or shut the door. Iserá ang será sang bintánà. Close
the window-shutter. Naserahán ang íla pátyo. Their cemetery has been
closed. (cf. dápat, háum, takúd, takúp).

_serádo_, (Sp. cerrado) Closed, locked, fastened; reserved, secreted;
shut-up, condemned; firm, stable, determined.

_seradór_, (Sp. serrador) A sawer, sawyer, especially a sawyer by
profession. (cf. manuglagarî, lagárì).

_seradór, seradóra_, See seladór, seladóra--zelator, etc.

_seradúra_, (Sp. cerradura) Lock; closure. (cf. takúd, pamakúd).

_serbísyo_, (Sp. servicio) Service. (cf. alagarán, palamúgnan).

_serbísyo públiko_, (Sp. servicio público) Public service. Public
Utility.

_serdî-sérdì_, To refuse apparently, pretend to be averse to accepting
something offered, etc. See birgîbírgì, indíîndì, kudískúdis.

_seremónyas_, (Sp. ceremonia) Ceremony, liturgy. (cf. buluhatón).

_serenáta_, (Sp. serenata) Serenade. (cf. harána).

_sermón_, (Sp. sermón) Sermon, homily; admonition,
reprimand. (cf. láygay, wáli).

_sertipíko_, (Sp. certifico) Certificate, testimonial, certified copy
of a record.

_sesyón_, (Sp. sesión) Session, meeting, sitting. (cf. sápul, sinápul,
tinipóntípon, etc.).

_setseríka_, A kind of plant.

_si_, The personal article. Si Huán. John. Si Huán kag si Pédro. John
and Peter. Si Fuláno. So-and-so. Si Kwán. What's-his-name. Si pánday
Pédro. Peter, the carpenter. (cf. tay).

_siá_, (H) He, she, it. Siá amó ang nagbúhat sinâ. He (she, it) did
that. Siá----siá----. Be it----or----. Whether----or----. Siá táo,
siá sápat----. Be it man or beast. Siá ísdà, siá píspis. Whether fish
or bird.

_síad_, To tear asunder, split (bamboo, etc.). Siáda (-ára) ang
kawáyan. Split the bamboo. (cf. lías, bíal).


_siagít_, To yell, squeak, squeal, shriek, scream, screech, to shrill,
cry out in a shrill voice. Nagsiagít ang píspis sang pagdakúp ko
sa íya. When I caught the bird it screeched. (cf. tiyábaw, iyágak,
tiyángak).

_siáhà_, The dry leaves of sugar cane. (cf. kansiáhà).

_síak_, To split, cleave. See bíak, bíal.

_siák_, Split, cloven. See biák, biál.

_síal_, To split, etc. See síak, bíal, bíak, bís-ak.

_siál_, Split. See siák, biál, biák.

_siál-síal_, Dim. and Freq. of síal, siál. Also: A quarrel, fight,
difference, scuffle; to quarrel, fall out, be at variance with, have
different views or opinions, or the like. (cf. súay, sipák, híbag).

_siám_, Nine. Tagsiám. Nine each. Makasiám. Nine times.

_siamán_, Of nine (days, or the like), lasting nine (days, etc.);
a novena. (cf. nobéna).

_siántong_, A kind of bolo, but straight and longer than the ordinary
binángon and having the point slightly curved. (cf. sandúkò).

_siápò_, Bagasse, sugar cane stalks that have passed through the mill,
crushed sugar cane.

_siásat_, To understand, comprehend, know. See sayásat, sayási.

_siási_, To ponder well, think over, deliberate; to know,
understand. Nagsayúp siá, kay walâ siá makasiási. He made a mistake,
because he did not think things over well beforehand. (cf. painóíno,
libólíbo, pamalándong, basóbáso, asíási, entiénde, sáyod, hunâhúnà;
sayási, sayásat, siásat).

_siáy_, A kind of trap for catching wild chickens, etc.; to catch
with such a trap.

_síbà_, To devour, gulp down, swallow, engorge, said especially
of serpents. Ginsíbà sang mán-og ang pisô. The snake devoured the
chicken. Ang maninínà nagsíbà sang pángkà. The maninínà-serpent
swallowed the frog. (cf. lámon, lumóy, tukúb).

_sibád_, To gulp down, devour. See síbà. Ginabantayán lang níya dirâ
ang íya saráng masibád. He is there on the look-out for someone whom
he may devour, i.e. take in, cheat, fleece or the like.

_sibád-síbad_, Dim. and Freq. of sibád. (cf. sibâsíbà).

_síbag_, To fall out, quarrel, have a difference with, to
disagree. Nagasíbag silá nahanungúd siníng bág-o nga pagbulút-an. They
had a difference of opinion with regard to this new law. (cf. híbag,
bagâ, banggiánay, áway, súay, baísbáis).

_sibág-síbag_, Dim. and Freq. of síbag.

_sibarót_, To stand on end (of hair). (cf. tinggarô, sibulô).

_sibâ-síbà_, Dim. and Freq. of síbà.

_sibát_, A spear, a kind of barbed lance. Palayógi siá sang
sibát. Throw the spear at him. Sibatá ang talunón. Throw a spear at
the wild boar. Spear the wild boar.

_sibátse_, (Sp. azabache) Jet, jet-black; beads, trinkets, etc. of
a jet-black colour.

_sibáw_, To inspect or visit traps or the like to see, if something
has been caught. Nagasibáw siá dídto sang íya siód. He is inspecting
his trap there. Sibawá ang siód nga ginbutáng ko dídto kahápon. Go
and look at the trap I put there yesterday.

_sibáy_, A perambulator, wheel-chair; a baby's chair with a railing
to keep the baby from falling.

_síbid_, The temple (of the head); top of the forehead, brow.

_síbid_, A cow-lick, a whorl of hair on the flank of a horse near
the hip-joint.

_síbid_, Wake, streak of water left in the track of a ship; to fish
with a hook in the wake of a ship.

_síbin_, A small and rather rough cloth used for rubbing and cleaning
the skin; towel; to rub with a towel. Sibíni siá. Rub him with a
towel. Isíbin sa íya iníng pányo. Rub him with this cloth.

_sibít_, Pin; to pin, use a pin; vaccinate. Síbta ang úngon
ko. Draw out my splinter or thorn with a pin. Ginsíbtan níya ang
íya báyò. She fastened her dress with pins. Síbti lang ang delárgo
mo nba nagísì. Just pin together the tear in your trousers. Ginsibít
níya ang tunúk (dúgi) sa ákon kamót. He took the thorn out of my hand
with a pin. (cf. turúbok, kiríkol, alpilír, espelér).

_síbo, síbò_, (Sp. sebo) Tallow, fat, suet, axle-grease.

_síbò_, Fit, suited, correct, exact; to fit, suit, go--, accord--,
match--, with. Síbò gid ang íya (panabát) sabát. His answer was
quite correct. Síbò gid ang ímo báyò sa ímo delárgo. Your jacket goes
well with your trousers. Iníng lánsang índì makasíbò; dálhi akó sing
dakô. This nail won't do; bring me a large one. Pasibóa ang bató sa
búhò sang padér. Fit the stone into the hole in the wall. (cf. ígò,
ángay).

_síbo_, (Sp. cebo) Fodder fed to animals, in order to fatten
them. (cf. patámbok, inogpatámbok).

_síbod_, Complicated, perplexed, involved; to become involved,
etc. Dílì maáthag, kóndì (síbod) masíbod gid ang íya pagsáysay. His
explanation is not clear, on the contrary it is obscure. Nasibóran
(-ódan) akó sang íya nga hámbal. His speech was too involved
(discursive, rambling) for me.

_síb-ot_, Grudge, resentment, indignation, exasperation, angry feeling,
vexation; to have a grudge, etc. Nagasíb-ot ang ákon buút sa íya. I
have a grudge against him, I am vexed with him. (cf. aligótgot).

_sibúg_, To stop quickly or suddenly (of any vehicle); to brake,
stop by means of a brake. (cf. padúlug, dúlug).

_síbud_, See síbod.

_sibúkaw_, The sibucao-tree and its wood, much used for fuel, sleepers,
bolts and pegs, etc.; it also yields a much esteemed red dye. Also
called sapan wood, sapon wood, brazil wood.

_sibulô_, To stand on end (of hair); to be horrified. (cf. tinggarô,
sibarót, paníndog, hanguyús).

_sibút-sibút_, Annoyed, angry, cross, exasperated; to get annoyed,
be angry, etc. (cf. ákig, pasibútsibút).

_síbwa_, To blow, said of wind, etc. Nagasíbwa karón ang amíhan. At
present the north-wind (northwind) is blowing. Ginasibwahán kitá
dirí sang habágat. Here the south-wind (southwind) is fanning
us. (cf. húyup, huyúp).

_síbwal_, To flare or shoot up high (of fire). See íbwal.

_sída_, (Sp. seda) Silk. (cf. sóklà).

_síd-an_, From síod. Also: trap, snare, stratagem, artifice (to catch
or deceive another).

_síday_, Poetry. (cf. baláybay, binaláybay).

_síd-ing_, To shade the eyes with one's hand and look intently at
somebody, as often done by short-sighted people. Sidingá siá. Look
at him narrowly. Sín-o ang ginasíd-ing mo? Whom are you looking at
so intently?

_sídla_, Bravery, courage, intrepidity; to be brave,
courageous. (cf. ísug, sígla, pág-on, bákud).

_sídlak_, Splendour, brilliance, brightness; to shine brightly, be
bright, to dazzle. Nagasídlak ang ádlaw. The sun is shining (shines)
brightly. Tákdi ang persiána, kay ginasidlakán (ginasilákan) akó
dirí sang ádlaw. Close the blinds, for the sun is shining in upon me
here. (cf. sílak, sílaw, sílì).

_sídlang_, To shine, etc. See sídlak.

_sídlang_, To rise (of the sun, etc.). (cf. bútlak, subáng, murá).

_sidlangán_, The East, sunrise, orient. (cf. mulúd-an, bulutlákan).

_sídlaw_, Dazzling brightness; to be dazzling, bright, shine with a
dazzling light or with a brightness that dazzles the eyes. (cf. sílaw,
sídlak, sílak).

_sídngan_, From sílung--to cause an aversion, etc.

_síd-o_, Hiccough, hiccup; to hiccough, hiccup. (cf. síkdò, sidô).

_sidô_, See síd-o--hiccough, etc.

_sídong_, (B) See sílong. Pasídong--pasílong. Pasidónga ang
karabáw. Put the buffalo in a sheltered place.

_sídsid_, Hem, fringe, edge, brim, rim, border. (cf. binít, hamitán).

_siélo_, (Sp. cielo) Heaven, sky, firmament, welkin
(poetical). (cf. lángit, kalangítan).


_siémpre_, (Sp. siempre) Always, at all times, ever, forever, still,
perpetually, everlastingly. (cf. gihápon, dáyon, pírme, daláyon).

_siemprebíba_, (Sp. siempreviva) A kind of plant, immortelle, the
Everlasting flower.

_siénto_, (Sp. ciento) Hundred, century. (cf. gatús).

_siésta_, (Sp. siesta) Afternoon nap, after-dinner nap, siesta.

_siéte_, (Sp. siete) Seven. (cf. pitô).

_sieté-sieté_, Irascible, irritable. (cf. pikón, kutóskutós, pitópitó).

_síga_, Light, brightness; to shine, give light. Nagasíga ang sugâ. The
lamp gives light. The lamp shines brightly. Nasigáhan kamí sang úgsad
nga búlan. The full moon gave us light (shone upon us, shed its light
upon us).

_sigábung, sigabúng_, Thud, thump, dump; to thud, thump, dump, land
with a thud or thump (of falling objects). Nagsigábung ang bató sa
pagtupâ sa busáy. The stone landed at the bottom of the precipice
with a loud thump or crash.

_sigahúm_, To desire, hanker after, aspire to, strive or long
for, wish to obtain (a position, an office, etc.). Nagasigahúm
siá sang pagkapangúlo-puód. He aspires to the office of Provincial
Governor. Sigahumón mo gid ang ímo ginahándum túbtub nga makadángat
ka sinâ. Strive to obtain what you want till you get it. (cf. hánggab,
hingamó, himúlat, paningúhà, panikasúg).

_sigahúm_, To think, guess, imagine, opine. (cf. bánà, bántà,
hunâhúnà, máy-om).

_síg-ang_, To be placed or distributed like the legs of a tripod. Iníng
tátlo ka baláy nagasíg-ang. These three houses form a triangle.

_sig-angán_, A tripod, trivet. (cf. kalán).

_sig-angón_, Fit for, or pertaining to, a tripod. Bató nga
sig-angón. One of the three stones of a stone tripod as used on open
hearths (for supporting a pot, etc.).

_sig-anó_, How much of? How much in comparison to? Better or
worse? Larger or smaller? How? Sig-anó sang ákon ang ímo pinatubás? How
was your harvest in comparison to mine?

_sigarílyas, sigarílyo_, A decorative plant whose leaves are as narrow
as cigarets.

_sigarílyo_, (Sp. cigarillo) Cigarette, cigaret.

_sigáy_, (H) A kind of small sea-shell frequently used by children as
a play thing; to play with sigáy-shells; to handle roughly, kick, etc,
(as sigáy-shells are handled in play). (cf. búskay).

_sígbin_, A ghost, evil spirit, supposed to kidnap little children.

_síge_, (Sp. seguir) To continue, go on, go ahead. Sigéha lang ang
ímo pagsulát. Go on writing. Continue your writing. (cf. dáyon).

_síghud_, To introduce oneself into, come to, enter, present oneself,
find an entrance. (cf. sulúd, abút).

_sígib_, See sígput. Sigíba--sigputá. (cf. ságib).

_síg-id_, A vine much used for binding purposes. (cf. hípgid).

_sígla_, To be brave. See sídla id.

_síglo_, (Sp. siglo) Century, age, long period of time.

_sígmit_, Eyetooth, canine tooth, fang.

_sígmok_, Contemptible, despicable, without honour; to be contemptible,
despicable. (cf. talamáyon).

_sígne_, To shudder, get a fright, be shocked, frightened, afraid,
terrified, stunned, fascinated. Ginasignehán akó siníng mahígkò nga
sápat. This dirty beast makes me shudder. (cf. bígne).

_sígo_, Fit, suited, well adapted; to fit well or exactly. (cf. síbò,
ígò, dápat, ángay).

_sígpaw_, A small fishing net (worked by one man); panígpaw--to fish
with the sígpaw-net.

_sígpit_, Hair-pin, a bifurcated pin, such as women secure their hair
with. (cf. orkílya id.).

_sígput_, To finish, make an end of, complete, take up all small
particles or leavings. Sigputá ang kán-on sa pínggan. Finish the rice
on the plate. Eat up all the rice on the plate. Ginsígput níla ang
salín (sálà) nga humáy sa talámnan. They collected all the rice left
in the field.

_sigumár_, A pick-pocket, thief. (cf. swítik).

_sígwil_, A kind of fish with a sharp-pointed head; any fish with a
pointed head that somewhat resembles the sígwil.

_síhà_, (B) See sáhì.

_sihág_, See sinág--to be transparent, etc.

_sihág_, To separate, go astray, stray, straggle, divide. (cf. sipák
id.).

_siháy_, Different, not the same, not like, unlike, dissimilar. Siháy
kaáyo inâ. That is altogether different. (cf. túhay).

_síhay_, To deviate, differ from, take a different turn or
road. (cf. sipák, simáng, híbag).

_sihílo_, (Sp. sigilo) Seal, sigillum.

_sihít_, Requiring much patience and application, complicated,
perplexing, involved, said of a task like mending a torn and entangled
net, collecting the larger rice-grains from a heap of rice and the
like. Sihít (masíhit) nga trabáho. A difficult or complicated task.

_síhit_, To require much toil or patience. (cf. sihít).

_síhod_, A small fishing net (carried and worked by one man).

_siít_, Thorn, prick, prickle, especially the prickles of a
bamboo-branch.

_sikâ_, (B) An expression used to scare or drive off a cat. Sikaá ang
(kutî) kuríng. Scare the cat away by shouting "sikâ". Shoo the cat
away. (cf. sepé).

_síkad_, To plant one's foot against something for support, take a
firm stand as when pulling a rope or the like. Síkad ka sing maáyo sa
pagbútong sang kalát. Take a firm stand for pulling the rope. Sikádi
(--ári) ang tuód, bató, etc. Plant your foot firmly against the
tree-stump, the stone, etc. Isíkad ang tiíl mo sa padér. Put your foot
(firmly) against the wall.

_sikád-síkad_, Dim. and Freq. of síkad.

_síkag_, A small fish-bone. (cf. bokóg).

_sikágon_, Having many small bones, full of small bones (of
fish). Iníng ísdà sikágon kaáyo. This fish has many small
bones. (cf. bokogón).

_sikának_, A fish-pond. (cf. púnong).

_sikángkang_, To straddle, to put or spread the legs
asunder. (cf. bikâ, balakáng, barakáng).

_sikápat_, An old coin worth about twelve and a half
centavos. (cf. reál).

_sikâ-sikâ_, Dim. and Freq. of sikâ--to scare away a cat, etc. Also:
to despise, treat with contempt, turn away from in disgust,
etc. Ginasikâsikâ gid lámang ang mga ímol sang madámò nga mga
manggaránon. Many rich people turn away in disgust from the poor or
treat the poor with contempt. (cf. ihígihíg, ahígahíg, síkway, támay).

_sikawaló_, (B) See sikwalô, sikwálo id.

_síkdò_, (H) To hiccup, hiccough. (cf. síd-o id.).

_síkdol_, To elbow, nudge, push with the elbow, jog with one's
elbow. Sikdolá siá. Push him aside with your elbow. (cf. sikó,
sikól id.).

_sikí_, The heel, trotter, paw, lower part of the leg (of a dog,
pig, etc.; cf. buúl, tikód, kahíg, tiíl). In some places also: foot
(of man).

_síklat_, A fence or partition made of split bamboo woven vertically;
to make such a fence or partition. Siklatí ang idálum sang baláy
mo. Put a siclat-wall round the underneath of your house. Indì nínyo
pagisíklat iníng kawáyan sa kodál, kay iatóp ko sa saríri. Don't use
this bamboo for making a siclat-fence, because I am going to roof the
kitchen with it. (cf. dagándan--a fence or partition of split bamboo
woven horizontally).

_síkma_, (H) To blow the nose with the aid of the finger and thumb or
with a handkerchief. Isíkma ang síp-on mo. Blow your nose. (cf. sungá).

_síkmat_, A stitch or pain in the back, rheumatism of the back; to
cause pain in the back. Ginasíkmat akó karón. I have a pain in my
back. Siníkmat siá kaína. A while ago he had a pain in his back.

_síko_, The elbow, sleeve; yard. (cf. pakô, bára, báda).

_sikó_, To elbow, push with the elbow, jog with the elbow,
nudge. Sikohá siá. Elbow him. (cf. sikól).

_síkob_, To elbow, etc. See sikól, síngkub, síkdol, sikó.

_sikóktot_, To bend the back as under a heavy weight, lean forward,
stoop. Nagasikóktot ang karabáw kon mabúg-at ang lúlan nga íya
ginagúyud. The buffalo bends its back, if the load it pulls is
heavy. (cf. síktot, balikótot, barikótot, sikutút).

_sikól_, To elbow, etc. See síkdol.

_sikól_, To carry on the back by means of a stick or pole brought over
the shoulder. Sikolí ang bakág; pangítà ka sing isikól mo. Carry the
basket on your back; look for a stick to carry it with.

_sikót, sikót-síkot_, To arrange, regulate, distribute, divide,
separate, share out. (cf. pasikótsíkot, báhin, binágbínag, pahítò)

_sikrotót_, To twist, contort, bend, curve in irregular form
(limbs, etc); twisted, contorted. Sikrotót na ang láwas níya sa
katigulangón. His body is twisted with age. Nagasikrotót ang íya
láwas sa dakô nga katúgnaw. His body is contorted with the severe
cold. (cf. sikrotóy, síktot, búktot, barikótot, sikóktot).

_sikrotóy_, To contort the limbs, etc. See sikrotót.

_síksik_, To finger, handle, fumble, examine the hair (squeezing it
from the root upwards through the fingers, as when looking for nits or
lice). Indì ka magságad síksik (Indì ka maníksik) sang bohók mo, kay
maláw-ay. Don't keep fingering your hair, for it is not nice. Siksikí
ang íya bohók kon may lusâ. Examine her hair; there may be nits in it.

_síktot_, To bend low, stoop, curve, bend the back (owing to old age
or infirmity). (cf. sikóktot, sikutút, síktot, búktot).

_sikúktut_, See sikóktot--to stoop, bend the back.

_sikúngkung_, To sit leaning the back against a support with the
knees drawn up and the arms bent so that the hands come to rest in
front of the chest. (cf. sikyotóng id.).

_sikú-ong, sikúong_, Bent down, curved downwards (of the brim of a
hat, lamp-globe, umbrella, etc.). Sikú-ong gid ang paldíyas sang íya
kálò. The brim of his hat is bent down low.

_síkup_, To pounce upon, run after (as a goshawk pursues its prey);
to catch fish (with the hands); to gather, collect, take hold
of. (cf. sikúp, panálug, típon, karipón).

_sikúp_, A bird of prey, hawk, goshawk. (cf. banóg, salagyáwan).

_sikút-síkut_, To bend the back, stoop down. See sikutút.

_sikutút_, Stooping, bent forward; to bend forward, stoop. (cf. síktot,
sikóktot).

_sikwahî_, (B) Different, worse; to be different from or worse than
others. Iníng bátà maáyo, ápang sikwahî gid iníng isá. This is a good
boy, but that one is quite the reverse. (cf. túhay, laín).

_sikwahî_ (B) Peculiar, queer, awkward, clumsy. (cf. baksiwâ).

_sikwaló_, An old coin worth about six and a quarter centavos. The
sikwaló is equal to one half of a reál. (cf. sikápat).

_sikwálo_, (H) See sikwaló.

_síkwan_, A sort of wooden shuttle employed in making or mending
fishing nets, etc.

_síkway_, To repel, reject, refuse, drive away, put off, dismiss,
cast off, discard, repulse, repudiate, turn down. Sikwayá ang amó nga
panghunâhúnà. Reject such thoughts. Ginsíkway níya akó. He rejected
me. He refused to accept or receive me. Indì mo pagisíkway ang ákon
pakilóoy sa ímo. Do not refuse to hear my petition. Ginsíkway níya si
Fuláno sing may pagtámay. She rejected N.N. with contempt. Nagsíkway
sa íya ang mga pumilílì, kay walâ siá sing matuódtúod nga igkasángkol
sa amó nga palangakóan. The electors have turned him down, for he
has no proper capacity for such an office. (cf. paíway, pahalín,
tábug, támay).


_sikwayán_, Place where something is thrown or cast off; the
bottom or foot-end of a bed, the lower end of a river; the anus
(of animals). (cf. síkway).

_síkyap, sík-yap_, To cut--, shave--, pare--, slightly the surface,
cut off a small part, to graze. Sikyapá ang kíbul, kalónggo ko,
etc. Cut off the surface of my callous skin, of my wart, etc. Nasíkyap
sang kotsílyo ang kamót ko. My hand received a glancing cut from the
knife. Sik-yapí sing diótay ang úbi, kay matán-aw akó, kon anó ang
duág níya. Scrape off the skin of the úbe, for I want to see what
colour it is. (cf. sápla).

_sik-yotóng_, See sikúngkung id.

_silá_, (H) They. Silá íla or silá sing íla----. They on their
part----. (cf. sánda, tánda).

_siláb_, Scorched, singed, roasted. (cf. iláb).

_sílab_, (H) To scorch, burn superficially, singe. Nasílab ang íya
kílay sang sugâ. His eyebrows were singed by the lamp. (cf. sírab,
ílab, id.).

_sílaba_, (Sp. sílaba) Syllable. (cf. mítlang, kúnlà).

_silabó, silabô_, (H) To stand on end, stand upright. (cf. tíndog,
tinggarô).

_silág_, A kind of small fish.

_sílag_, To watch the steps of, observe. See the Freq. panílag which
is much more in use.

_sílag_, Grudge, ill-will, malevolence, malice, spleen, spite; to
bear another a grudge, be filled with spleen against. (cf. síb-ot,
aligótgot, gulut-ánon, kasílag).

_silahánon_, (H) They by themselves. Sang silahánon na lang (silá)
dirâ----. When they were alone by (amongst) themselves----.

_sílak_, (H) See sídlak id.

_síl-an_, For siolán from siól. Also: Motive, reason, pretext (for
being offended, for taking revenge, etc.). Pangitái sing síl-an sa
pagdakúp sa íya. Find some pretext to arrest him.

_siláng_, (H) To aim, take aim, see, look at, inspect. Silangá sing
maáyo ang ímo pusíl. Aim your rifle well. Silangá sing maáyo ang
píspis. Take good aim at the bird. (cf. apúnta; tán-aw, túluk).

_siláp-ong_, To graze, touch; to flit or pass by. (cf. salapáy, labáy).

_silá-síla_, Dim. of silá. They (amongst themselves). (cf. silahánon).

_sílaw_, To be bright, etc. See sídlaw.

_silbáto_, (Sp. silbato) Whistle. (cf. píto, síyak, panihól, huní).

_sílhig_, Broom (for sweeping floors); to sweep. Silhigá ang
ságbot. Sweep away the rubbish. Silhigí ang sagwâ (ságwà). Sweep the
reception room. Nasilhigán sing maáyo iníng kwárto. This room has
been swept well. Indì siá makahibaló bisán na lámang magsílhig. She
does not even know how to sweep.

_síli_, Eel.

_silî_, Polish, shine, lustre. (cf. sílì).

_sílì_, To be polished, to shine, to
be--bright,--brilliant,--shiny,--lustrous. Iníng pínta nagasílì. This
paint is lustrous. (cf. silî, masílì, sílaw, silíng, híning, púlug,
bádlak).

_silí_, An expression used to drive away dogs. (cf. sepé, sikâ--to
drive away cats).

_silibaón_, What is to--, can--, should--, be devoured. (cf. síbà).

_silíbton_, That is to--, should--, can--be treated or opened with
a needle; to be probed. (cf. sibít).

_siligpúton_, What is to be--, should be--, can be--, gathered,
collected, gleaned; remnant, scanty remains, scattered
derelicts. (cf. sígput).

_sílik_, Shrill, loud, piercing, far-reaching, sonorous; to be or
become shrill, etc. Sílik (masílik) gid ang íya tíngug. His voice is
very shrill. Nasilíkan akó sang íya tíngug. His voice sounds shrill
to me. (cf. sulánting).

_sílik_, Fin (of a fish). (cf. sírik).

_silíkpon_, What is to--, should--, can--, be collected or gathered;
fish, etc. to be caught by hand. (cf. síkup; siligpúton).

_silík-sílik_, Dim. and Freq. of sílik--to emit a shrill cry, etc.

_silík-silík_, A wizard, witch, sorcerer. (cf. babáylan).

_sililhígon_, (H) What is to be swept away; rubbish, dirt, waste
matter, debris. (cf. sílhig).


_sililotán_, (H) Place of punishment, prison, torture-chamber; one who
deserves to be punished, punishable, criminal, culprit. (cf. sílot).

_silimbáhon_, (H) Adorable, worshipful, to be worshipped, worthy of
divine honour, worthy of the utmost love and respect. (cf. símba).

_silinákot_, (H) Mixed, mingled, motley, divers, various. (cf. sákot).

_silíndro_, (Sp. cilindro) Cylinder, roller, press-roll (of a printing
press, sugar-mill, etc.).

_silindrón_, A mouth-organ, a toy musical instrument.

_silíng_, (H) Saying, speech, utterance; to say, speak, tell, give
mouth or utterance to. Anó ang silíng níya? What does he say? What
are--or--were his words? Nagsilíng siá sa ákon nga----. He told
me that----. Singganón or singganán mo siá or isilíng mo sa íya
nga----. Tell him that----. May masilíng áyhan nga----. Perhaps some
may say that----. Amó iní ang ginsilíng níya sa ákon. This is what he
said to me. Ginsilingán (ginsingganán) níya kamí sinâ. He has told us
that. May nagsilíng sa ákon nga----. Somebody told me that----. Madámò
ang nagasilíng "húo, húo", ápang tumalágsa ang nagatúman. Many say
"yes, yes", but only a few actually live up to their word. Indì ka
makasilíng sinâ. You must not (should not, cannot) say that. Indì
ka magsilíng "ámay", kay dápat mo isilíng "amáy". Don't say "ámay",
for you should say "amáy". (cf. hámbal, púlong, súgid, dágil, koón).

_silíng_, (H) According to, in accordance with, in conformity
with. Silíng sang íla nga kinabatásan----. According to their
custom----. "Matúman ang ímo buút dínhi sa dútà silíng sang sa
lángit". "Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven". Silíng sang
amó nga hágnà nga pagbulút-an----. In conformity with that proposed
law or bill----. (cf. sonô).

_silíng_, (B) To shine, be bright, have a shiny or polished
surface, to glisten, glitter. Diá nga bitón kang sapátos nagasilíng
gid. (Iníng bitón sang sapátos nagahíning gid). This shoe-polish
is very bright. Nasilingán (Nahiníngan) gid akó kang (sang) sapátos
mo. Your boots appear to me to be well polished. (cf. sídlak, sílak,
bádlak, ídlak, sídlaw, sílaw, sílì, híning).

_silíng ko_ (_mo, etc._) I (you, etc.) think (thought).

_silíngsilíng_, Dim. and Freq. of silíng--to shine, etc.

_silipálan_, Playground. (cf. siripálan, halampángan).

_silipálon_, Play, playthings, toys. (cf. sipál, siripálon,
halampángon).

_sílog_, Channel, canal, duct, conduit; to canalize. (cf. ílog,
ililigán, kalóg).

_sílog_, Edge, border, groove, moulding along the edge of boards,
tables, etc.; to make a moulding, border, etc. Silógi ang tápì sang
sapíyo (sepíyo), kon may sapíyo ikáw nga inogsílog. Make a moulding
along the edge of the plank with your plane, if you have a grooved
plane.

_síl-ok_, To choke, get a fit of coughing by drinking in too large
draughts. Nasil-okán akó sang túbig. The water went the wrong
way. Sinil-okán siá sang paginúm níya sing túbig, kay naginúm siá
sing (sa) gólpe. He choked when he drank water, for he drank it too
greedily. (cf. talím-ok; talám-ok).

_silóng_, New pustules of smallpox forming near or around the old ones.

_sílong_, Ground-floor, downstairs, underneath. Sa sílong sang
baláy. Underneath the house, under the house, underneath the living
quarters of the house, in the basement. Pasilónga (ipasílong) ang
áwto. Put the automobile in the basement or under the house. Pasilóngi
lang sang ímo kabáyo ang idálum sang ákon baláy. Just put your horse
underneath my house.

_sílot_, Chastisement, punishment, correction, castigation; to
chastise, punish, correct, castigate. Silóti siá. Punish him. Sílot
sang Diós iní. This is a punishment of God. Walâ níya pagpapanyagáha
ang íya anák sa pagsilót sa íya sayúp. He punished his son by not
letting him have dinner, for he had done wrong. (cf. kastígo).

_sílung_, See sílong.

_sílung_, To cause an aversion, antipathy or objection. Walâ ko
pagbákla ang husáy nga gintányag níya sa ákon, kay may ginsídngan
akó. I did not buy the comb he offered me, because I had some objection
to it. May ginasilúngan (ginasídngan) akó sinâ. I have an objection
or antipathy against it. I find some fault in it.


_sílwà_, To vomit, eject food from the mouth. Nagsílwà siá sang íya
kináon. Ginsílwà níya ang íya kináon. He vomited (brought up) what
he had eaten. (cf. súka, dígwà).

_sílwak_, To spill, pour out. (cf. álwak, ályak).

_sílya_, (Sp. silla) Chair, seat; direction to a driver of a vehicle
to turn to the left or to the side opposite to máno. (cf. síya).

_sílyo_, (Sp. sello) Stamp, postage stamp; to stamp, put a stamp
on. Sílyo dokumentáryo. Documentary stamp. Silyohí ang sóbre. Put a
stamp on the envelope. (cf. pát-in, timáan, tándà).

_silyón_, (Sp. sillón) Easy chair, armchair, elbow-chair; side-saddle
for ladies. (cf. butáka, síya, ampílò, hampílò).

_sim_, (Sp. cinc, zinc) Zinc, galvanized iron. Atóp nga sim. A
galvanized iron roof. (cf. sin).

_simána_, Week. (cf. pitoádlaw, semána).

_simanahán_, A weekly. (cf. pitoadláwan, semanahán).

_simáng_, To deviate, depart, take a different turning, road or course,
split off, differ from. (cf. sipák, híbag, bulág, tálang).

_simarón_, (Sp. cimarrón) Wild, untamed, unruly. Simarón nga báka,
karabáw, etc. A wild cow, buffalo, etc. (cf. marón, ilá).

_simát_, A primitive plate made from the layers composing the stem
of the banana-plant. Mabúhat lang kitá sing mga simát, kay walâ kitá
sing mga pínggan. We shall make shift with banana plates, as we have
no China ones.

_símba_, To adore, worship; go to church. Magsímba kamó. Go
to church. Simbahón mo ang Diós. Adore God. Pilá ka Domíngo ang
ginsimbahán mo sa sulúd sang isá ka túig? On how many Sundays have
you been to church in the course of the year? Walâ akó makasímba,
kay masakít akó. I could not go to church, because I was sick (ill).

_simbágo_, Whereas, whilst, etc. See ibágo, singgái.

_simbáhan_, Church, house of God, temple, fane, building devoted
exclusively to religious purposes. (cf. símba, iglésya).

_símbog_, A mixture, blend, alloy; to mix, mingle, blend,
adulterate. Iníng buláwan may símbog nga pílak. This gold has an
admixture of silver. Simbogá ang sawáy kag kóbre. Mix the brass and
copper. Make an alloy of brass and copper. Simbogí ang kapé sing
gátas. Mix the coffee with milk. (cf. lakót, sámò, lákay, etc.).

_símbolo_, (Sp. símbolo) Symbol; emblem. (cf. tándà, timáan).

_simbóryo_, (Sp. cimborio) Dome, cupola; chimney. (cf. alasohán).

_simbulawán_, Having the appearance of gold, like gold, golden,
made of imitation gold.

_siménto_, (Sp. cemento) Cement.

_simiénto_, (Sp. cimiento) Foundation. (cf. sadsáran, palatúkdan).

_simód_, To smell or sniff at everything as a dog in search of food,
to bite, eat, get a mouthful; sniffing. Simód gid iníng idô. This
dog sniffs at everything.

_sím-ong_, Lonely, solitary, dreary; neglected, abandoned; to be
lonely, etc. Nagsím-ong iníng lugár, kay walâ na pagapúy-i sang
táo. This place has become lonely because it is now uninhabited,
because people no longer live here. (cf. míngaw).

_simó-simó_, To treat harshly, maltreat, oppress. (cf. limólimó,
pígos).

_simót_, Miserly, greedy, stingy, covetous of more; to be miserly,
etc. (cf. ímot, dingót, pangunyádì).

_símpà_, (Probably a contr. of sinupâ) Cud, quid, especially of
betelnut chewing. (cf. supâ, mamâ, minamâ).

_simpátiko_, (Sp. simpático) Sympathetic, congenial,
winsome. (cf. mainawáon, maabíabíhon, malolô, malolóy-on).

_símple_, (Sp. simple) Simple, pure; plain, unadorned; easy, clear;
guileless, artless, undesigning. (cf. bunáyag, pugóypugóy, mahapús,
maáthag, malígdong, matárung).

_símpon_, (H) To join, associate with, etc. See ímpon. Indì ka
magsímpon sa íla. Don't join them. Do not associate with them.


_símput_, Closely joined, tight, very near together; to make tight,
to be or become closely joined, etc. Símput gid ang kinitáan sang
mga tápì siníng baláy. The boards in this house are very well
joined. Simputá ang pagsalúg, ang pagrára, etc. Make the floor,
the wickerwork, etc. tight. (cf. hunápit).

_símsim_, The small branches of bamboo, etc. (cf. gáwgaw, kagíngking).

_simsímgam_, A kind of chewing gum.

_sin_, Galvanized iron, zinc. (cf. sim).

_sinâ_, (H) The genitive and accusative of inâ--that; the dative and
ablative are formed by placing "sa" before "sinâ". Ang íya sinâ nga
kahulúgan----. The meaning of that----. Sín-o ang nagbúhat sinâ? Who
did (made) that? Who has done (made) that? Sa sinâ nga bágay--. In
that manner--. Ihátag mo iní sa sinâ nga (sináng) mga táo. Give this
to those men.

_sín-ad_, To put over a fire, etc. See sún-ad id.

_sin-adán_, See sun-adán--fireplace, hearth.

_sinádto_, Formerly, in the old days; bygone, things of long ago,
past events. (cf. sádto, dáan, dumáan, minál-am).

_sinág_, Transparency, clearness, perviousness to light; to be
transparent, diaphanous, pellucid, shining through, clear. Ang ímo
báyò nagasinág. Your jacket is transparent. Nagsinág ang íya sádto
malubúg nga bíno. His wine that formerly was turbid has become
clear. Nagasinág ang íya pangguyáhon. The skin of her face is very
clear. (cf. sínaw, tín-aw).

_sinágà_, Cut up and stringed together; a portion, lot or
share (of pork, beef, fish, etc.); by the string or bundle tied
together. Nakabakál akó sing kárne, ísdà, báboy, etc. nga sinágà. I
bought some meat, fish, pork, etc. by the string, i.e. several pieces
strung together. (cf. ságà, binúgsò, tinóhog, (búgsò, tóhog)).

_sinagâ-ságà_, Dim. and Freq. of sinágà. Báboy nga sinagâságà. Cutlets
or slices of pork strung together. The "Pork-barrel" (of politicians).

_sinágrit_, Whir, whirring, whistling, hiss, buzz; to whir, hiss,
buzz, whistle. (cf. ságrit).

_sinágto_, (H) See sinádto--past, bygone, former, etc.

_sinákup_, Subject, dependent, subordinate; member of, affiliated
with. (cf. sákup, ginsakúpan).

_sinaláy_, Roast fish (or meat) on a spit. (cf. sálay).

_sinalayó_, (H) Social relations, life or intercourse, family life;
to live, spend one's life, pass one's days, have social relations
or intercourse. Matáwhay ang íla pagsinalayó. They are leading
a tranquil life. Nagasinalayó silá dídto sing mahiól kaáyo. They
are living there under miserable conditions. Magsinalayó kamó sing
matárung. Live together honestly. (cf. sayó, salayó, sarayó, sinarayó).

_sinálog, sinálug_, A fish, shrimp, etc. caught with the
hands. (cf. sálug).

_sinálog_, Mixed up, mingled together, thrown together in
disorder. Sinálog nga mga bínhì. Seeds of various kinds mixed
together. (cf. sálog).

_sinaloháy_, Feasting, banquet, banqueting; to fare
sumptuously. (sálo).

_sinaló-sálo_, Banquet, feast, rich treat or entertainment; to banquet,
feast, fare sumptuously. (cf. sálo).

_sinamáy_, A light fabric made of hemp, agave, etc. and often
elaborately decorated with multicoloured designs. (cf. sámay, linágo).

_sinambúnut_, Scuffle, riot, fighting, tumult, skirmish, wrangle, rowdy
meeting; to meet for a fight, come to blows, gather or assemble (as
in a riot, quarrel, etc.). (cf. sambúnut; lininggóhot, sinurumbálì).

_sinámpuk_, Attack, assault, assail, clash; to attack, clash, rush
upon, etc. (cf. sámpuk).

_sinangá-sánga_, To crisscross, cross in all directions, branch out
in various directions. (cf. sangá).

_sinángula, sinangulá_, (Sp. sin ángulo--without an angle) A kite
of a roundish shape without any sharp corner. (cf. sapísápi, pinakâ,
buladór).

_sinangúwà_, Scuffle, riot, fighting, etc. See sangúwà, sambúwà.

_sinángya_, To play, frolic, romp, be full of gaiety or
merriment. (cf. sángya, sádya, hinúgyaw).

_sinántò_, To harmonize, agree, be conform to, be in alignment with;
to rhyme (in poetry). (cf. sántò, kasántò, kasinántò).

_sinápat_, Beastly, brutal, brutalized, animal, brute. Kalakasán
nga sinápat. Beastly excesses. Batásan nga sinápat. Beastly
habits. (cf. sápat).

_sinarayó_, (B) Social relations, etc. See sinalayó.

_sinasalígan_, Trusted in, enjoying the confidence of, trustworthy,
reliable, relied upon, faithful, confidential. Sinasalígan ko siá
nga ábyan. He is my intimate (confidential) friend. (cf. sálig).

_sínaw_, (B) To be bright, clear, pure (of water, etc.). Nagsínaw na
ang túbig sang subá; kaína sang ága malubúg pa. The water in the river
has become clear now; this morning it was still turbid. (cf. tín-aw,
sinág).

_sindakál_, To bubble up, seethe, boil. (cf. akálakál, bukál).

_síndi_, (Sp. encender) To light, set fire to. Sindihí ang sugâ. Light
the lamp. Nasindihán na ang kínke. The lamp is lit. (cf. dáig, dábok).

_síndot_, To throw in the fire, to fire, set alight, set light
to, set fire to, burn. Sindotí ang kógon. Fire (Burn down) the
cogon-grass. Nasindotán na balá ang ságbot? Has the rubbish been
burnt? (cf. síndi, súnug, tutúd).

_sindúgò_, Blood-relation, related by blood or descent, relative or
kinsman by birth; a pact or covenant signed in blood; a party to such
a pact; to sign such a pact. Sindúgò silá. They are kinsmen. They have
signed in their own blood a covenant of friendship. They are intimate
friends. Nagsindugoáy silá. They have pledged their friendship one
to the other in their blood. (cf. dugô, kadúgò, sandúgò).

_sinélas_, (Sp. chinelas) Slippers, Chinese slippers. (cf. bakiâ,
kótso, kórtso--clogs).

_sinelásan_, Shop where slippers are made or sold.

_sing_, The indefinite article for the accusative and, very rarely, for
the genitive. It corresponds to the English "some" and "a". Nakabakál
akó sing ísdà. I bought (have bought) some fish. Ginbaligyaán níya
akó sing mga páhò. He sold me some mangoes. Nagpatíndog siá sing
baláy. He built a house. Walâ sing--nothing, no, none, nobody, no
one. Walâ akó sing pílak. I have no money. Walâ sing anó man. It is
nothing. Don't mention it. It is of no consequence. Walâ gid sing
táo dirí. There is nobody here.

_sing_, An adverbial particle. Bantayí siá sing maáyo. Watch him
well. Nagapangabúdlay siá sing mapísan. He works diligently. Sing
(sa) madalî. At once. Quickly. Without delay.

_sing_, A conjunctive particle: Whilst, whereas, when. Walâ níla
pagatumána inâ, sing amó kuntánì ang dápat níla pagtinguháon sing
labí. They do not fulfil that obligation, whereas they should try to
do so above anything else.

_singád-singád_, To eavesdrop, overhear, listen in. See tingádtingád.

_síng-al_, Harsh, rough (of speech); to speak in anger or fury,
vociferate, shout, rail at, abuse in loud language, be wild or
furious. Síng-al nga sabát (panabát). A rough or harsh answer. Indì
kamó magkádto dídto kon índì kamó buút nga sing-alán. Don't go there,
if you do not want to be loudly abused. Ginsing-alán akó níya. He
shouted at me furiously. Indì mo siá pagsing-alán. Don't--rail at
him,--speak harshly to him,--shout angrily at him. (cf. gásod, gasód,
kusá, sínggit, singgítan, pamúyas, pamúlag).

_sing-anó_, For how much, for what reason, on what account,
wherefore, why. Ngáa man kag sing-anó nga ibutáng sa katalágman
ang ákon kabúhì? Why and for what reason should my life be put in
danger? (cf. tungúd sa anó, bangúd sa anó, ngáa, ándot).

_singgái_, Whereas, whilst, on the contrary, when, as, in as much as,
in as far as. (cf. sing, gái).

_singgálong_, Fox; civet cat. (cf. singgárong, dídis).

_singganán, singganón_, (H) Passive forms of silíng--to say, tell.

_sínggit_, To shout, yell, cry, roar, bawl, bellow, howl, vociferate,
call out, speak in a very loud voice. Indì ka magsínggit. Don't
shout. Singgití siá. Shout at him (to him). (cf. turayáw, pagaás,
pugaás, síng-al).

_singgítan_, Brawler, shouter; rowdy; to vociferate (especially in
anger or passion). (cf. sínggit).

_sínghot_, Smell, odour, aroma, scent; to smell, scent. Singhotí iní,
agúd masayóran mo ang báhò (dapóg). Smell this so that you may know how
it smells (what its smell is like). (cf. panínghot, panimáhò, síngo).

_síngì_, The extent, reach or range of an orifice or aperture, as of
a pair of tongs or scissors, of the jaws of an animal; or the like.

_singíl_, A young tender shoot or branch; to shoot, sprout, grow, put
forth new shoots. (cf. salíngsing, túbò, ólbo, lúmbay, ólhot, lusút).

_singî-síng-i_, Dim. and Freq. of síngì--the extent of an opening, etc.

_singî-singián_, The space between the fingers, toes, or the like;
the part of the hand to which the fingers are attached.

_singít_, Hook, hook and pole. Butangán sing singít ang bagát. Singití
ang bagát. Fasten a hook on the pole. (cf. kawít).

_síngit_, To take in, or gather, with hook and pole. Singíta ang mga
páhò. Pluck the mangoes with hook and pole. (cf. dágas, dúgus, káwit).

_síng-it_, (H) Stye (of the eye). (cf. búntug).

_síngkal_, Great heat or passion, height of excitement; to be or
become very hot, passionate, strong, excited or the like. Nagasíngkal
na ang ádlaw. The sun is very hot. Nagsíngkal ang íya kaákig. His
anger became red-hot. Nagasíngkal na ang íla pagilináway. They
are fighting fiercely against each other. The battle is now at its
height. Nasingkalán akó sang ínit. It was too hot for me. (cf. ínit,
tagítì, bóhot, tagíngting, sindakál, salíit).

_singkamás_, A vine with edible roots. The roots are usually eaten
raw. (cf. tikamás id.).

_síngkaw_, Yoke; to yoke, attach the yoke. Singkawí ang karabáw. Put
the yoke on the buffalo's neck. (cf. góta).

_singkayóng_, To squat down, crouch, huddle up. (cf. katínkátin,
kúung, singkorót).

_singkáy-síngkay_, To stir, move, be active; to strut, walk or
behave in an ostentatious manner. The Freq. paningkáysíngkay is
mostly used. Paningkáysíngkay ka. Get a move on. Bestir yourself. Do
something. Be active.

_síngkì_, To be or become hot, exasperated, to wax hot, boil with
anger. Masíngkì sing panimúot. Hot-tempered. (cf. síngkal).

_singklétas_, A kind of men's slippers. (cf. sinélas).

_singkorót_, To draw oneself into a contracted heap, to huddle up,
crouch, squat down, lie down in a heap (particularly said of persons
that are sick, wounded or exhausted with fatigue). (cf. singkayóng,
pandungkóldúngkol).

_síngkub_, To elbow, etc. See sikól, síkdol, sikó, síkob.

_singkwílan_, A kind of tree. See sinkwílan id.

_síngo_, Smell; to smell, etc. See sínghot, panimáhò.

_singô_, To sob, blubber, sigh. (cf. hibubún-ot, písngò, ngóyngoy).

_síngsing_, Ring; to wear a ring, put on a ring. Singsingí ang íya
túdlò. Put a ring on his finger.

_síngud_, To listen, overhear, eavesdrop. See tingádtingád,
singádsingád.

_síngulo, singuló_, (Sp. cingulo) Cingulum, girdle, sash. (cf. wáklos,
páha, koréa).

_siní_, (H) Gen. and Acc. of iní--this. For the Dat. and Ablat. "sa"
is usually placed before it. Sín-o ang naghímo siní? Who has done
this? Iníng kálò íya siní nga (siníng) táo. This hat belongs to
this man. Sa súbung (subúng) siní----. At this time----. Now at
once----. Immediately----. Sa siní nga kahimtángan ko malisúd ang
ákon pangabúhì. In this condition (Under these circumstances) my
life is hard. Sa tigaláni siní nga túig----. At the (rice) harvest
of this current year----. Nasápwan siníng karón nga----. Lately it
was discovered (found out) that----. May kabuangón pa nga maglabí
siní kadakô? Is there any folly greater than this? Siní (Sa siní) nga
paági----. In this way----. By such means--. Sang isá siníng naglilígad
nga mga ádlaw----. One of these last days----. (cf. kará, kadiá).

_sinibáy-síbay, sinibáy-sibáy_, To move about in all directions,
as crowds, ants, etc. (cf. surumbálì, lininggóhot).

_sinígang_, A dish of meat or fish.

_siníkyap_, A chip, a part--torn,--split,--cut,--broken
off. (cf. síkyap).

_sinimáng-simáng_, Various, divers, different; to deviate, differ from,
disagree, swerve or stray from, diverge. (cf. simáng).

_sinípa_, Hangings, valance, etc. See sanípa.

_sinipád_, Petal of a flower, leaf of a book, piece of an orange,
part of a fruit cut in pieces, a division or share of. (cf. sipád).

_sinípit_, Carried under the arm. See sípit.

_sinipít_, Anchor. (cf. ánkla).

_sinísa_, Ash, etc. See senísa.

_sínit_, (Sp. cenit) Zenith. (cf. ódto).

_siniudád_, Proper to city-life, according to the ways and manners
of a city or town, urban. (cf. siudád).

_sínko_, (Sp. cinco) Five. (cf. limá) Also: to make five parts, divide
in five parts. Sinkohón mo iní ka báhin. Divide this in five parts.

_sinkóhon_, A five-centavo coin. (cf. sínko, bakód, bagáng).

_sinkolyágas_, (Sp. cinco, llagas--five, wounds) A flowering plant.

_sinkwílan_, A kind of tree. See singkwílan id.

_sín-o_, Who? Sín-o ang tagíya siníng baláy? Who is the owner of
this house? Sín-o ikáw? Who are you? Sín-o ang ngálan mo? What
is your name? Bisán si sín-o lang saráng makabúhat sinâ. Anyone
can do that. Sánday sín-o ang mga nagdulúaw sa ímo? Who were your
visitors? Who were they that visited you?

_sinô_, To sound hollow, etc. See kanô. Iníng lubí nagasinô. This
coconut sounds hollow.

_sínodo, sinodó_, (Sp. sínodo) Synod. (cf. tilipunán, katilíngban.

_sinóndan_, Type, pattern, original, model; followed; succeeded
by. Also often, but incorrectly, used in the meaning of: copy,
imitation; copied, imitated. (cf. sunúd).

_sinsár, sínsar_, (Sp. cinchar) The fatty integument or membrane
surrounding the stomach of a pig. The sinsár of a sow is often dried
and reserved as a remedy for rheumatism, back-ache, etc.

_sinsíl_, (Sp. cencil) Chisel, burin, engraver, especially applied
to a strong steel chisel without handle as used by carpenters for
cutting zinc, iron, etc, a cold chisel.

_sinsínggam_, A kind of chewing gum. See simsímgam id.

_sinsóro_, (Sp. chinchorro) A large fishing net, a drag-net,
seine. (cf. paninsóro--to fish with a drag-net).

_sínta_, To rise on the hind legs, rear (of horses); to be angry,
scold, abuse in language. Nagasínta ang kabáyo. The horse is
rearing. Nagsínta siá sa ákon. He abused me in angry language.

_síntak_, To crack, break, smash. (cf. búung, lumâ, pusâ, litík).

_síntas_, (Sp. cinta) Ribbon, band; cinematograph-pictures, film,
reel; floor beams. Mga síntas nga pílì ang ginapagwâ. Selected films
are shown.

_sintír_, (Sp. sentir) To feel; to hurt, pain, cause pain. Nagasintír
ang ákon hubág. My swelling is giving me pain. Ginasintirán akó sang
ákon pilás. My wound is paining me, is painful.

_síntò_, To press, push, squeeze (against something hard). See súntok.

_síntok_, To push, thrust, knock or press against. See súntok.

_sinturón_, (Sp. cinturon) Girdle, belt, sash, band,
cincture. (cf. páha, wáklos, wágkos).

_sinúbung_, An alloy, particularly gold mixed with
copper. (cf. súbung).

_sinúgal, sinugál_, Gambling; to gamble. (cf. sugál).

_sinúgba_, Roast (corn, etc.; cf. binóog, iníhaw).


_sinúgdan_, Beginning, start, origin, commencement. (cf. ginsugúran,
súgud).

_sínuk_, To intercept, catch, waylay; to pay a surprise visit, take
unawares, come unannounced for an inspection, etc. Sang pagsínuk níya
sang íya nga palangúmhan nasápwan níya ang madámò nga mga mamumugón nga
nagpasalipótpot sang íla nga buluhatón. When he paid a surprise visit
to his farm he found many workmen idle, absent, neglecting their work.

_sinuktánay_, Collection (of debts), demand (for payment); to collect
outstanding debts, demand payment. (cf. sokót).

_sinulatán_, Writing, writings, what has been written, book, article,
essay, manuscript, scrip. (cf. sulát).

_sinulínga_, To scoff at, mock, deride, ridicule; scoffing, mockery,
etc. (cf. ulígyat, sulínga, uligâ, tiáwtíaw).

_sinulî-súlì_, Turned upside down, topsy-turvy, putting the cart before
the horse, in an inverted order; to turn upside down, etc. (cf. sulî,
balískad).

_sinulúg_, A kind of dance, war dance (with very swift movements;
cf. sulúg--current).

_sinumbungánay_, Mutual incriminations, accusations; to accuse one
another, bring charges against one another. (cf. súmbung).

_sinumbúnut_, See sinambúnut id.

_sinurumbálì_, See sinambúnut, sarumbálì, surumbálì--to crowd,
gather, etc.

_sinutíl_, To be naughty, bad, wicked, behave badly. Indì ka
magsinutíl. Don't be naughty. (cf. sutíl, kasutíl).

_sínyas_, (Sp. seña) Sign, signal, token, password, hint, wink,
gesture; to make a sign to, give an agreed nod or wink. Sinyasí
siá. Give him a sign. Ginsinyasán siá níya nga maghalín. He gave him
a sign to leave. (cf. timáan, tándà, pát-in, pangiláy).

_síò, siô_, To smoke opium. See síok id.

_síod, siód_, To trap, entrap, snare, ensnare, catch with a snare or
trap. Nakasíod siá sing píspis. He caught a bird in a snare. Síd-i
ang báboy. Set a trap for the pig. Síd-a ang báboy. Snare the pig.

_siód_, A snare, trap. Siód nga tiglapák. A spring-trap. The victim
is caught when it steps on the trap and releases a spring. Siód nga
tigsohót. A trap that catches its victim by means of spikes that
turn inwards and prevent the victim from escaping, when once it has
entered. (cf. síod).

_siók_, (B) To be or become densely overgrown with shrubs, long
grasses, etc. Nagsiók ang líbut sang dáan nga simbáhan, kay walâ
sing nagsapák sa sulúd sang pilá na ka túig. The ground around the
old church has become thickly overgrown with shrubs, etc., because
no one has taken care of it for a number of years. Also noun. Density
(of vegetation); a thicket, jungle, trees, shrubs, long grass, vines,
etc. thickly set. (cf. síot).

_síok_, To hollow out, undermine. (cf. áb-ab, kábkab).

_síok_, To smoke opium. Indì ka magsíok sing apyán. Don't smoke
opium. (cf. siô).

_siók-siók_, Dim. and Freq. of siók.

_siól_, To bother, pester, trouble, molest, interfere with. (cf. soól,
síl-an).

_sió-sío_, A kind of plant. (cf. sisío).

_síot_, (H) See siók. Sa tingúlan magasíot iníng alágyan, kay madámò
nga mga gámhon ang magatúbò. In the rainy season this thoroughfare will
become dense with vegetation, for many weeds, shrubs, etc. will spring
up. Nagsíot na iníng lugár. This place has now become jungle-like.

_sípà_, To kick. Ginsípà nía akó. He kicked me. He gave me a kick. Indì
mo siá pagsipáon. Don't kick him. (cf. tíndak).

_sipád_, A petal (of a flower, etc.); leaf (of a book); a division
or part of an orange or similar fruits. (cf. sinipád).

_sípad_, To part, divide (said especially of an orange, etc.). Sipára
(-áda) ang naránha. Divide the orange. Sipári akó sináng
kabúgaw. Divide that pomelo for me. (cf. sipád).

_sipád-sipád_, Dim. of sipád, sípad.

_sipák_, To separate from, part from, go away or astray,
leave. Nagsipák siá sa ákon. He left me. He parted from
me. (cf. bulág).

_sipál_, (B) To frolic, gambol, play. Sipalá (tána). (Hampangá
siá). Play with him. Ginsipál na ang kutî, bóla, etc. (Ginhampangán
níya ang kuríng, bóla, etc.). He played with the cat, the ball,
etc. (cf. hámpang).

_sípan_, The shell of the betelnut, often used to clean the teeth with;
a tooth-brush.

_sípat_, See gábà--to harm, injure, punish. Indì mo pagusíkan ang
kán-on, kay básì sipáton ka. Don't waste the rice, for you may draw
down upon yourself the anger of Heaven.

_sipî_, One of the clusters--, a single cluster--, of a bunch
of bananas; to cut--, break--, off a cluster, break up into
clusters. Ibalígyà mo ang ságing sing binúlig, índì mo pagsipión
(pagsíp-on). Sell the bunch of bananas as a whole, don't break it up
into clusters.

_síping_, (H) To be near together, etc. See íping.

_sipít_, Clothes-moth, carpet-moth; silver-moth, fish-moth,
silver-fish. Also verb. Ginasipitán iníng hábul. This blanket is
moth-eaten.

_sípit_, The pelvic bone, pelvis.

_sípit_, To carry under the arm near the armpit. Sipíta ang
líbro. Carry the book under your arm.

_sipíyo_, A plane (of a carpenter); to plane. (sepíyo, sapíyo id.).

_síplat_, To see accidentally, catch a glimpse of, look upon by chance,
happen to see, to notice or observe in passing. Nakasíplat akó sa íya
sa idálum sang kóro. It was quite by chance that I saw him under the
choir. Nasiplatán níya akó sa púsud sang pamulákan. He happened to
see me in the corner of the garden. (cf. sípraw, pasípraw).

_sípo_, To collect--, gather--, scrape--, together (stones, fruit,
etc.). Sipóha ang mga páhò, bató, patád, etc. Gather together the
mangoes, stones, stakes, etc. (cf. típon, karipón, hípu, hirípo).

_síp-on_, The mucus that flows from the nose, snot (a vulgar word).

_síp-on_, From sipî--to break off a cluster (of bananas).

_sípong_, To bind--, tie--, knot--, connect--, string--, together,
to fasten in a knot, attach to each other by a knot (threads, yarn,
hemp-fibres, etc.). Sipónga ang lánot nga talagakón. Bind together
the hemp-fibre that is to be got ready for reeling (spooling, winding
on a reel). (cf. higót, balíghot, tábid, súgpon, balô).

_sipóng_, Bound together, tied, secure, fastened well, tight, drawn
together; contracted, knit, frowning (of eyebrows). Sipóng ang íya mga
kílay. (Nagapasípong siá sang íya mga kílay). His eyebrows are knit,
contracted. (He is knitting his eyebrows. He is frowning).

_sip-onón_, Dirty, running (nose); snotty, full of snot (vulgar
expressions).

_sipót_, (B) Near together, close, narrow, tight; to be or become
narrow, tight, close together. Nagsipót ang dálan, hay gináb-ab kang
subâ ang sampihák. (Nagkitíd ang dálan, kay gináb-ab sang subâ ang isá
ka pihák). The road has become narrow, for one side of it has been
washed away by the river. Nasipotán akó kadyá nga látok. (Nakitirán
(Nakitidán) akó siní nga látok (lamésa)). This table is not wide
enough for me. (cf. kitíd).

_sípra_, (Sp. cifra) Figure, number, cipher, code.

_sípraw_, The form pasípraw is mostly used. (B) To see accidentally,
happen to see, cast a glance upon, notice (by chance). Pasiprawí kang
mga matá mo si Pédro nga dián sa ingód kang látok. (Pasiplatí sang ímo
mga matá si Pédro nga árà dirâ sa luyó sang lamésa). Cast a glance on
Peter who is by the side of the table. Ipapasípraw (Ipapasíplat) si
Huán kay Hosé. Let José have a look at John. Papasiprawá (Papasiplatá)
si Hosé kay Huán. Tell (Order) José to have a look at (catch a glimpse
of) John. (cf. síplat, pasíplat).

_siprés_, (Sp. ciprés) Cypress.

_sípsip_, Cut near the ground, close-cut, close-shaven, close-cropped,
closely shorn; to cut down to the ground, cut off near the roots or
close to the ground. (cf. sóop).

_síra_, See séra--wax.

_sirá_, See será--to close, shut, lock.

_sírab_, (B) To scorch, singe, roast. (cf. ílab, írab, sílab).


_sirabó_, (B) To stand erect, stand on end. Nagasirabó ang búlbul kang
báka, hay ginaramigán. (Nagapanilabó, (nagasilabó, nagapalaníndog)
ang balahíbo sang báka, kay ginatugnawán). The cow's hair is standing
on end, because it is feeling cold. (cf. silabó, tinggarô).

_siráng_, (B) See siláng--to aim at; to look at, inspect.

_sírbe_, (Sp. servir) To attend on, wait upon, serve, do one's bidding,
be at one's command, be obedient to; to be of use or advantage, to
serve, avail, answer--, serve--,--one's turn,--one's purpose. Sirbehi
sing maáyo ang ímo agálon. Serve your master well. Magsírbe ka sa
Diós. Serve God. Iníng lánsang índì makasírbe, kay malíp-ot. This
nail won't do (is of no use); it is too short.

_sirbiéntes, sirbyéntes_, (Sp. sirviente) Servants, menials, waiters,
in waiting. (cf. sologoón, mutsátso).

_sírga_, (Sp. sirga) The tracking of a boat from the shore; to track
a boat.

_sirgwélas_, (Sp. ciruela) Plum, prune. (cf. sirigwélas).

_sírhan_, For sirahán from sirá--to close, etc.

_sírì_, (B) See sílì--to shine, glisten, etc.

_siriáles_, (Sp. cirial) Torches, processional candlesticks.

_sírib_, To lap, lick up, take food or drink with the tongue;
splash or produce a sound as of food or drink being lapped by a dog,
etc. Ang bíbi nagasírib sa lúnang. The duck is slapping the mud with
its bill. (cf. súrib).

_sirigwélas_, See sirgwélas--a plum.

_sírik_, See sílik--fin (of a fish).

_sirikpuyó_, A kind of creeper whose leaves resemble the scales of
the puyó-fish; hence the name.

_siríngan_, The ground immediately around a house. The ground on
which water drops from the eaves of a house. (cf. paniríngan).

_sírip_, Sheriff.

_siripálan_, (B) Playground, place for games, etc. (cf. sipál;
halampángan).

_siripálon_, (B) A plaything, objects or outfit intended for a
game. (cf. sipál, halampángon, hampángan).

_sirirítan_, (B) A collective name for vines and creepers with
edible roots.

_sirisiádà_, (B) To bustle, run this way and that way in order to
get everything ready for a social party, a feast, an entertainment,
or the like. (cf. pangáman).

_sirisimána_, (B) Weekly, every week. (cf. solosimána).

_sirí-síri_, To separate the hulled rice from the unhulled grains
after pounding by tossing the whole mass in a shallow bamboo-basket
and throwing the unhulled grains (pásì) off in front. Sirisiríha lang
ang bugás, kon índì ka makahibaló magsisíg. Separate the hulled rice
from the unhulled grains by the operation of "sirísíri", if you do
not know how to perform the "sisíg". (cf. sisíg, with the difference
that in sisíg the "pásì" are thrown off at the side).

_sírit_, To fizz, fizzle, emit a hissing sound as fat when frying,
etc. Ang mantékà nagasírit kon butangán mo sing kárne, ítlog, etc. Fat
fizzles or hisses, if you put meat, eggs, etc. in it.

_siríu_, The iron point (attached to the wooden shaft) of a lance or
the like. (cf. siríw id).

_siríw_, See siríu id.

_siriwául, siriwá-ul_, Difficult, trying, hard to bear or manage;
to be trying, etc. See sariwául id.

_siriwsíw_, An aphid, plant louse (very harmful to crops).

_sírko_, (Sp. circo) Circus; to be an acrobat, contortionist, tumbler;
to turn a somersault, turn head over heels. Magsírko ka. Turn a
somersault. (cf. bansúlì).

_sirkulár_, (Sp. circular) Circular; a circular letter.

_sirótso_, (Sp. serrucho) Large saw, handsaw. (cf. lagárì).

_siruháno_, (Sp. cirujano) Surgeon, chirurgeon,
operator. (cf. manugbúsbus).

_sírum_, (B) To get dark or dusk, to fall (said of evening, twilight,
approaching darkness). Nagsírum ron. (Naghápon na gid). Twilight has
fallen. It's quite dark now. Magadúaw akó kanínyo kon magsírum ang
ádlaw. (Magadúaw akó sa ínyo kon maghápon na gid (kon magnobô na gid
ang ádlaw)). I'll visit you in the evening. (cf. hápon, kasisídmon).

_sirúm-sirúm_, The cricket.

_síryo_, (Sp. cirio) A large wax-candle. Ang síryo paskwál. The
paschal candle.

_sísì, sîsî_, To tear, rend, etc. See gísì id.

_sisî_, See gisî id.

_sisí_, A kind of small edible sea-shell; oyster.

_sîsî, sísì_, Fie! Whew! Pooh! Don't touch it! Don't come near
it! (cf. a-â).

_sisíg_, To separate (after pounding) the hulled rice (bugás)
from the unhulled grains (pásì) by tossing in a shallow basket and
throwing the pásì off at the side, either to the right or left. Sisigí
ang bugás. Clean (by tossing) the pounded rice from the unhulled
rice. Isisíg ang kalálaw. Use the flat-bottomed, low-brimmed bamboo
basket for cleaning the rice. (cf. sirísíri).

_sisí-o_, A kind of plant. (cf. siósío).

_sisíwa_, Nurse, especially one that takes care of children.

_sísta_, (Sp. sistro) Sistrum; guitar.

_síste_, Spite, envy, malice; to do spitefully or out of spite,
maliciously, or out of envy; to beguile, trick, cajole. Ang kaláyo
nga nagsúnug sang ámon baláy walâ maghalín sa dapúg, kóndì síste gid
sang táo. The fire that burned down our house did not originate from
the kitchen-hearth, but was intentionally caused by some spiteful
man. Ginsistehán sang laláki iníng babáye sing lumáy. This woman was
beguiled by the man with a love-philtre. (cf. tístis).

_sistéma_, (Sp. sistema) System.

_sítara_, (Sp. cítara) Zither, cittern, zithern, cithara.

_sitsarón_, (Sp. chicharrón) Fried lard-scrap, cracknel, crackling,
the crisp remains of fat after the removal of the lard by frying.

_sítsit_, To hiss, call attention by hissing. Sitsití siá. Attract
his attention by hissing. (cf. panítsit, panagótsot).

_sítyo_, (Sp. sitio) Spot, place, room, location, site, country-seat,
small rural village. (cf. lugár, doók, soók).

_siudád_, (Sp. ciudad) City, large town. (cf. bánwa).

_siudádnon_, Referring, pertaining to a city, appropriate or
characteristic of city-life. (cf. siniudád).

_síug_, To shove, push, jostle, press forward, elbow one's way through
a crowd; to set type (in a printing shop). (cf. manugsiúg).

_siúpaw_, A kind of Chinese cake.

_siwálo_, Cord, chain, strand (of a cable); ring, link (of a gold
chain, or the like).

_síwid, siwíd_, Temple, brow, etc. See síbid.

_siwíl, síwil_, Projection, excrescence, outgrowth; cape, promontory,
peninsula, projecting point; to project.

_siwíl-síwil_, Dim. and Freq. of síwil. Also: irregular, out of order
or alignment, not straight; a kind of fish with a very pointed head.

_síya_, (Sp. silla) Chair, seat, saddle; to saddle (a horse,
etc.). Nasiyáhan (Ginsiyáhan) mo na ang kabáyo? Have you saddled the
horse? Nahókman siá nga pátyon sa síya nga kilás (síyang kilás). He
was sentenced to die on the electric chair. (cf. sílya).

_siyá_, He, she, it. See siá.

_síyak_, Chirp, cheep, peep, the cry of chickens; the whistle
of steamers; to chirp, cheep, peep (of chickens); to whistle (of
steamers). Nagasíyak na ang sakayán. The steamer is whistling. Pasiyáka
ang bapór. Blow the steamer's whistle. (cf. siagít, píto).

_siyápò_, See siápò--bagasse.

_siyóktot_, To bend the back, lean forward, stoop. (cf. sikóktot).

_sóbol_, To banish, exile, ostracize, deport, expel, drive out; to
keep away, turn back, tell another not to go or come, ask another to
stay away. Sobóla siá. Drive him out. Expel (banish) him. Ginsóbol
níya ang yáwà. He exorcised (drove out) the devil. Sobóla na lang ang
párì, manugbúlung, etc., kay patáy na ang masakít. Tell the priest,
the doctor, etc. not to go (come) any more, because the sick person is
(already) dead. (cf. pahalín, paíway, tábug).

_sóbol_, Close by, near by, on the point of, too late, impossible
for lack of time. Sóbol na nga índì na akó makahingágaw sang
ímo delárgo. It is too late now; I cannot finish your pair of
trousers. (cf. apíke, lapít).

_soból-soból_, Dim. and Freq. of sóbol--close by, etc.

_sób-on_, From soób.

_sóbra_, (Sp. sobra) Over, above, surpassing; to be over, overmuch,
more than enough; surplus, excess. May kwárta pa nga sóbra? Is there
still some money over? Is there any money left still? Nagasolóbra gid
lang ang mga mamumugón sa Négros. There are more than enough workmen
in Negros. Magasóbra iníng humáy sa isá ka tabungós. This rice will be
too much for one tabungós-basket. Pasobrahí akó sing isá ka balángit
sa duhá ka métros sang hénero nga ákon báklon. Add yet one span to
the two meters of cloth I am buying.

_sóbre_, (Sp. sobre) Envelope. (cf. putús, baláhos).

_sóbrekáma_, (Sp. sobrecama) Bedspread, bed-cover, quilt,
coverlet. (cf. tabón).

_sobrekárgo_, (Sp. sobrecargo) Purser, supercargo. (cf. manugtátap).

_sobrenaturál_, (Sp. sobrenatural) Supernatural. (cf. labáw--sa
kinatúbò,--sa kinaugálì).

_sobreseír, sobreseído_, (Sp. sobreseer, sobreseído) To stay a judgment
or legal proceedings; stayed, discontinued (of legal proceedings).

_sobreseimyénto_, (Sp. sobreseimiento) A stay of judgment or legal
proceedings. (cf. walâ sing kadayonán, puút, tápnà).

_sóbsob_, To fall to the ground on one's face. Andam ka, agúd índì ka
makasóbsob. Look out, lest you should fall on your face. Nakasóbsob ang
íya bábà sa dútà. He bit the dust. (cf. dágpà, dúsmò, hágmak, dámhag).

_sóbsob_, See sónson, súnsun--to do often, frequently, etc.

_sóda_, (Sp. soda) Soda, soda water.

_sodó_, To draw, pull, push, make tight by pulling, to press or squeeze
together. Sodohá (sodoá) ang háblon. Pull the woof tight. Isodó ang
ángkub. Pull the handle of the reed.

_sód-o_, See sodó.

_sodó-sódo_, A kind of cactus often used in quickset fences.

_sódsod_, See súdsud--to go out in person; to scrape or rub off;
a kind of fishing net, etc.

_sógò_, Order, command, commandment, law, behest, call, beck, charge,
injunction, precept; to order, command, direct, bid, instruct, tell,
enjoin. Pilá ang mga sógò sang Diós? How many commandments of God are
there? Anó (Náno) ang íya (nga) sógò? Anó ang íya nga sinógò? What was
his command? What was it he commanded? What were his orders? Sín-o
ang íya (nga) sinógò? Whom did he give his order to? Who is his
messenger? Whom did he command? Ari akó kon may igasógò (ikáw)? I
am at your service (a polite form of speech at being introduced
to strangers, etc.). Ginsógò níya akó sa Ilóngílong. He ordered
me to go to Iloilo. Sogóa siá nga mangáhoy. Tell him to gather
firewood. Pasogóan mo si Fuláno nga magkádto sa Manílà. Send an order
to N.N. that he should go to Manila. Isógò mo sa íya iní. Give him
this order. Order him to do this. (cf. bílin, tógon, panagubílin,
ley, pagbulút-an, kasogoán, panugôsugô).

_sóhol_, Wage, wages, remuneration, salary, hire, allowance,
stipend, emolument, pay, payment; to pay wages, etc. Anó (Náno)
ang igasáhol mo sa ákon? What (kind of) wages will you pay me? Pilá
ang isóhol (igasóhol) mo sa ákon? What (How much) wages will you pay
me? Sohóli silá sing tagápat ka pisítas ang ádlaw. Pay them eighty
centavos a day. Isóhol sa íya iníng kwárta. Pay his wages with this
money. Ang Sabadó amó ang ádlaw nga inogsóhol--or--inogbáyad sang
sóhol. Saturday is pay-day. Sinohólan silá sing mahál. They were well
paid. (cf. swéldo, báyad).

_sóhot_, To enter through a small opening, to slip in, creep through,
get in, insinuate oneself into, thread one's way through. Sóhot
(Magsóhot, sumóhot) ka lang sa korál (kodál). Sohóti lang ang
korál. Just creep through the fence. Sohóta ang kwárta nga nadágdag
sa idálum sang baláy. Creep in under the house and get the money that
was dropped down. Ginsóhot níya ang bóla sa idálum sang lamésa. He
crept in and got the ball from underneath the table. He crept under
the table and got the ball. Kapín na sa isá ka búlan nga walâ gid siá
magsóhot (makasóhot) sa simbáhan. For more than a month he has not
(was unable to) put in an appearance at church.

_sókbit_, A thick, hard, scale-like skin near the spur of some
cocks. Such cocks are highly esteemed by those addicted to
cock-fighting. (cf. líkus).

_sókbit_, The ear with husks and silk of the maize or Indian corn; to
form or develop the ear (of maize); to gird on, put on or attach to
a belt a sword, bolo, revolver, or the like; to put a pen, pencil,
or the like, behind the ear; to hang on a nail or peg. Isókbit
sa ímo páha ang tagúb sang binángon. Attach the bolo-scabbard to
your belt. Ginsókbit níya ang binángon. He fastened the bolo on his
hip. Isókbit (sokbitá) ang lápis sa ímo dalúnggan. Put the pencil
behind your ear. (cf. táklus--to gird on; sáb-it, sád-ang).

_sókdap_, Bamboo-splints for wicker-work, to cut bamboo splints, split
off bamboo-splints. Sokdapá ang kawáyan. Make bamboo splints. Split
the bamboo into splints. Sokdapí akó, kay marára akó sing amákan. Cut
bamboo-splints for me, because I am going to weave a bamboo-mat.

_sókdol_, To strike or push against something above. Sokdolá sang
bagát ang haló dirâ sa kisamí. Jab the pole against the iguana there
on the ceiling. (cf. sóndol).

_sóklà_, Silk. (cf. séda id.)

_sóklob_, To put on a garment, slip into a dress, don, cloth, array,
dress, robe, enrobe, attire, garb, apparel. Isóklob ang báyò mo. Put
on your jacket. Soklobí ang bátà sing báyò. Put an outer garment on
the child. Dress the child. (cf. soób).

_soklóban_, Travelling case, clothes-basket, box, chest (of
wicker-work).

_sókmà_, (B) To ask an explanation, exact an account. Sokmaí (soknaí)
siá sang íya nga ginhámbal kahápon bátok sa ímo. Ask him for an
explanation of what he said against you yesterday. (cf. búsla,
sóknà, súdyà).

_sókmat_, See sókmà, sóknà, súkmat--.

_sóknà_, (H) See sókmà id.

_sokób_, To measure liquid and dry goods. Sókba iníng humáy. Measure
this rice. Sókbi akó sing duhá ka pásong. Measure out two bushels
for me. Isokób iníng gantángan. Use this gántang-measure for
measuring. (cf. sókol, takús).

_sokóg_, Anything that stiffens or strengthens, as an upright,
crossbeam, brace, or the like. (cf. talimáskog, balískog, bokóg).

_sókol_, (B) To measure clothes, fields, or the like. Ginsóklan kang
mananáhì ti báyò ang bátà nga diá. (Gintáksan sang manugtábas sing báyò
iníng bátà). This boy was measured for a jacket by the tailor. Sókla
ang heneró nga báklon kadiáng súkì ta (siníng áton súkì). Measure out
the cloth our customer is buying. Ginsókol nánda ang plása. (Gintakús
níla ang plása). They measured the public square. (cf. sokób, takús).

_sokól_, Measure, measurement, size. Anó ang sokól kang báyò mo,
sapátos mo, umá mo, etc.? (Náno ang takús (taláksan) sang ímo báyò,
sapátos, umá, etc.)? What are the measurements of your jacket,
boot, fields, etc.? What size is your jacket, boot, field,
etc.? (cf. taláksan, solókban).

_sokól_, A young, immature mushroom.

_sokóng_, (B) Creased; wrinkled; to form creases, to crease,
wrinkle. (cf. kubúng, bokóng).

_sokót_, To demand payment, collect debts, to dun. Sókta siá sang íya
útang. Collect his debt. Demand payment of his debt. Isokót akó sang
útang níya sa ákon. (Sókti akó sang íya útang sa ákon). Collect from
him his debt to me. Panokót (Sokót) ka dídto. Collect the debts there.

_sóksok_, (B) A small lizard. (cf. tagútò, tikî).

_sóksok_, To put or place under, push underneath, slip on garments,
a ring, etc. Isóksok ang lápis sa sulúd sang kwadérno. Put the pencil
into the composition book. Isóksok ang báyò mo nga bág-o pa lámang
nahumán. Slip into the newly-made jacket. Ginsóksok níya ang kwárta
sa ulúnan. He pushed the money under the pillow.

_solámyog_, A plant. See salámyog id.

_solándoy_, To stumble against something sharp, stub the toe against,
slip, make a false step. Nakasolándoy akó sa tunúk (dúgi) kag napílas
ang ákon tiíl. I kicked against a thorn and hurt my foot. (cf. sándad).

_soláng_, (B) The chin. (cf. suláng, ság-ang).

_solaót_, To fasten or attach to with a knot; to connect the broken
ends of a string, thread, etc. with a knot. (sulaút id.).

_solápok_, See sulápuk--whim, etc.

_solár_, (Sp. solar) A plot of ground, parcel of land, piece of
building ground, lands or fields in general, estate. Ang solár sang
baláy. The piece of land on which the house stands. Malápad ang íya
nga solár. His lands are extensive. (cf. dútà, lúpà).

_solát_, To write, etc. See sulát.

_solát_, (B) Pain in the back, shooting rheumatic pain. (cf. síkmat).

_soldádo_, (Sp. soldado) Soldier, warrior, military
man. (cf. mangangawáy).

_soléras_, (Sp. solera) Cross-beam, floor-beam, rib.

_solísas_, See sorolísas--to be out of alignment.

_solisitár_, (Sp. solicitar) To solicit, seek to obtain, apply
for. (cf. pangáyò, ahâ, pakitábang, pakilóoy).

_solisitúd_, (Sp. solicitud) Solicitude; petition, application,
demand. (cf. pangáyò).

_solitárya, solitáryo_, (Sp. solitario) Tapeworm, taenia. (cf. lúgay,
bítok).

_solô_, (B) Light, lamp; to light, give light, shine. May solô
(sugâ) kamó? Have you a light or lamp? Sól-i (soloí) sánda. (Súg-i
silá). Give them a light. Sinól-an na kamí ti kínke kang pagpanáug
námon. (Sinúg-an níya kamí sing kínke sang ámon pagpanáug). He lighted
us down the stair with a lamp. (cf. sugâ).

_sologoón_, (H) Servant, menial, subject, subordinate, domestic
servant, helper, assistant, employee. (cf. sógò, mutsátso, alagád,
sorogoón).

_solókban_, (H) Measure, standard, gage (for measuring dry and liquid
goods). (cf. sokób, taláksan).

_solók-solók_, (H) The stomach, abdomen; to give blows or fisticuffs
directed against the stomach or abdomen. Masakít ang íya solóksolók. He
has stomach-ache. Nagpagusá silá sang íla solóksolók (pagsolóksolók)
sa waláy loóy-lóoy sa kaílo nga táo túbtub nga nagkúghad siá sing
dugô. They exhausted their rage on the poor fellow and without
the least mercy struck blow after blow with their fists on his
abdomen till he coughed up blood. Indì mo siá pagsolóksolokón
(pagsumbagón sa solóksolók). Don't strike him on the stomach (with
your fist). (cf. soróksorók).

_solókton_, (H) Debts to be collected, debts due, payments to
be demanded, amount to be paid or gathered. May solókton ikáw sa
íya? Does he owe you anything? Is there any money owing to you that
you can demand of him? Pilá ang solókton mo? How much have you to
collect? (cf. sokót, útang).

_solóndan_, (H) Rule, guide, example, exemplar, model, paragon,
pattern, type to be followed or imitated. (cf. sunúd, soróndan).

_solondayón_, Cover, shelter, protection, privacy. Ang paggináhud sang
mga bátà (sang kabatáan) sa plása walâ gid sing solondayón (húsà)
sa ámon baláy. Our house is exposed to all the noise of the boys on
the public square. (cf. sorondayón, húsà, lipúd).

_solóng_, See sulúng--to shine through, be transparent. Nagasolóng
ang dugô sa íya mga písngi kag bibíg. The blood shines through his
(her) cheeks and lips.

_sólong_, See súlung--to pay duty, etc.; to defy, etc.

_solóng_, (B) To see, look at, inspect, view. Sólnga diá. (Tan-awá
iní). Look at this. Nagsolóng tána kang síne. (Nagtán-aw siá sang
síne). He went to see the motion pictures. Nakasolóng akó kahápon kang
beláda. (Nakatán-aw akó kahápon sang beláda). I saw the entertainment
yesterday, i.e. I was present at it. (cf. sulúng, páslong (pasolóng),
bilíd, tán-aw, túluk, himútad, mulálong).


_solopsópan_, (H) The mouthpiece of--a pipe,--a feeding bottle,
etc. (cf. sópsop, sopsópan).

_solosábado_, Every Saturday. (cf. sarasabádo).

_solosimána_, Weekly, every week. (cf. sirisimána).

_solpéo, solpíyo_, (Sp. solfeo) Sol-fa, solfeggio, solmization;
to solfa, practise tonic sol-fa, take lessons in singing.

_sólsol_, To press or force upon, to insist on another's accepting or
receiving something offered him. Isólsol sa íya iníng mga ságing, páhò,
etc. Insist on his accepting these bananas, mangoes, etc. Solsolá gid
siá sa pagpadáyon sang íya pagkamanunúon. Press him to continue his
profession of teaching. Ginsolsolán níya akó sing pílak. He insisted
on my accepting some money. He made me take some money. He forced
some money on me.

_soltéro, soltéra_, (Sp. soltero, -a) Single, a single man or woman,
unmarried. (cf. láy-aw, pamatán-on, olitáo, dalága).

_sompílang, sompiláng_, A piece of rope fastened to the ankles and
used for climbing trees, posts, etc. (cf. sáklit--climbing iron).

_sonáta_, (Sp. sonata) Sonata, a piece of music. (cf. tolokáron).

_sóndol_, To collide, knock or push against, etc. See sókdol.

_sónggab_, To run afoul of, trip, make a false step. See sánggab,
súnggab.

_sóngkod_, A stick, cane, staff, walking stick; to use a walking
stick; help, support. Nagasóngkod na siá (May sóngkod na siá) kon
maglakát, kay tigúlang na (siá). He is using a walking stick now
when he goes out, for he is old (is getting old). Isóngkod (Songkorá)
iníng lipák. Use this piece of split bamboo as a walking stick. Siá
amó ang íya sóngkod sa íya katigulangón. He is her support in her
old age. (cf. bastón).

_sónlog_, To tease, fool, mock, scoff, take off, ridicule, parody,
travesty, exasperate by imitation or repetition of what another
does or says, to mimic. Indì ka magsónlog sa ákon. Indì mo akó
pagsonlogón. Don't mimic me. Don't mock----, tease----, fool----,
me. (cf. tiáwtíaw, sulínga, yagutâ).

_sonlogánon_, Mimicry, mockery, travesty, parody, ludicrous imitation
of another's ways; a mimic, scoffer, one who ridicules or teases
another; to tease, ridicule, etc. (cf. sónlog).

_sonô_, According to, in accordance with, conformable to, in harmony
with, in conformity with. Sonô sa sinúgid ni Fuláno----. According
to what N.N. said----. Sonô siníng bág-o nga pagbulútan----. In
conformity with this new law----. Sonô kay San Páblo----. According
to St. Paul----. Dílì inâ sonô sa (sang) katarúngan. That is (was)
not just. (cf. silíng).

_sónson_, See sóbsob, súnsun--to do often, etc.

_sónson_, Flexible, pliable matting, etc. employed in building
provisional storages for rice and the like.

_sóob, soób_, To put on a garment, to dress, etc. See sóklob,
súl-ub. Sób-a ang báyò mo. Put on your jacket.

_sóod_, (B) To be nearly related, closely akin or related (connected);
to be close by, near by. Nagasóod balá ang ínyo paghimatâ? Are you,
perhaps, nearly related? Dílì gid sóod (Bokón ti sóod, warâ pagsóod)
ang ámon pagparientíhay. Our relationship is not near. Sóod gid ang
ánda (íla) paghimatâ. They are near relations. They are quite closely
related. Nagasóod gid ang ánda (íla) pagkaábyan. They are intimate
friends. (cf. sumúod).

_soód-sóod_, Dim. and Freq. of sóod. To be rather closely connected,
related, etc.

_sóok_, To hollow out, undermine, eat away. Nasoókan (Ginsóok sang
túbì) ang pángpang sa ubús sang baláy ni Fuláno. The bank near N.N.'s
house is undermined. (cf. síok, áb-ab, kábkab).

_soók_, Away from the centre, outskirts, nook, corner, situated in
the interior of the country, an out-of-the-way place; to be away from
the centre, etc. (cf. doók, loók).

_sóol_, (B) Sleeve. (cf. pakô).

_soól_, (B) To pester, bother, annoy, be a nuisance, cause loathing or
aversion. Ginasól-an akó sa bátà nga parahíbì. (Ginaták-an akó sa bátà
nga palahíbì). The baby is always crying and it annoys me. (cf. taká).


_soón_, (B) To cover, enclose, surround, fit well or closely. Diá
nga kálò makasoón gid sa ólo ko. (Iníng kálò makasíbò gid sa ákon
ólo). This hat fits my head well. Són-i ti loón ang dulséra. (Butangí
sing takúp (tákpi) ang dulséra). Put the lid on the preserve
dish. Isoón ang takúp kang botílya kang kalámay. (Ibutáng ang takúp sa
botílya sang kalámay). Put a (the) lid on the sugar-jar. (cf. takúp,
loón).

_sóop_, To cut off near the ground or roots. Soópa ang paggúnting
sang ákon bohók. Cut my hair short. Pasoópi ang bohók ko. Give me a
close crop. Ginsóop níla ang pagtapás sang káhoy. They cut down the
tree close to the ground. Pasoópi sang galáb ang bungálon. Keep the
sickle near the ground in cutting zacate. (cf. sípsip).

_soóp_, Close-shaven, close-cropped, closely shorn, cut down to the
ground. Kasoóp sang íya mga kokó, sang gúnting sang íya bohók, etc. His
nails are cut very short, his hair is closely shorn, etc. (cf. sóop).

_sópas_, (Sp. sopa) Soup; slices of bread for soup. Mabakál akó
kúntà sing sópas. I should like to buy slices of bread (biscuits,
etc.) for soup.

_sopéra_, (Sp. sopera) Soup-tureen.

_sopléte_, (Sp. soplete) Blow-pipe; soldering iron.

_sópò_, A children's game played with shells.

_sópsop_, To sip, draw or suck in. Sopsopá ang húnsoy (sánsoy). Suck--,
draw--, pull--, at the pipe.

_sopsópan_, Mouthpiece. See solopsópan.

_sorbéte_, (Sp. sorbete) Sherbet, ice-cream, cooling fruit drink.

_sórò_, To fizz, fizzle, hiss, bubble, effervesce. Magasórò (Masórò)
ang limonáda kon búksan (abrihán) mo ang botílya. Lemonade effervesces
when you open the bottle.

_sórò_, See bórò--to be worried or sad, to mutter, murmur, complain.

_sorogoón_, (B) See sologoón--servant, menial, etc.

_sorók-sorók_, (B) See solóksolók--stomach, etc.

_sorókton_, (B) See solókton--debts to be collected, etc.

_sorolísas_, Ill-fitting, out of alignment, at odds, at variance,
contradictory, disagreeing; to be out of harmony, disagree,
etc. Nagasorolísas iníng mga sinúgid; tungúd siná índì akó
magpáti. These stories are contradictory; therefore I will not
believe them. Tungúd kay walâ sing kasapulán ang íla bádò amó nga
nagsorolísas ang mga hímos níla. For the reason that they had come to
no agreement about their banquet, their preparations were at cross
purposes. (cf. taláng, tálang, sayúp, dílì sinántò, dílì ígò, dílì
hilitóhog, etc.).

_soróndan_, (B) See solóndan--example, rule, etc.

_sorondayón_, (B) Cover, shelter, privacy, screen, freedom from
noise, observation, etc. Ang baláy ni Fuláno warâ gid ti sorondayón
(walâ gid (sing) húsà) sa (ámon) baláy námon. N.N.'s house is quite
open to observation from ours. Ang paggináhud kang (sang) mga bátà
nga nagasipál (nagahámpang) sa gwâ warâ gid ti sorondayón (walâ gid
sing húsà) sa sulúd sang simbáhan. The noise of the children playing
outside can be clearly heard in church. (cf. solondayón, húsà).

_soróso_, To attack, assault, assail, rush at, go for, be aggressive,
fall upon. Ang idô nagsoróso sa ákon. Ginsoróso akó sang idô. The
dog attacked me. Sorosóha siá. Attack him. Fall upon--. Go for--,
him. (cf. saróso, aránka).

_sorô-sórò_, Dim. and Freq. of sórò. Also: To boil gently,
simmer. (cf. borô-bórò).

_sórot_, (B) Very painful, severe, at its height; to be very painful,
etc. (of stomach-ache, or the like).

_sorótsot_, (B) Swift, quick, voluble, rapid, glib, very fluent
(of speech); near together, dense, close (of trees, plants, etc.);
to talk volubly, etc.; to be close together, etc. Indì akó makasáyod
kang (sang) ginhámbal mo, hay (kay) masorótsot (masákò, magarót). I
cannot understand what you are saying, for you speak so quickly, too
swiftly. Indì kaw (ikáw) maghámbal kanákon ti masorótsot (sa ákon sing
masáko, sing magarót). Don't talk to me so volubly, so swiftly. Indì
mo pagsorotsotón (pagsakóon, paggarotón) ang ímo hámbal. Don't speak
too quickly. (cf. garót, íkit).


_sóso_, The female breast, paps; to suck the breast; pasóso--to give
suck, give or offer the breast, to suckle, nurse (feed) a baby. Ang
bátà nagasóso sa íya nga ilóy. The baby is sucking its mother's
breast. "Buláhan ang tián nga nagdalá sa ímo, kag ang mga dúghan nga
ginsós-an (ginsosóhan, ginsóswan) mo". "Blessed is the womb that
bore thee, and the paps that gave thee suck". Pasós-a (pasosóha,
pasóswa) ang bátà, kay gutúm na. Give the baby--suck,--the breast
(Nurse or feed the baby), for it is hungry. (cf. úbre).

_sôsô_, To squash, squelch, smash, press, compress, squeeze. (cf. nônô,
mômô).

_sosón_, Group, troop, bunch, drove, party, division. Madámò nga
mga sosón nga mga (sang mga) táo ang naglilígad sa ámon baláy. Many
groups of people passed by our house. Tan-awá ináng (yanáng) isá ka
sosón nga mga (sang mga) karabáw dirâ. Look at that herd of buffaloes
over there. (cf. hubón, búnghay, panóng).

_sosoón_, To cover the head against rain or sun, especially said of
women loosening their skirt and putting it over their head. Magsosoón
ka lang, kay magaulán. Cover your head (with your skirt), for it is
coming on to rain. (cf. tákdung, kódong, takuróng).

_sóta_, (Sp. sota) Jack, knave (at cards). Binábà sang sóta ang íya
tinayâ. The knave devoured his stake i.e. won it.

_sotána_, (Sp. sotana) Cassock, soutane.

_sotánghon_, A kind of Chinese vermicelli.

_sotanílya_, (Sp. sotanilla) A small cassock, an acolythe's cassock.

_sotás_, Silk-string, silk-ribbon for bordering garments, etc.

_sótsot_, To thrust--, push--, poke--, upwards with a pole, etc.,
to prick from below. Sotsotá sang lipák ang íya tiíl. Prick his foot
from below with the piece of split bamboo. Sín-o balá ang nagsótsot
sa ákon kagáb-i? Who may (can) have poked me with a stick from below
last night? (cf. hárog).

_sótsot_, To incite, urge, stir up, impel, push, instigate. Ginsótsot
ni Fuláno ang íya útud nga awáyon akó. N.N. incited his brother
to--fight,--quarrel, with me. (cf. súdyot, súgyot, tulúd).

_sóysoy_, To pound, to hull rice with a pestle held in both hands
and used with little force. Soysoyá ang dikdikón. Pound the dikdikón
(hulled rice still mixed with some unhulled grains). (cf. totó, bayó).

_suâ_, A kind of orange tree. Its acid fruit and leaves are used for
seasoning. (cf. swâ).

_suák_, The flower-bud of the coconut-palm, particularly the hard,
tough sheaths that envelope the flower before it blossoms and falls;
to bud (of coconuts). Nagasuák na ang lubí. The coconut-palm is
budding. (cf. swák).

_suál_, To lift up or turn over with the snout, as pigs often do;
to rail at, shout or bark at. Naúlà ang humáy sa tabíg, kay ginsuál
sang báboy. The rice in the harvesting basket was spilt, for the pig
overturned it with its snout (suwál id).

_suál-suál, suál-súal_, Dim. and Freq. of suál. (cf. suwálsuwál).

_suám_, Sugared water, sweet drink (especially for infants).

_suáni_, A sieve, colander, strainer, large ladle with many
perforations employed in removing scum from the boiling juice of
sugarcane, or the like. (swáni id.).

_suát_, To take out, extract, pick stitches, threads, thorns, etc. with
a needle or pin. Suatá sang dágum ang hílo, tunúk (dógi), etc. Take
out the thread, the thorn, etc. with the needle. (cf. sibít, panibít).

_súay_, Quarrel, disagreement, difference, dissention,
misunderstanding, dispute, altercation, tiff, squabble, words;
to quarrel, altercate, disagree, differ, fall out, dispute, bandy
words, squabble, wrangle, bicker. May ginsúay akó kahápon. I had
a quarrel yesterday. Indì kamó magsúay. Don't wrangle. Anó ang ínyo
ginasuáyan? What are you squabbling about? Indì mo siá pagsuáyon. Don't
bandy words with him. Daláyon (pírme) gid lang silá nagasinúay. They
are always quarrelling. (cf. bagâ, báis).

_suáyang_, A kind of fish-trap or fishing net attached to a
pole; to catch fish by means of such a net. Ginasuáyang níla ang
mga ísdà sa subâ. They are catching fish in the river with the
suáyang-net. (cf. suwáyang id.).


_suáy-súay_, Dim. and Freq. of súay. Daláyon gid lang silá
nagasuáysúay (nagasuluáysúay, nagasinuáysúay). They are always
quarrelling. (cf. baísbáis).

_subâ_, River, stream. (cf. sapâ, ílog).

_súbà_, To go up-river, go up-stream. Nagsúbà siá kaína. A short while
ago he went up-river. Subáa ang sapâ. Follow the brook up-stream. Kon
magsúbà ka sa lapás ang páskò dídto ka sa baláy námon madáyon. When
you travel mountainwards after Easter Week (visit us and) stay at
our home. (cf. usá-og--to go down-river).

_subád_, To swallow without chewing, to swallow whole, gulp down,
devour. Ginsubád ang katián sang isá ka mán-og. A snake devoured the
decoy-bird. (cf. sibád, síbà, halúnhon, tulún, tukúb, lámon, lumóy).

_súbak_, (H) To add or mix with, put in, especially to put meat or
fish into a vegetable side-dish, sauce, etc. Subáki ang tinóla sing
ginamós. Put some pickled fish into the vegetable dish. Isúbak iníng
ísdà sa sabáw. Mix this fish with the sauce. (cf. lángkay, lakót).

_subák_, Admixture, addition, solid morsel or ingredient of meat,
fish, etc. in soup, sauce, broth, or the like. (cf. súbak, pátaw).

_súb-an_, From subô. Ginakasúb-an (ginakasuboán) ko inâ. I am sorry
for it.

_subáng_, To rise, appear (of sun and moon, etc.). Nagsubáng na ang
ádlaw. The sun has risen. (cf. bútlak, sídlang, murá).

_subáng_, Firstling, first-fruit (of fruit, vegetables,
etc.). (cf. pangánay).

_subá-súba_, A small, white-winged moth. (cf. sugbá-súgba).

_subásta_, (Sp. subasta) Auction; to auction, sell by auction,
put up for auction, bring under the hammer. Subásta públika. Public
auction. Ginasubásta karón ang íya dútà. His lands are being sold by
auction (brought under the hammer). Subastahá lang ang íya karabáw,
agúd mabayáran ka. Just sell his buffalo by auction that you may get
your payment. (cf. balígyà, pamútong).

_súbat_, To gnaw, nibble, root (as a pig does). Sinubátan nga
maís. Corn that has been gnawed at (by pigs or the like).

_subáy_, Ant (in general). (cf. palâ, lásgà, ayámayám, baháwbaháw,
tigásaw, gúyum).

_súbay_, To measure and divide the harvest, particularly said of the
measuring of threshed and winnowed rice in presence of the owner of
the land and of his tenant or tenants, each one being allotted his
share. Masúbay (magasúbay) kitá sa buás sang áton humáy. To-morrow
we shall measure and divide our rice. Subáya ang humáy. Measure the
rice-crop. (cf. sokób, takús, báhin, párte).

_súbhan_, For subohán from subô--to temper, etc.

_subíng_, A kind of primitive bamboo whistle or mouth organ; flute,
lyre; pan-pipe.

_súb-it_ See sáb-it--to put or hang on, etc.

_súblak_, Generation, progeny, offspring. (cf. inalabúab, himatâ).

_súblang_, To meet, encounter one another coming from different
directions, as the one coming up, the other going down, or the one
going in, the other coming out of a room, interview, etc.; to meet
one another in passing. Nagsublangánay silá nga duhá. The two of them
passed each other. (cf. sumálang, sugatâ, sug-álaw).

_súblang_, To go near, approach, attack; to oppose, go against,
prevent, stop, put a stop (an end) to. Malalangán ang pagsúblang
sang balatían, ápang dílì sang kamatáyon. Diseases can be prevented,
but death not (cannot be prevented). (cf. palapít, soróso; táblaw,
tápnà, puút).

_súblì_, Replacement of another, substitution, inheritance; to
supply--, take--, another's place, to replace another, take over his
work or place, to inherit, become the successor of. Subliá ang óbra
níya. Take over the work from him. Replace him at his task. Ginsúblì
níya ang íya nga mánggad. He inherited his wealth. Nagsúblî sa íya
si Fuláno sa pagpanúdlò sa buluthóan. N.N. took his place at teaching
in the school.

_subô_, Sorrow, grief, sadness, distress, woe, affliction; to be
or become sorrowful, sad, unhappy, woe-begone, etc.; to grieve,
mourn, repine. Nagsubô ang íya tagiposóon. His heart was grieved,
saddened. Nagakasubô siá tungúd sang balítà nga íya nabáton. He
feels sad over the news he received. Ginakasuboán ko gid inâ. I am
very sorry for it. Dílì mo igkasubô inâ. Don't get downcast over
that. Ginakasuboán níya sing dakô ang balatían sang íya ilóy. He is
in great distress about his mother's illness. Dílì mo pagpasuboón
ang ímo mga ginikánan. Don't grieve your parents.

_subó_, To pour water over live coals, over heated iron, etc.; to
harden, temper, steel, make brittle by means of water. Salsálon nga
nasúbwan (sinúbwan, sinuboán, sinubohán, nasúbhan, sinúbhan). Iron
tempered by dipping in water. Súbhan (Súbwan, subohán) mo sing túbig
ang kaláyo. Pour water on the fire. Extinguish the fire by pouring
water over it. Nagsubó siá sang íya binángon. He tempered his bolo
(by making it red-hot and dipping it in water). Ipasubó sa pánday
ang ímo binángon. Let the smith put a hard edge to your bolo.

_subó_, Tempering, temperament, character, disposition. Walâ pagsahoáy
ang íla nga subó; gánì sing masúnsun silá nagaáway. Their temperaments
are different; hence they often quarrel. (cf. gáwì, batásan).

_subóg_, A fish-basket carried at the hip and provided with an opening
armed with spikes that point inward and so prevent the escape of fish,
crabs, shrimps, etc. The subóg is similar to an alát, except for the
lid with a spiked opening.

_súbok_, To root, turn up the earth with the snout as pigs do. Ang mga
báboy nagasúbok sang dútà dirâ. The pigs are rooting there. Iníng búhò
sinubókan sang báboy. The pig was rooting in this hole--or--this hole
was made by the rooting of the pig. Indì mo pagpasubókon ang báboy
dirí sa atubángan sang baláy. Don't permit the pig to root here in
front of the house. (cf. íbok).

_súbok_, To be or become rough, hairy, prickly (of leaves, or the
like).

_subók-súbok_, Dim. and Freq. of súbok.

_súbol_, See sóbol--to expel, banish, etc.

_suból_, The new feathers of a fowl growing under the old feathers
that are being moulted.

_suból-suból_, In the proximity of, very near by, close by; to be
near by, etc. See sóbol, sobólsoból id.

_subón_, (B) In time to come, in the future, later, after some
time. Subón patindogón ko ang sángka baláy nga bág-o. (Sa olíhi
patindogón ko ang isá ka baláy nga bág-o). After some time I shall have
a new house built. Sa tulád kadyá índì pa, pay subón hóod mapamanílà
akó. (Sa karón índì pa, ápang sa olíhi húo mapamanílà akó). Not
just at present, but later on, yes, I shall go to Manila. Subón (Sa
olíhi, kunína) báklan ta ikáw ti kálò nga madálig (sing matahúm nga
kálò). Later on I shall buy you a beautiful hat. (cf. olíhi, kunína,
palaabúton, ogáling).

_súbsub_, See sóbsob--to fall down face foremost, prone.

_súbsub_, To knock the point of a thing against something else,
to put one end or point of a thing into fire, water, or the like.

_subúk_, Hungry, empty (of stomach). (cf. gutúm, ginagútum).

_súbung_, To alloy, reduce or impair by mixture, especially said of
gold being mixed with a baser metal. (cf. sinúbung).

_súbung_, As, like, similar to, resembling. Damák ikáw nga súbung
sang báboy. You are as dirty as a pig. Súbung siní. At once, at
this very instant, right away, immediately, without delay. Maáyo man
kamí sing láwas nga súbung sang sa gihápon. We are in good health as
ever. Taktaká siá nga súbung nga sinákup sang ínyo katilíngban. Dismiss
him from membership in (as a member of) your society. Indì ka magsúbung
sinâ. Don't act like that. Don't do such a thing. (cf. daw, tulád,
parého, kaángay, katúlad).

_subúng_, See súbung. Subúng siní (súbung siní)--at once, etc.

_súbung_, To exhale, steam. Nagasúbung ang ínit sa íya láwas. The
heat is steaming from his body. (cf. ósbong).

_súbwag_, To sow, spread, strew. See sáb-og, sábwag, sábud.

_súbwan_, From subó. (cf. súbhan id.).

_súd-an_, A side-dish to eat with rice, especially fish or meat. Also
used as a verb. Sud-aní ang kán-on sing ísdà. Eat (Take) some fish with
the rice (you are eating). Ginpasud-anán níya kamí sing kárne. He gave
us a side-dish of meat. Pasud-aní silá sing ísdà. Give them some fish
to eat with the rice. Prepare or provide some fish as a side-dish to
eat with their rice. (cf. ikáon, dáplì, daráplì).

_sudáng-sudáng_, An idler, loafer, one who goes about visiting houses,
etc. for the sake of conversation, distraction, or the like. The
augmentative form panudángsudáng is more in use as a verb. Walâ
siá sing trabáho, kóndì nagapanudángsudáng siá. He has nothing to
do but just goes about visiting. Walâ sing pulús yanáng pamatán-on;
sudángsudáng gid lámang siá. That young man is no good; he is a mere
loafer. (cf. landólándo, lagáwlágaw, haráyháray, tiógtióg).

_súdlib_, To set fire to, burn. (cf. síndi, síndot, dábok, tútud,
súnug).

_súdlut_, To prod, prick, sting; instigate. (cf. súntok, túslok).

_sudó_, See sodó--to draw, pull, etc.

_súd-o_, See sodó, sód-o.

_súd-ong, súd-ung_, To approach, come near; to help, give shelter or
protection. (cf. palapít, búlig, tábang).

_súdsud_, To go on an errand in person, do personally, venture out
or abroad. Amó gid gánì inâ ang ákon ginsúdsud dirí sa tungâ ang
gáb-i. That was the reason why I came here in person in the middle
of the night. (cf. kúdaw, dúkaw, gúnaw, túdà).

_súdsud_, A scraper; to scrape off, rub off, erase. (cf. hódhod).

_súdsud_, A fishing net that is mostly used for catching fish at night;
to catch fish (at night) by means of the súdsud-net.

_súdyà_, To examine into, investigate, exact an account, make
answerable for. Pagasudyaón kunína sang Diós ang tanán nga mga ginbúhat
sang táo. God will later on exact an account of all the deeds that
a man has done. (cf. súkmà, súknà).

_súdyang_, A sharp splinter. (cf. súyak, úngon, dalíngag, dógi).

_súdyot_, To incite, stimulate, urge, tempt. (cf. súgyot, súplut,
tulúd, sútsut, sótsot).

_suéldo_, (Sp. sueldo) Wages, wage, pay, salary, stipend; to salary,
pay--wages,--a salary. Sueldohí siá sing napúlò ka mángmang ang
búlan. Pay him a salary of ten pesos a month. Pilá ang suéldo mo? How
much salary do you receive? How much do you receive in wages? How
much pay do you get? (cf. sóhol, báyad, baláyran, binulánbúlan).

_suérte_, (Sp. suerte) Lot, fate, risk, venture, chance, luck, fortune,
hazard, accident. (cf. pálad, kapaláran).

_sugâ_, (H) Lamp, lantern, light; to light (a lamp). Sugaí (súg-i)
ang balatonán. Light up the reception room. Súg-i kamí dirí. Light
a lamp for us here. Bring us a light. Ari na si Fuláno, kay nagasíga
ang sugâ sa íya nga hulút. N.N. is here now, for the lamp in his room
is lit. (cf. sánag, íwag, solô, kínke, tínghoy, kapáwà, lampará).

_sugabáw_, A small weir (lág-i) used in fish-traps or fish-corrals
in rivers, especially in the fish-corral called "pailíg or pasubâ".

_sugád_, To follow, imitate, mimic, copy; to reach, come
to. (cf. sunúd, ílog, súnlug, kaín).

_súg-ak_, To fill--, be full--, to overflowing, be brimful, choke-full;
to spirt, stream, flow out or over. (cf. sulúg-ak).

_sugakúb_, Leaves of the buri palm, etc. sewn together and used as
a protection against the rain; a primitive raincoat made of such
leaves. (cf. salokób).

_sugakúd_, To cause a swelling and give pain, stick out
prominently, be palpable (of splinters, thorns, etc. sticking in the
flesh). Nagasugakúd ang tunúk (dógi) sa ákon tiíl. The thorn in my
foot is quite perceptible by the touch.

_sugál_, Gambling, gaming; to gamble, game, especially playing
at cards. Batíd siá magsugál (sa pagsugál). He is an expert at
gambling. Indì kamó magsugál sa ákon baláy. Indì nínyo pagsugalán ang
ákon baláy. Don't gamble in my house. Daláyon gid lang silá nagasugál
(nagasinugál). The are always gambling.

_sugálan_, Gambling-house, gaming-house, gaming-saloon, casino,
place--, room--, table--, etc. where gambling is indulged
in. (cf. sugál, sugaról).

_sug-álaw, sug-aláw_, (B) To meet, encounter, come upon, fall in with,
especially said of persons coming from different directions. Kang
pagsug-alawáy (Sang pagsugataáy) námon nagdungán (nagdúngan)
kamí padúlung sa Ilóngílong. When we met we went on together in the
direction of Iloilo. Sug-aláwa sa dálan. (Sagataá siá sa dálan). Try to
fall in with him on the road. (cf. súgat, sugatâ, sumálang, samálang).

_súg-an_, From sugâ--to light a lamp.

_sugaról_, Habitual cardplayer, gambler, gamester. (sugál; cf. tahór).

_súgat_, To go to meet. Súgat ka sa íya. Sugáta siá. Go to meet
him. (cf. aláwálaw, sugatâ).

_súgat_, A solemn funeral in which the priest goes out to meet the
corpse either at the house of the dead or at some distance from
the church.

_sugatâ_, (H) To meet from opposite or different directions. Ang
pagsugataáy ni Hesús kag sang íya Ilóy. The meeting of Jesus and his
Mother. (cf. sug-álaw, súblang, sumálang).

_sugatán_, Place of meeting; the arch erected for the purpose of
celebrating the ceremonies of the joyful meeting of the Risen Christ
and His Blessed Mother on Easter-Sunday.

_súgba_, To chance or happen to be present, attend. Nakasúgba siá sa
katipúnan sang mga índì sa íya nga búnghay. He happened to be present
at a meeting of men that were not of his party. (cf. támbong).

_súgba_, To throw into the fire, scorch, singe, roast. Isúgba ang
papél, kárne, etc. sa kaláyo. Throw the paper, meat, etc. into the
fire. (cf. bóog, íhaw).

_sugbá-súgba_, A white moth. (cf. subásúba id.). Also: a turn-coat,
changeling, waverer, one who easily changes his faith, opinion,
friends, etc.

_súgbo_, To plunge in; to do for the first time, enter a profession,
make the first plunge in life, etc. Súgbo ka sa túbig. Plunge into
the water. Bág-o pa lang siá magsúgbo sa pagpanúdlò. Only recently
he entered the teaching profession. Ginsugbohán sang karabáw ang
tulúgban. The buffalo plunged or jumped into the mudhole.

_súghay_, To go from place to place, walk about, travel; to
walk the streets, stroll, loaf, loiter, idle away the time, walk
about aimlessly. Nagasúghay gid lang silá sang mga dálan. They
are just strolling (loafing, loitering) about, walking up and
down the streets. Ang mga trak nagasúghay na sang madámò nga
kabanwahánan. Trucks are now plying between, passing and repassing
between, many towns. (cf. lakát, balíkbálik; landólándo, lagáwlágaw,
tiyógtiyóg).

_súghut_, To creep or crawl through a hole, enter through a small
opening or aperture, force a way through. Nagsúghut siá sa maíkit nga
mga pinúnò sang mga kahóykahóy. He crept through the dense thickets
(brushwood). (cf. sóhot, súhut).

_súgi_, See asúgi--mercury, etc.

_sugí_, To ignite, kindle, set fire to, light. Sugihá (súgya) ang
sálong. Set fire to the pitch. (cf. síndi, dáig, dábok).

_súgid_, Talk, tale, story, conversation, account, report, statement,
narrative, relation, yarn, declaration, information, news; what
is or has been told or said; to tell, say, speak out, set forth,
state, declare, unfold, inform, disclose, give utterance to. Anó ang
súgid (sinúgid) níya? What did he say? Súgid na. Tell it now. Speak
out. Isúgid mo sa íya inâ. Tell him that. Sugíri akó sang nahanabô
dídto. Tell me what happened there. Ginpaandamán níya silá nga índì
magsúgid sa bisán kay sín-o sang íya nga ginhímò. He warned them not
to tell anybody what he had done. Ang íya ginsúgid butíg. What he
said is (was) a lie. (cf. hámbal, púlong, silíng).

_sugíd-súgid_, Dim. and Freq. of súgid. Talk, gossip, rumour, report,
hearsay, tittle-tattle; to rumour, whisper, gossip, tell tales,
relate. (cf. konókóno, hinudínghúding).

_sugilámbong_, Short essay, story, novel, romance, fictitious
tale. (cf. súgid, sugilánon, ámbong).

_sugilánon_, (H) Conversation, talk, chat; to chat, have a
conversation, talk to each other. Nakakitaáy kamí ni Fuláno, ápang walâ
kamí magsugilanonáy. N.N. and myself saw each other, but we did not
talk to each other. Anó na man ang íla ginasugilánon dirâ? What are
they talking about there again? Ang buút náton pagasugilanónan karón
amó ang bág-o nga pagbulút-an----. What we wish to talk over amongst
ourselves is the new law----. (cf. hambárò, hambalánon, odóyódoy).

_sugilanonán_, (H) Drawing room, waiting room, entrance hall,
lobby. (cf. súgid, sugilánon; balatonán--reception room).

_sugír-om_, (B) To blacken, become swarthy, etc. See sagír-om,
sagíl-om, itúm, ilóm).

_súgkay_, (B) A fine-tooth comb; to comb (and catch lice) with such
a comb. Sugkayá ang bohók na. (Sulúra ang íya bohók). Comb his hair
with a fine-tooth comb. (cf. husáy, súlud).

_súgmad_, To place--, set--, fish-traps; to commence the building
of a fish-corral (punút), ramming in the upright posts (ósok),
etc. Nakasúgmad na kamó sang punút? Have you started building the
fish-corral? Ipasúgmad (Sugmará (-adá)) na ang punút, kay natigána na
ang mga kawáyan (nga pulúnton). Let work on the fish corral (fish-trap)
begin now, for the bamboo for it is ready.

_súgnud_, To stir the fire, push the burning wood inwards, in order
that the fire may burn better. Isúgnud ang gatóng sa kaláyo. Stir the
fire. Push the fire-wood further into the centre of the fire. Sugnurí
ang tiníg-ang. Gather together or stir the fire for boiling rice.

_súg-o_, To be in a bad humour, be or become refractory, obstinate. See
pasúg-o.

_súgok_, Very fat, bull-necked, pot-bellied. (cf. baragóok).

_súgpà_, Blood-spitting; to spit blood, vomit--, throw up--,
blood. Nagsúgpà siá kahápon. He spit blood yesterday. Ginasúgpà
siá. He is subject to blood-spitting. (cf. kúghad, súka, lúad).

_súgpay_, To starve, famish, become exhausted (through
hunger). (cf. súpay).

_súgpon_, To splice, add to in length, prolong, join, continue. Sugponá
ang duhá ka písì. Join the two strings together. Sugponí ang
kalát, kay malíp-ot. Join another piece to the rope, for it is too
short. Isúgpon iníng lúbid. Add this string or cord. Indì ka magsúgpon
sa mga dinúpak nga halambalánon. Don't join in--, take part in--,
indecent conversations.

_súgud_, A kind of reed similar in appearance to tígbaw, but with a
stalk covered with tiny hairs.

_sugúd_, To sting, prick, bite, said of insects. Ginsugúd akó sang
putyúkan. I was stung by the bee.

_súgud_, (H) To begin, commence, start, enter upon. Súgud na kamó
sang pagarádo, pagáni, nobéna, rosáryo, etc. Súgdi na nínyo ang
pagarádo, ang nobéna, ang rosáryo, etc. Begin to plough, to harvest
the rice, the novena, the rosary, etc. Nasúgdan na ang pagpatíndog sang
baláy. The building of the house has now begun. Sín-o ang nagsúgud sang
pakigáway? Who started the fight, who began fighting? Kon sumúgud ka
sing isá ka butáng tapúson mo gid. If you start something, carry it
through to the end. (cf. umpisá).

_sugúng_, To force, compel, insist. Indì mo siá pagsúnggon
(pagsugungón) sa pagpangabúdlay sing támà. Don't make him work too
hard. (cf. ahát, pílit).

_sugúng_, Grievous, serious, hard to bear, grave; to become
grievous or hard to bear. Sugúng na, konó, ang íya pagbátì. They
say he is seriously ill now. Nagasugúng na ang íya balatían. His
sickness is getting serious. Kon magsugúng ang íya balatían táwgon
nínyo ang Párì. In case his sickness becomes serious, call the
priest. (cf. sángsang).

_sugút_, Conform, conformable, agreeable, agreeing, willing, granting;
to agree, accede, defer to, fall in with, concur, assent, acquiesce,
to conform to, approve of. Sugút ka sinâ? Do you agree to that? Do
you allow it or approve of it? Nagkasugtánay na silá. They have
come to an agreement or understanding. Indì mo siá pagsúgtan sang
amó nga mga butáng. Don't give him your consent with regard to those
things. Pasúgta siá. Let him agree. Make him give his consent. Pasúgti
siá. Let him have his way. Balasolón gid ang batásan sádtong mga
ginikánan nga íla ginapasúgtan lang ang íla mga bátà sang tanán níla
nga luyáglúyag. It is very blameworthy in those parents who allow
their children to have their own way in everything.

_súg-ut_, To bind hemp-fibre together and roll it up neatly in
a basket previous to putting it on a reel and forming it into
hanks, etc. Sug-utá ang lánot. Get the hemp-fibre ready for
reeling. (cf. tágak, súgpon).

_sug-után, sug-útan_, The basket used in the operation of
súg-ut. (cf. tagakán id.).

_sug-úton, sug-utón_, Hemp-fibres to be got ready for the reel.


_súgyot_, To urge on, egg on, tempt, induce, stir up, agitate,
excite, provoke, arouse, instigate. Ginsúgyot níya siá sa pagpadáyon
sang kasábà. He urged him on to continue the lawsuit. Indì mo siá
pagsugyotón sa pagpahalín sang íya agsadór. Don't induce him to dismiss
(send away) his leaseholder. Si Eba nagpasúgyot sa yáwà. Eve allowed
herself to be seduced by the devil. (cf. súdyot id.).

_suhâ_, A kind of small orange. See suâ id.

_suhág_, To fall out, disagree, be inconvenient or incongruous;
be not in accord. (cf. sihág, sipák, simáng, híbag).

_súhut_, To creep or crawl through a narrow passage, etc. See sóhot,
súghut id.

_suítik_, Pick-pocket, thief. (cf. sigumár, makáwat).

_súka_, Vomiting, vomit; to vomit, to bring up, be sick. Nagsúka siá
sang íya kináon--or--ginsúka níya ang íya kináon. He vomited what
he had eaten. "Ang idô nagbálik sa íya súka or sinúka" (ginsukáhan,
sinukáhan). "The dog is returned to his vomit" (the place where
he vomited).

_sukáb_, To lift slightly the edge of, to raise the hem or border
as of a mat, carpet, etc. Sukabá ang amákan, kay tan-awón ko kon
anó ang árà sa idálum. Raise the mat a little, for I want to see
what is underneath it. Ang atóp sinukabán sang hángin sing tátlo ka
pánid nga sin. The wind lifted three sheets of galvanized iron off
the roof. Ginsukáb níla ang bató kag nasápwan sa idálum ang isá ka
dakô nga iwí-íwi. They lifted one side of the stone and discovered
underneath a huge scorpion. (cf. ukáb, sukíb, tukíb).

_súkad_, To ladle or take out rice from a kettle, scoop out (rice,
etc.). Sukára ang kán-on sa kólon. Take the rice out of the kettle
or cooking pot. Sukári akó sing kán-on, kay ginagútum akó. Take out
some rice for me; I am hungry. (cf. hakíd).

_súk-ad_, To scoop or tear out. See lúk-ad id. (cf. súbok).

_sukámod_, To stumble, trip in walking, fall to the ground. (cf. dágpà,
dúsmò).

_súkang_, To tread or trample on, take a firm stand on, step
on. (cf. tápak, lápak, tikáng, síkad).

_súkat_, Match, mate, the equal of another in any kind of work; to
be a match or mate on equal terms. Iníng duhá ka táo nagasukatáy sa
sugilánon, pagpangabúdlay, paglakát, etc. These two men are equal to
each other in their powers of conversation, in bearing the fatigues of
work, in marching, etc. Indì ikáw makasúkat sa ákon sa paglakát. You
are no match for me (not my match) in walking. (cf. tupúng, túpung).

_súkat_, To measure (clothes, etc.). Sukáti akó sing isá ka
térno. Measure me for a suit of clothes. Make me a suit of clothes
to measure. (cf. takús, sókol).

_sukát_, Anniversary, annual celebration, anything a year old or of
a year ago; to be a year old, to be the anniversary of. Sukát na
ang (sang) paghalín níya dirí. It is now a year ago since he left
here. Iníng kaadláwan amó ang ikáp-at ka pagsukát sang----. This day
is the fourth anniversary of----. Nagsukát na ang humáy sa siníng
tabungós. The rice in this tabungós-basket is now a year old. Iníng
táo ginasukatán gid sang íya pinatubás (patubás) nga humáy. The
rice-harvest of this man is going to be a year old (before he touches
it) i.e. he has so much left over from former harvests, that he is
really not in need of the new harvest. Kon magsukát (sumukát) na ang
ádlaw sang----. When the day of----comes round----.

_sukát-súkat_, Dim. and Freq. of súkat--to measure, etc.

_súk-ay_, A plough; to plough. (cf. arádo, dáro).

_súk-ay_, To dig, to turn up earth, etc. Suk-ayá ang dútà. Turn up
the earth. Ginasúk-ay níla ang dútà. They are raking or turning up
the earth. Isúk-ay sa dútà iníng sadól. Use this hoe to turn up the
soil with.

_sukáy_ (_sang ólo_), To collect (one's thoughts); cudgel (one's
brains). (cf. padálum (sang hunâhúnà); palíntong, palibúg (sang ólo)).

_sukáy_, To part asunder grass, etc. Ginsukáy níla ang tígbaw, agúd
maghapús ang pagági dirâ. They parted the tígbaw-reeds, in order
that the passage might become easy. Sukayá ang kógon, kahilamonán,
etc. Part the cogon, grass, etc. asunder.

_súkì_, Customer, client, regular buyer or visitor. Súkì ko siá. He
is one of my regular customers.


_sukî_, A small bamboo cup for measuring out toddy or for drinking
out of.

_sukíb_, To lift the edge of, open a little in order to peep in, have
a look at. Sukibá ang kúmbung, ang baúl, etc. Open the curtain, the
trunk, etc. a little (and see what is behind or inside). (cf. sukáb).

_súk-it_, To hang on a peg, etc. See sáb-it. Isúk-it ang kálò mo
sa lánsang--or--suk-ití ang lánsang sang kálò mo. Hang your hat on
the nail.

_súklà_, Silk. See sóklà id.

_súklì_, To change, exchange, take and give an equivalent, return in
kind. Kuháon ko lang iníng ímo kimóno, kay suklián ko lang ikáw sing
isá nga bág-o man kon magkádto akó sa Ilóngílong. I'll take this kimono
of yours and buy a new one for you, when I go to Iloilo. (cf. báylo,
ílis, báyad).

_súkmà_, To take to task for, etc. See sókmà.

_súkmat_, See súkmà, sóknà.

_súknà_, See súkmà, sóknà.

_súkò_, Plenty, galore, abundant, excessive, exorbitant, too much,
very much. Súkò kadagáyà karón ang mga páhò. Mangoes at present are
plentiful. Súkò kamahál karón ang (sang) bilí sang ísdà. The price
of fish is exorbitant now. (cf. lakás, támà, masyádo, lám-ag, dúro).

_sukúd_, Fate, chance, luck, fortune, opportunity, occasion; bad luck,
misfortune, hard lines. (cf. pálad, kapaláran; buísit).

_sukút_, See sokót--to exact payment, etc.

_súkut_, Fierce, vehement, violent (of fighting, pain,
etc.); to increase, augment, be or become vehement, be at its
height. (cf. sángsang, sugúng, hinurungán).

_sulá_, A part of a tuber with at least one eye in it for planting;
to cut up tubers into "sulá". Sulahá ang úbi. Cut the úbi in
pieces. Sulahí akó sing tátlo ka sulá nga úbi. Cut for me three pieces
of úbi (for planting).

_suláb_, The edge of a cutting tool. Sa suláb sang binángon. With
the edge of the bolo. (cf. suráb).

_súl-ab_, (H) Acidity of the stomach, flatulence; to develop or form
acidity, be full of wind. Nagasúl-ab ang ákon solóksolók. My stomach
is affected with acidity.

_sulagót_, Inconvenient; too tight. See sulápgot id.

_sulágpot_, See sulagót, sulápgot.

_súlak_, To throw, hurl, fling. (cf. túlak, pilák, habóy).

_súlak_, To start planting, building, etc. See panúdlak, which is
more commonly used.

_sulákwid_, To get one's foot caught or entangled. Nakasulákwid ang
ákon tiíl sa gamót sang káhoy. My foot caught in the roots of the tree.

_sulálob, sulálub_, See sulálum--chickenpox.

_sulálum_, Chickenpox, varicella; a kind of eruptive and contagious
disease. Sulálob id.

_sulámbaw_, (H) A fishing net. See salámbaw.

_sulámbaw_, To fasten the knife above, instead of below, the spur of
a game-cock in cock-fighting.

_sulámpaw_, See sulámbaw.

_súlang_, To go in, enter, said especially of fish entering the
pasulangán; to make enter. Sulánga ang mga ísdà sa pasulangán, agúd
madakúp gid náton. Make the fish enter the inner trap, that we may
be sure to catch them.

_súlang_, To interrupt, intrude upon. Indì mo pagsulángon ang
babáylan sa íya mga buluhatón. Don't interrupt the hocus-pocus of the
(superstitious practitioner) medicine man.

_suláng_, (B) The chin. (cf. soláng, ság-ang).

_sulánò_, To flatter, ingratiate oneself with, wheedle, cajole, fool,
trick. (cf. unís, utís, odót, hulánò, hásò, lág-it).

_sulánting_, Shrill, piercing, audible at a great distance, carrying
far; to utter a shrill, piercing, loud cry, to shriek. (cf. sílik).

_sulápgot_, Inconvenient, impeding on account of being too tight; to be
too tight, etc. Ang ákon kamisón makitíd (masipót), gánì nagasulápgot
kon maglakát akó. My chemise is too narrow, consequently it hinders
(inconveniences) me when I walk. (cf. sulagót, sulágpot).

_sulápuk_, Whim, fancy, caprice, sudden turn or start, impulsiveness,
impetuosity; to do or act impulsively, hastily; to rush. Sulápuk
sang kabubút-on. A sudden fancy or impulse of the will. Nagsulápuk
(sumulápuk) ang dugô sa íya ólo. The blood rushed to his
head. (cf. hinalî, hinálî, dalás, tabinás).

_sulát_, Letter, writing, script, handwriting, penmanship, calligraphy;
to write, pen. Sulatá iní. Write this (it down). Sulatí siá. Write
him. Sinulát. Written. Nakabáton ka sang íya sulát? Have you received
his letter? Ang mga sinulatán ni Fuláno nabántug na. N.N.'s writings
have become famous. Maáyo siá magsulát. He writes a good hand. He is
a good writer. Ilakíp sa sulát iníng retráto. Enclose this photo in
the letter. Isulát sa íya ang nahanabô. Write him and tell him what
happened. Indì, kay nasulát----. No, because it is written----.

_sulát_, Pain in the back. (cf. solát, síkmat).

_sulát-súlat_ Dim. and Freq. of sulát. Daláyon gid lang siá,
nagasulátsúlat sing mga binaláybay. He is constantly dabbling at
writing poetry.

_sulaút_, See solaót--to connect broken ends of thread, etc.

_suláw_, (B) To see, look at, etc. See sulúng. (Sulawá--súlnga,
sulungá).

_súlay_, To walk through pelting rain, flying bullets, etc., to brave,
defy opposition, challenge difficulties. Ginsúlay níya ang ulán,
bágyo, ínit, etc. He went out (did his work) in spite of the rain,
the storm, the heat, etc. Suláya lang ang mga lisó. Brave the rain
of bullets. Sinúlay níya sing matútum ang tanán nga mga kabudláyan
kag kalisúd. He bravely (courageously, pluckily) went through all
fatigues and difficulties. (cf. súray).

_súlay_, Prop, support, shore, a length of cane or wood put up in a
leaning position to prevent a house, wall, fence, etc. from falling;
to prop, prop up, support, shore up. Suláyi ang baláy mo, agúd índì
mapúkan sang hángin. Put props to your house, lest the wind should
blow it over. Magsúlay (manúlay, magpanúlay) na kitá sang áton mga
baláy, kay may bágyo nga maabút. Let us shore up our houses (with
leaning supports), for a storm is approaching. (cf. tokó--an upright
or vertical prop for floors, etc.).

_suláy_, To tempt, try to seduce, lead into temptation, put to the
test, provoke, incite, entice, persuade (especially to do evil). Indì
mo siá pagsulayón. Don't--tempt him,--put him to the test. Si Hesús
ginsuláy sang yáwà (manunúlay). Jesus was tempted by the devil
(tempter). (cf. hágad, sútsut, súgyot, tulúd).

_suláy_, To split, cleave apart, separate from. (cf. súlhay).

_súlda_, (Sp. soldar) Soldering material; to solder, weld. Suldahá
ang sim. Solder the galvanized iron. Isúlda iníng tímgà sa tohók sang
alhíbi. Use this lead to solder the hole in the water tank.

_suléras_, See soléras--floor-beam.

_súlhay_, To be easy to split or to cleave apart; to separate from,
disperse, push or drive away. (cf. tálhà, suláy, sipák, íway, halín,
tábug).

_súlhay_, (B) To feel fresh, be comfortable, as after a bath on a
hot day, or the like. Nagsúlhay ron ang památyag ko, hay nakaparígos
akó. (Nagprésko (Présko) na ang ákon památyag, kay nakapalígos akó). I
feel quite fresh now, because I have taken a bath. (cf. présko,
táwhay, maáyo).

_sulî_, Upside down, topsy-turvy, head over heels, reverse, inverted;
to turn upside down, invert the order of things, etc. Sulî, ang
pagpatíndog níla (nánda) siníng halígi (kadyá nga harígi). Ginsulî
níla (nánda) ang pagpatíndog siníng halígi (kadyá nga harígi). They
planted (set up) this post upside down. Sulión mo ang panghígdà
(pamatáng) mo sa ímo higdáan (sa baratángan mo). Turn right round
on the bed, lie the other way about, lie with your head where your
feet are now. Natabô ang sulî sang íla ginpaabút. Nagsulî ang íla nga
ginláum. (Natabô ang sulî kang ánda ginpaabút). The reverse of what
they expected came to pass. (cf. balískad, balikwâ, balíkwat, kulúb).

_súlib_, To smoke out (bees, etc.); to set fire to cogon-grass, burn
out a jungle (kaingín) or the like. (cf. paasó, sílab, súnug, tútud).

_sulíg_, A small fish with reddish stripes.

_sulikáp_, To sneak or slink away, etc. See salipótpot, pasalipótpot.

_sulínga_, Mockery, ridicule; to scoff, mock,
ridicule. (cf. sinulínga).


_sulingót_, To be angry, to frown, sulk, be offended, look dark or
cross, etc. (cf. suringót, bulingót, buringót, súngon, súnggud).

_sulíp, súlip_, To squeeze oneself through a small aperture, creep
or crawl into a hole, etc. with bent body. Sulipá ang bóla sa
idálum sang táytay. Crawl under the bridge and get the ball. Indì
ka makasulíp (makasúlip) dirâ. You cannot squeeze yourself through
there. (cf. sóhot, súrip).

_sulíp_, Turned up (of eyes); to turn up (said of the eyes of one in
a fit or at the point of death). Nagasulíp ang matá sang bátà nga
ginaabút sang masoswélo. A child in a convulsive fit turns up its
eyes. (cf. durós; pasulíp--to glance upon, cast a glance upon, etc.).

_súlit_, To repeat, do (over) again, iterate, reiterate, recur, revert,
resume. Sulíton mo ang pagbása sang tulún-an. Sulítan mo sang bása
ang tulún-an. Read the book once more. (cf. liwán, liwát).

_sulít-súlit_, Dim. and Freq. of súlit.

_sulopâ, sulupâ_, See the following súlpà.

_súlpà_, (B) A piece of bamboo of two joints length used as a
receptacle for hulled rice (for use in the family). (cf. bulugásan,
burugásan, tagúbtub, talúbtub, pasók).

_súlpò_, To dislocate, dislodge, sprain; to be a candidate for a second
term of office. Nasúlpò (Nagkasúlpò) ang íya abága. His shoulder was
dislocated. Si Fuláno nagpasúlpò, ápang walâ siá pagsulpoá sang mga
pumililî. N.N. offered his candidacy again, but the electors did not
return him to office. Ginsúlpò níla ang dáan nga pangúlo-bánwa. They
voted again for the old Municipal President. (cf. líw-as, lúak).

_súlput_, To clean out a tube, etc. by pushing a feather, straw, piece
of wood, or the like, through it. Sulputá ang lágtok sa ímo húnsoy (sa
sánsoy mo). Clean the dirt out of your pipe or cigarholder. Ginsúlput
níya (na) ang húnsoy, kay (sánsoy, hay) mapín-ot. He cleaned the stem
of his pipe, because it did not draw well. Isúlput iníng bagát sa túbo
nga salsálon, kay punô sang ságbot. (Isúlput diáng bagát sa túbo nga
salsálon, hay butâ kang rámò). Push this pole through the iron tube,
for it is full of rubbish. (cf. súlsug).

_súlput_, A rammer, ramrod (of a gun); a piston-like rod used for
detonating a pop-gun; a hollow cylindrical mould for the making of
small cakes or tablets of cocoa (cacao, chocolate).

_súlsug_, See súlput, with the difference that súlsug implies a motion
backwards and forwards, and súlput just one push through.

_súlsul_, To press upon, insist, etc. See sólsol.

_suluayán_, (H) Discussion, debate, project or bill to be debated;
that is to be discussed, disputed or to be quarrelled about. (cf. súay,
suluayón; suluwayán id.).

_suluayón_, (H) Quarrel, squabble, scuffle, wrangle; cause or motive
of a quarrel. (cf. súay, suluayán; suluwayón id.).

_súl-ub_, To dress, put on (a garment). See soób, sóklob.

_sulubakô_, To be very busy, occupied, etc; having much to
do. Nagasulubakô kamí karón sang (pag) áni. At present we are very
busy gathering in the rice. (cf. sákò, dúlup, dánghos).

_súlud_, The reed in a weaving loom; a comb for the hair, especially
one for combing out lice, etc. (cf. súgkay, husáy).

_sulúd_, Inside, contents, interior, what is within; included, together
with; to come in, enter, go in; to enter, invade, overrun. Anó ang
sulúd siníng bakág? What are the contents of this basket? Ang sulúd
sang baláy. The inside (interior) of the house. Sa sulúd sang isá ka
búlan. Within a month. Mabáton mo dirâ ang sóhol nga napúlò ka mángmang
nga binúlan sulúd ang pagkáon. You will receive there a monthly
salary of ten pesos with free board (board included). Usisáa kon anó
ang sulúd sinâ. Examine what is within (its contents). Sulúd! Come
in! Indì akó makasulúd, kay napintalán ang ganháan. I cannot come in,
for the door is bolted. Pasúdla ang mga bátà sa simbáhan. Make the
children enter the church. Sinulúd ang bánwa sang mga buyóng. The
robbers invaded the town. Súdli ang kínke sing agás. Fill the lamp
with kerosene. Nasúdlan na ang paligosán sing túbig. The bath-tub
has been filled with water. Iníng tabungós walâ na sing sulúd. This
basket is now empty. Yanáng káha may sulúd nga madámò nga pílak. That
box contains much money. (cf. sulúdlan, kasúdlan, unúd).

_sulúdlan_, (H) Receptacle, vessel; entrance, gate, door. (cf. sulúd).

_sulúdsud_, A scraper, a tool used for scraping. (cf. súdsud).

_sulúg_, Current; to flow with a current, flow rather swiftly. Ang
túbig sang subâ nagasulúg, kay may bahâ. The water in the river is
flowing with quite a current now, for there is a flood.

_sulúg_, Cock, rooster. (cf. agák, manók).

_súl-ug_, To cooperate, collaborate, join forces. (cf. buligáy,
dágiaw, híl-o).

_sulúg-ak_, To be brimful, chock-full, full to overflowing; to surfeit,
loathe, have enough (more than enough) of a thing. (cf. súg-ak, punô,
taká, sumô, súm-od).

_sulugálan_, Place (house, room, den) where gambling is indulged
in. (cf. sugál, sugálan).

_sul-ugán_, Anything that needs assistance, help or cooperation;
requiring concurrent effort or labour, common, joint,
cooperative. (cf. súl-ug).

_sulugilanonán_, Drawing room, place for conversation, or the like. See
sugilanonán.

_sulug-utón, sulug-úton_, Hemp fibres to be got ready for
reeling. (cf. súg-ut, talagakón).

_suluhulán_, (H) A salaried position; salary, wages; a person that
is earning wages or should be paid a salary. (cf. sóhol).

_súluk_, Backwater; to turn back, flow up river or up stream (of the
tide or of water turned back on account of some obstruction).

_sulukasók_, Entangled, twisted, complicated, difficult to smooth
or arrange in order; to be entangled, etc. Sulukasók gid ang
íya bohók. His hair is all in a tangle, is difficult to comb
out. (cf. surukisók id.).

_suluk-áyan_, (H) Harrowing; a field, etc. to be
harrowed. (cf. súk-ay).

_suluk-áyon_, (H) What is to--, should--, be harrowed.

_sulukísok, sulukisók_, Entangled, complicated. See sulukasók.

_suluk-ítan_, (H) A peg, nail, bracket, rack. (cf. súk-it, salab-ítan).

_suluksúkan_, (H) Hollow, socket, pocket; partition, division,
part, department (of a bookstand, writing desk, portfolio,
etc.). (cf. sóksok).

_sulukusák, sulukúsak_, Entangled, complicated, etc. See sulukasók.

_sululátan_, Writing, for writing; office;
writing--table,--desk,--room, escritoire. Papél nga sululátan. Writing
paper. (cf. sulát).

_sululáton_, What is to be--, should be--, can be--, written; a story,
an event, an incident, etc. to be set down in writing. (cf. sulát,
sululátan).

_sulúlhan_, (H) A salaried position, etc. See suluhulán.

_sululungán_, (H) What is to be--confronted,--met,--satisfied,--paid
for, as an obligation, duty, debt, etc. (cf. súlung).

_sulumbákì_, Strife, contention, variance, quarrel, struggle; to
contend, struggle, quarrel. (cf. sumbákì, sumpákil, súay, báis).

_sulumbúngon_, (H) Charge, accusation to be brought
forward. (cf. súmbung).

_sulúndan_, Model, pattern, type, example, way, method to be followed,
rules to be observed. (cf. sunúd, solóndan, soróndan).

_sulúndon_, What is to be followed or imitated, etc. (cf. sunúd,
sulúndan).

_sulúng_, (B) See solóng--to see, look at, inspect.

_sulúng_, To shine or show through, become transparent. Nagasulúng
ang dugô sa lábhag. The blood shows through the weal.

_súlung_, (H) To pay duty, taxes, rent, debts, etc. Sulúngi ang
buhís. Pay the tax. Isúlung mo iníng kwárta sa buhís. Pay the tax
with this money. Nagsúlung siá sa ákon sing duhá ka pamísa. He gave
me two Mass-stipends. (cf. súrung id.).

_súlung_, (H) To defy, challenge, dare, brave, confront, bid defiance
to, set at naught, provoke to a fight. Ginsúlung níya akó. He
challenged me (to a fight). Sulúnga siá sa íya baláy. Defy him in
his house.

_sulungkáhan_, The place where the game of súngka is played, especially
the holes for the stones in the game of súngka. (cf. sungkáhan).

_sulungkitáan_, A collision, knocking--, coming--, together, meeting,
amalgamation, merger. (cf. sungkitâ).

_sulúnò_, To trick, fool, etc. See salúnò.

_sulúnò_, To follow, imitate, copy, do likewise, be like, be conform
or consistent, to agree; to come upon, meet with, find out. (cf. sunô,
sunúd; sapó).

_sulúptan_, (H) Store, reservoir, depot, warehouse, depositary,
repository, place where something is collected or gathered. Ang
íla patayonán-túbig walâ pa pagbutangí sing salaán sa sulúptan sang
túbig. Their water system is still unprovided with a filter at the
reservoir. (cf. supút).

_suluwayán_, Discussion, etc. See suluayán.

_suluwayón_, Quarrel, etc. See suluayón.

_sulúypon_, (H) What is to be--, can be--, sucked (drawn) in. Dugús
nga sulúypon sang mga putyúkan. Honey to be sucked or gathered by
the bees. (cf. súyup).

_suluyupón_, See sulúypon id.

_súma_, (Sp. suma) Sum, total, amount, addition, footing; to sum up,
find the sum of, add up, total up, tot up. Sumáha na ang bilí sang ákon
mga baláklon. Total up the value of the goods I am buying. (cf. ísip,
bilóg, búg-os).

_sumálà_, (B) It is up to, the responsibility lies with, it rests with;
not as, not like, contrary to, not following the example of. Sumálà
dián kanímo (sa ímo). (Dirâ lang inâ sa ímo). As you wish or like. Do
as you please. The responsibility lies with you. Kon magágto kamó
sa marayô nga umá magbálon gid kamó, sumálà kang natabô kanámon
kóndì nagútum kamí. (Kon magkádto kamó sa malayô nga umá magbálon
gid kamó, tan-awá ang natabô sa ámon kóndì nagútum kamí). If (When)
you go to a distant country district take provisions along and learn
from what happened to us, for we got hungry (having neglected to carry
provisions with us). Kon gabíi nga hóras ukón táknà nga inugturúg ron,
mamíntal gid kamó kang mga gawáng kag ganháan, sumálà kay Fuláno kóndì
ginsakáan ang baláy na kang matákaw. (Kon gáb-i nga óras ukón táknà
nga inugtulúg na, mamíntal gid kamó sang mga bintánà kag puertáhan,
tan-awá si Fuláno kóndì ginsakáan ang íya baláy sang makáwat). At
night when it is time to go to bed, bar your windows and doors and
do not follow N.N.'s example, for (as he had neglected to do so)
thieves entered his house.

_sumálà_, To lay the blame upon, charge with, make responsible
for. Sín-o ang áton sumaláon sinâ? Whom shall we blame for that? Whom
shall we hold accountable for it? (cf. súmbung).

_sumaládsad_, One who skips or trips, a dancer; one who founds or
establishes something. (cf. sádsad; sumalaút).

_sumalákay_, A passenger on a vehicle, conveyance or boat. (cf. sakáy,
mananákay, sakayánon).

_sumalákdag_, Protector, defender, helper, assistant,
patron. (cf. sákdag).

_sumálang_, To meet, encounter, come upon, fall in with. Nasumálang
ko si Fuláno. I met N.N. Masumalángan ta riá ti masamí (Makít-an,
mabasahán, masápwan ta inâ sing masamí) sa mga pamantaláan. We
often--come upon those things,--find such matters mentioned, in the
news-papers. (cf. samálang, sug-álaw, tábò, sapó, sugatâ).

_sumalaút_, Dancer, dancing girl. (cf. sáut, sumaládsad, bailarína).

_sumaláyhaw_, A young cock, cockerel. (samaláyhaw id.).

_sumaláyo, sumaláy-o_, (H) A regular visitor, guest, frequenter,
client, customer. (cf. sayó, súkì, daní).

_súm-an_, From sumó.

_súman_, A dish of (cooked) rice mixed with sugar and the juice (gatâ)
of coconut meat, stirred well together and baked.

_súmat_, Talking in one's sleep. Ginasúmat siá. He talks (is talking)
in his sleep. (cf. damán).

_súmay, sumáy-súmay_, To ridicule, mimic, mock, scoff, deride, gibe,
find fault with, chide, criticize adversely or maliciously, to count
up, enumerate (the faults, shortcomings, etc.). (cf. sónlog, ulígyat,
uligâ, híkay, múlay, tiáwtíaw; ísip).

_súmbad_, To recount, repeat another's words, quote, etc. Isúmbad sa
íla ang ákon hinámbal. Repeat to them what I have said. Sumbará ang
ákon ginsúgid, agúd masáyran ko kon nahángpan mo ukón walâ. Repeat what
I have said, so that I may know whether you have caught my meaning
or not. Sumbarí akó sang íya nga ginláygay. Repeat to me his address
or sermon. (cf. sunúd, liwán).

_súmbag_, Punch, blow, thump, boxing, fisticuffs; to box, punch,
thump, strike, fist. Sumbagá siá. Punch him. Ginsúmbag níya akó. He
gave me a thump. He boxed me.

_sumbákì_, To contend, strive, quarrel, struggle. (cf. sulumbákì,
súay, báis, paunáuná, paindísíndis).

_súmbal_, To push, prod, jab, thrust against. Sumbalí siá sang
bagát. Give him a prod with the pole. Isúmbal sa íya iníng bastón. Jab
this stick against him. Jab him with this stick. (cf. túslok, tisók,
tíslok, hárog, hándus, dúgdug).

_sumbálì_, To turn--round,--upside dow,--inside out, to
reverse. (cf. sulî, balískad).

_sumbáli_, To swing the arms regularly or rhythmically, to keep time
by swinging the arms, as in dancing, etc. (cf. hágyon).

_sumbilíng_, (H) Any missile in the nature of a javelin, spear,
lance or the like.

_sumbiráw_, (B) To call to see, call on for a moment, visit for
a short time, pay a very short visit. Nagsumbiráw (Nagpasumbiráw)
gid lang ikáw rúgya kanámon. (Nagtámwà (naggáwa) gid lang ikáw dirí
sa ámon). You paid us a very short visit. Sumbirawá ang mga táo sa
tarámnan. (Bisitáhi sing makadalî ang mga táo sa talámnan). Go and see
the workmen in the field for a moment. (cf. sambiráw, dúaw, súr-aw,
súy-aw, hápit, bisíta).

_súmbung_, To accuse, complain of, lodge a complaint against,
tax with, denounce, indict, arraign, charge with, impute to,
inform against, impeach, charge with an offence judicially or
by public process. Isúmbung siá sa hokóm. Accuse him before the
judge. Sumbungí ang hokóm sang ginhímò ni Fuláno. Lodge a complaint
with the judge against N.N.'s doings. Ginsúmbung siá níla. They
accused him. (cf. sulumbúngon, kasúmbung).

_sumilíkway_, Rejecter, refuser, objector, nonconforming,
nonconformist; one who disapproves, or rejects,
something. (cf. síkway).

_sumó_, Nausea, loathing, disgust; to loathe, feel disgust at, dislike,
detest, abominate, abhor. Nagasumó ang ginháwa ko sa (sang) matámbok
nga kárne sang báboy. I loathe fat pork. Ginasúm-an (Ginasúmwan,
ginasumohán) akó siníng karne. This meat turns my stomach. This meat
is giving me a feeling of disgust. (cf. taká, súm-od).

_súm-od_, See sumó. Nasum-orán akó siníng pagkáon. I dislike this
food. I have an aversion to this kind of food.

_súmong_, To swim against the current, face difficulties or dangers,
stand one's ground in the face of odds. Sumóngon ta lang ang sulúg,
ang bágyo, etc. Let us swim against the current, let us walk on in
spite of the storm, etc. (cf. panúmong).

_súmpà_, Oath, swearing, adjuration; to swear an oath, declare
under oath, take an oath, to swear. Indì ka magsúmpà kon walâ sing
kabangdánan nga dakô. Don't take your oath, unless you have a grave
reason for it. Sinumpaán níya ang kamatuóran siní. He swore to the
truth of this. Ginpasúmpà siá sang hokóm. The judge--put him under
oath,--put him on his oath,--administered the oath to him. He was
sworn by the judge. Sumpaí ang ginsúgid mo. Swear to the truth of
your statement. Nagsúmpà siá sing butíg. He swore falsely. He forswore
himself. He committed perjury.

_súmpa_, A kind of tree used for medicinal purposes.

_súmpa_, Oil. Súmpa sang lubí, sang olíba, etc. Coconut oil, olive oil,
etc. (cf. lána, aséite).

_súmpak_, To splice, scarf, join pieces of timber by overlapping them
so that the pieces joined are very strongly held together; a piece
of timber joined to another, an addition, prolongation. Sumpaká
iníng duhá ka halígi. Splice these two posts. Sumpakí ang halígi,
kay malíp-ot. Splice another piece to the post, for it is too
short. Isúmpak iníng káhoy sa halígi. Scarf (Splice) this piece of
wood to the post. (cf. súgpon).

_sumpákil_, (B) To quarrel, fight, squabble, scuffle,
altercate, be at variance with, have a difference. Pírme gid sánda
nagasumpákil. (Daláyon gid lang silá nagasinuáysúay). They are always
fighting or quarrelling. Ginasumpakílan nánda ang lúpà nga ánda
paranublión. (Ginabaísan níla ang dútà nga íla palanublión). They
are quarrelling over the land they inherited. (cf. súay, báis, bagâ).

_súmpay_, To add to, join to, attach to. Isúmpay iní sa útbong. Attach
this to the end. (cf. súmpak).

_sumpilâ_, An inclined, leaning, slanting post, prop; to prop up with
an additional post, add a slanting or inclined prop. Sumpilaí ang
salúg sang baláy mo. Prop up the floor of your house with additional
posts. (cf. súlay; tokó--an upright prop or support).

_súmpit_, To spirt, spurt out, whiz, hiss through the air. Nagsúmpit
ang túbig. The water spirted out. Ang panâ nagasúmpit sa hángin. The
arrow whizzes through the air. Tan-awá yanáng kabáyo nga daw
nagasúmpit. Look at that horse running, one would say, without touching
the ground. Naútud ang íya ugát kag dáyon sumúmpit ang dugô. His
vein was severed and the blood spirted out. Bisán diín lang dón-an
(dún-an) súmpit. Wherever the branding iron is applied there will be
a hiss. (cf. busawák, púswit).

_sumpíya_, To roll, rock, move up and down or from side to side
as a cradle or boat. Mahínay kag malágway ang pagsumpíya sang mga
sakayán, sang mga pakláng sang lubí, etc. sa hángin. The boats, the
leaves of the coconut palms, move (roll) slowly and languidly in the
breeze. (cf. humbíya, humbáya).

_súmpò_, To blunt or dull a pointed tool, etc. Ginsúmpò níya ang
bángkaw, lánsang, dága, etc. He blunted the point of the lance, nail,
dagger, etc. Sumpoá ang íya batásan. Blunt his manners or habits
i.e. curb them or reduce them to the normal. Indì mo pagsumpoón ang
búgsok. Don't blunt the point of the stake. (cf. lúsò).

_súmpung_, To make opposition to, oppose, resist, go against. Sumpungá
siá. Oppose him. (cf. bátok).

_súmra_, (Perhaps from the Sp. sombra) A small piece of cloth utilized
for making borders on a garment or in other similar work; a reserved
seat or place at a gambling table.

_súmsum_, Food, especially meat or fish, taken with tubâ; to take
food in addition to drinking tubâ. Nagasúmsum silá sing ísdà. They
are having fish together with tubâ. Dagáyà nga kárne kag ísdà ang
íla ginsúmsum. They had plenty of meat and fish in addition to tubâ.

_sumsúman_, Eating or feasting on meat, fish, etc. in addition to
a generous supply (allowance) of tubâ. Anó ang ínyo sumsúman? What
have you got to eat with the tubâ? (cf. súmsum).

_sumulúgal_, A gambler, gamester. (cf. sugál).

_sumulúnud_, (H) A follower, member of, partisan,
hanger-on. (cf. sunúd).

_sumúod_, Near to, close to; true, real, german, germane, very nearly
connected or related, intimate, near to (of friends, blood-relations,
etc.). Dílì siá sumúod níla nga anák. He was not really their child
(son), (but adopted). Sumúod gid ang íla pagparientéhay. They are
(were) near blood-relations. Sumúod silá nga mga ábyan. They are
intimate friends. Sumúod ko siá nga ábyan. He is a near friend
of mine. Sumúod ang íla paghimatâ. They are nearly (closely)
related. (cf. sóod; malapít).

_sún-ad_, To put a pan, kettle, pot, etc. over a fire or on a
tripod. Isún-ad ang kúlon sa sig-angán. Put the rice-kettle on
the tripod. Nasún-ad na ang kólon. The rice-kettle is on the
fire. (cf. sín-ad, tíg-ang).

_sun-adán_, A fire-place, hearth, quite frequently just a hole in
the ground. (cf. sún-ad).

_sún-an_, From soón for soonán. (soón--to cover, surround, fence in).

_súnda_, (Sp. sonda) Sounding, heaving the lead, plummet; catheter,
bougie, sound, probe; to fathom, sound, plumb, heave (cast) the lead;
to probe, examine. Sundahá ang kadálum sang túbig. Sound (plumb)
the depth of the water. (cf. túngkad).

_súndal_, To fathom, sound. (cf. súnda, túngkad).

_súndal_, See sámbol--to be pregnant, etc.


_súndang_, Knife, kitchen-knife, a small stiff knife, dagger, sword,
table-knife. (cf. tulóslok--fork; irós--spoon; garanás, urutóp,
lansítas, kotsílyo, binángon, íwa, etc.).

_súndò_, To follow; to imitate. (cf. sunód, súndug, túndog).

_súndol_, To push, etc. See sókdol.

_súndol_, To collide or knock against something above (with one's
head or the like). (cf. súnggò, búnggò).

_súndon_, For sunudón from sunúd--to follow, etc.

_súndug_, To follow; to imitate. (cf. sunúd, túndog, ílog, ápas,
súndò).

_sungá_, (B) To blow the nose. Súngha! Panungá! Blow your nose. Isungá
ang síp-on mo sa pányo, sa bintánà, etc. Blow the mucus from your nose
into the handkerchief, out of the window, etc. (cf. síkma, paníkma).

_súngab_, To notch, indent, break the rim or edge of something,
knock out the front-teeth, or the like. Nasúngab (Nagkasúngab)
ang binángon. The bolo is (was) notched, has had (had) its edge
indented. (cf. bíngaw).

_sungáb_, Notch, indentation; notched, indented, having a broken
rim, edge or border, lacking one or more front-teeth. (cf. bingáw,
bingawón).

_súngad_, The snout or proboscis of a pig or other animal; to sniff
at, root, gnaw at. (cf. hingódhingód).

_sungarót_, Tousled, rumpled, dishevelled, disordered, entangled; to be
in disorder, etc. Sungarót ang íya bohók. Her hair is all in disorder
(in a tangle). (cf. búkag, págpag, burungáyngay, gomón, surukisók).

_sungáw_, Leaking, escaping (of steam, vapour, odour); not air-tight,
not closed well (of bottles, barrels, etc.); to escape, leak, to
admit air, be not airtight, to become weak or spoilt by exposure to
air. Sungáw (Nagsungáw) ang bulúng sa sulúd sináng botílya. The smell
of the medicine in that bottle is filling the air. The medicine in
that bottle is spoilt (not having been closed well). Sungsungí ang
tolotádyaw sing hugút, nga índì magsungáw. Cork (Close) the vial
tight--to keep out air,--lest air should get in. Nasungawán akó sang
báhò sang bulúng. I noticed the smell of the medicine escaping from
its receptacle.

_súngay_, Horn, antler; to toss, push with the horns. Ang mga karabáw
nagasúngay dirâ. The buffaloes over there are fighting. Sungáya
siá. Toss him. Attack him with your horns. Pasungáya iníng
duhá ka tóro. Let these two bulls try their horns against one
another. Ginsúngay siá sang báka. The cow tossed him.

_sungáyan_, Horned, having horns; the devil, an evil spirit (áswang).

_súngdol_, See súndol--to collide, etc.

_súnggab_, See sánggab--to run foul of, etc.

_sunggarót_, To frown, sulk, pout, get angry, be offended, look
cross. (cf. súnggud, súngon, ariwaróng, lárong, bulingót).

_súnggò_, To knock against something hard, to stub (the toe) against,
collide with, come in sharp contact with. Nakasúnggò ang ákon ólo
sa halígi. I knocked my head against the post. (cf. búnggò, lónggò,
súntok, síntok, sántik).

_súnggo_, To bleed from the nose, nose-bleed; epistaxis, rhinorrhagia,
bleeding from the nose. (cf. pámbo).

_súnggud_, (H) To frown, sulk, pout, be angry, etc. See sunggarót,
súngon, sulingót, buringót, ariwaróng, kísdong).

_súnghon_, From sungá--to blow the nose.

_sungî_, Hare-lipped, having a hare-lip; having a slit nose (of
buffaloes, etc.).

_súngì_, To be or become hare-lipped or slit-nosed. Nasúngì iníng
karabáw, kay nahigót kag ginsúngay sang isá. This buffalo had its
nose slit, for it was tied up and another buffalo attacked it with
its horns.

_súngka_, A children's game with stones or sea-shells; to play with
stones. Nagasúngka (nagasinúngka) ang mga bátà. The children are
playing with stones, are diverting themselves with the súngka-game.

_súngkà_, To give oneself up, deliver oneself over to, to appear
voluntarily. Magsúngka ka sa hukóm--or--sungkaí ang hukóm. Deliver
yourself to the judge. Appear before the judge. (cf. atúbang).


_sungkáhan_, See sulungkáhan id. from súngka--to play with stones
or shells.

_súngkit_, To run or knock against, collide. (cf. súnggò, búnggò).

_sungkitâ_, To meet, come together; collide, knock against; to merge,
amalgamate. (cf. súngkit, sulungkitáan).

_súngkok_, Bent or bowed down, inclined; to incline one's body,
stoop, bow or bend down. Abáw nagasúngkok ka gid kon magsulát ka. Why,
you are bending down quite low, when you write. (cf. sungúk, súngroy).

_súngkò_, To push or knock against something, collide with. See búnggò,
súnggò, súngkit, sungkitâ, lónggò).

_súngkud_, Walking stick, cane; support. See sóngkod.

_súngo_, Antenna, horn, feeler (projecting from the head of an insect,
shrimp, lobster, etc.).

_sungó_, To attack, fall upon, worst, fell, throw down, outdo,
outwit. Pasungó--the Caus. Indì ka magpasungó sa íya. Don't allow
him to--worst you,--cheat you,--outwit you. Don't yield--, submit--,
to him. (cf. soróso, daúg, dáyà, límbong).

_súng-ol_, See pasúng-ol--to dislike, loathe, etc.

_súngon_, (B) To sulk, pout, be sullen, to frown, be
offended. Nagsúngon kanákon. Ginsungónan na (níya) akó. He frowned
at me. (cf. súnggud, sunggarót, etc.).

_súngroy_, Bowed down, bent, stooping, inclined (on account of (with)
age, infirmity, etc.); to stoop, etc. Súngroy (Nagasúngroy) na siá
sa katigulangón. He is bowed down with age. (cf. síktot, sikóktot).

_súngroy_, To creep or crawl in, disappear (in a hole, or the
like). (cf. súroy, sóhot).

_súngsung_, Cork, stopper, stopple, bung; to cork, stopple, close
a bottle, etc. Sungsungí ang botílya. Cork the bottle. Isúngsung sa
botílya iníng papél. Use this paper as a cork for the bottle.

_súngsung_, To confront (face) danger, walk against the wind, swim
against the current, etc. (cf. súlay, súray).

_sungúk_, Bent down, inclined, hunched up, stooping, drooping;
dejected, sad, brooding. (cf. súngkok, súngroy).

_súni_, Rumour, report, hearsay; to rumour, report, tell,
give out. Ginasúni nga----. It is rumoured that----. They say
that----. (cf. konó, silíng, móno).

_suní-súni_, Dim. and Freq. of súni. (cf. konókóno).

_súnit_, To be tiresome, troublesome, require great patience or
application, be difficult to perform (of a delicate or tedious task,
etc.). (cf. síhit, kúlì).

_súnlug_, See sónlog--to tease, fool, exasperate, etc.

_sunô_, See sonô--according to, etc.

_súnok_, Full, filled, said especially of all kinds of fishtraps;
to be or become full. Súnok sing ísdà ang bunóan, taón, subóg,
etc. The bunóan, the taón, the subóg, etc. is full of fish. (cf. punô).

_súnsun_, Matting, etc. for the storage of rice, or the like. See
sónson. (cf. pítak).

_súnsun_, To do often or frequently; to be frequent, happen
often. (cf. samí, masúnsun, sónson).

_súnta_, Division of a floor, a house, etc.; a story. Duhaá ka
súnta ang salúg sang baláy mo. Make two levels in the floor of your
house. Make an upper and lower floor in your house. Ang íla kampanáryo
may tátlo ka súnta. Their belfry is three stories high. (cf. panálgan).

_súntok_, To thrust, poke, prod, jab, knock or push against. Suntoká
siá sang ímo bastón. Prod him with your stick. Ginsúntok sang íya
túdlò ang ákon matá. He poked his finger in my eye. Nasúntok ang íya
matá sang tunúk (dógi). A thorn entered his eye. (cf. túslok, súmbal).

_sunúd_, To follow, succeed, come--, go--,--after,--next, to tail
after; to imitate, copy, emulate; to repeat what another says or
dictates. Sunúd (ka)! Follow! Súnda siá. Follow (Imitate) him. Ikáw
magúna akó masunúd (magasunúd). You go ahead, I'll follow you. Ginsunúd
siá sang íya idô. His dog followed him. Ang bágyo nasúndan sang dakô
nga kalínaw. The storm was followed by a great calm. Súndon mo ang mga
Sántos. Imitate the Saints. Pasúndi ang beláda sing panihápon. Let
supper be served after the entertainment. (cf. dasón, ílog, ápas,
sinúndan, solóndan).

_sunúd-súnud_, Dim. and Freq. of sunád. (cf. abátábat, apás-ápas,
ilógílog).

_sunúd-sunúd_, To follow like sheep, to imitate or ape like a
monkey. The term often implies contempt. (cf. ilógilóg).

_súnug_, Fire, combustion, blaze, conflagration; to burn, burn down,
commit--, consign--, to the flames, to fire, set on fire, set fire to,
destroy by fire. Tulúka, may súnug dirâ. Look, there is a fire (over
there). Nasúnug ang ámon baláy. Nasunúgan kamí sang ámon baláy. Our
house was burned down. Ginsúnug sang mga buyúng ang minurô. The
brigands--burned down the village,--set fire to the village.

_súnyod_, To smell or taste bad, stale, tainted, to excite
disgust. (cf. álan, bútlà, sumó, súm-od, taká).

_suób_, To dress, dress in, don, assume--, put on--, a garment, to
vest in. Súb-a (isuób) ang kamiséta mo. Put on your shirt. Nagasuób
siá sang íya báyò. Ginasuób níya ang íya báyò. He is putting on his
jacket. (soób id.).

_súod_, See sóod--to be near to, nearly related, etc. (cf. sumúod).

_suók_, Corner, out-of-the-way place, etc. See doók, higád, hilít,
toók.

_súok_, To push through, slip in, thrust in. Isúok ang bútkon mo
sa pakô sang ímo báyò. Put your arm through the sleeve of your
jacket. (cf. gúlò).

_supâ_, To chew food for a child, etc. Ginsúp-an (Ginsupaán) níya
sing sinánlag nga maís ang íya bátà. She chewed some roast corn and
then fed her child with it. Hatági ang bátà sang ímo sinupâ. Give
the baby some of the food you have chewed. (cf. símpà).

_súpang_, Physical development, growth approaching puberty; to develop,
grow, approach puberty. Madámò ang íya káon, kay nagasúpang na. He
eats much, for he is growing (developing).

_súpas_, Soup; bread for soup. See sópas.

_súpat_, The grain of wood, meat, leather, skin, etc.; exterior aspect,
form, appearance, figure. (cf. dágway, báynon, gwâ).

_súp-ay_, To starve, die of--starvation,--hunger,--inanition. Nasúp-ay
lang siá, kay waláy pagkáon. He starved to death, for he had nothing
to eat.

_súp-ay_, To add to, attach; to cover, spread over. (cf. súmpay,
tábon).

_supéra_, See sopéra--soup-tureen.

_súpil_, To overpower, conquer, outdo, win, beat, defeat, vanquish,
overthrow, overcome. (cf. pasúpil, ubág, tubalíng, paubág, patubalíng).

_supír_, Chauffeur, truck-driver, automobile-driver. (cf. sapyór,
tsóper).

_súpla_, (Probably from the Sp. suplir) To excuse, overlook, pass over,
let pass. Often used in games in the phrase "súpla ánay" meaning:
Don't let that count. Let it pass this time. Don't mark it against me.

_súplut_, To incite, induce, urge, influence, instigate, lead into,
persuade, tempt. Indì mo siá pagsuplutón sa pagbúhat sing maláin. Don't
tempt him to do wrong. (cf. súdyot, súgyot, sótsot).

_suplút-súplut_, Dim. and Freq. of súplut.

_supón_, To block the passage, clog, choke, obstruct, close up a hole
in a tube, etc. Ang lágtok nagsupón sang ímo sánsoy. Ang ímo sánsoy
nasúpnan (nasuponán) sang lágtok. Your pipe is clogged with dirt. Indì
mo pagsúpnan ang túbig nga nagaílig. Don't put an obstruction in the
way of the flowing water. Sinúpnan (Nasúpnan) ang túbu sang ságbot. The
pipe was choked with rubbish. (cf. será).

_súptan_, From supút--to gather, collect, etc.

_súpug_, Daring, brave, bold, valiant, audacious, dauntless, fearless,
reckless, making little of difficulties or dangers; to be or become
daring, etc. (cf. ísug, káhas, tútum).

_súpuk_, To oppose, withstand, resist, make opposition to. Supúki
siá. Oppose him. (cf. súmpung, bátok).

_supút_, To gather, collect in small amounts, bring together from
various sources, get (scrape) together little by little. Masupút
(Magasupút) pa akó ánay sing kwárta. I shall first get some money
together. Súpta (Suputá) ang ímo kinitáan. Let your earnings
accumulate. Súpti akó sing madámò nga mga páhò. Gather (and keep)
for me many mangoes. (cf. típon, káka).

_supút-súput_, Dim. of supút. Sa supútsúput natípon ko iníng kwárta. I
got together this money in small amounts or little by little.

_súra_, See sónlog.

_súra_, The young, prickly shoots of cogon-grass. Indì ka magági
dirâ, kay madámò ang súra. Don't go that way, for there are many
young cogon-shoots.

_súrà_, Foam, froth; to foam or froth at the mouth. Ang wiwián sang
kabáyo, pakâ, etc. nagasúrà. The horse, the frog, etc. is foaming at
(the sides of) the mouth.

_suráb_, See suláb--the edge of a cutting tool.

_súr-ab_, (B) Acidity of the stomach, etc. Nagasúr-ab ang soróksorók
ko. I am suffering from acidity of the stomach. I feel out of sorts. I
feel sick.

_surárum_, (B) See sulálum.

_súr-aw_, To visit, come for a visit or for inspection. Walâ mo gid
kamí pagsur-awá. You have never paid us a visit. Isúr-aw mo akó kay
nánay. Please pay mother a visit. (cf. dúaw, súy-aw).

_súray_, (B) To swim against the current, defy rain or storm,
etc. See súlay.

_súri_, Fie! For shame! Whew! Idle talk, bosh, twaddle, nonsense. Súri
mo, kay kon sa diín ikáw makakáka sing kwárta nga ibakál sinâ? Ah,
nonsense, for where can you get the money to buy such a thing? Súri
níya siní sa paghámbal sing súbung. For shame, how does he dare
to talk in such a way? Why, he ought to be ashamed of himself to
speak thus. N.B. This "súri" is probably only a corruption of the
Sp. hechura. See etsúra, hitsúra, hitsúri, tsúri.

_súri_, To arrange well, put in order, examine, go over. Suríha ang
sulát nga ímo ginhuád kon may mga sayúp ukón walâ. Read over the
letter you have translated to see whether there are any mistakes or
not. (cf. usísà, ugádúgad).

_súrib_, See sírib--to lap, lick up.

_suríb_, A kind of fish.

_suringót_, See sulingót--to frown, sulk, pout, look cross, be angry.

_súrip_, See súlip--to go or squeeze through, etc.

_súr-o_, To reach up to or into (said especially of water reaching up
to the floor of a vehicle, when the vehicle is driven through water, or
the like); to fill to repletion; full to repletion. Sinúr-o sang túbig
ang trak. The water came into the truck. The truck was awash. Súr-o
na ang solóksolók ko. My stomach feels full to repletion. (cf. súr-ub).

_súrok_, To push or thrust in, as a stick into a hole, etc. (cf. gúlò,
súok).

_súroy_, To enter through a narrow aperture, creep or crawl in,
slip in, introduce oneself. (cf. súngroy, sóhot).

_súrsi_, (Sp. resarcir) To sew, stitch, mend clothes, patch (a coat,
etc.). Sursihí akó sang ákon delárgo. Mend my trousers for me. Sursihá
ang gisî sang báyò ko. Stitch the tear in my jacket. (cf. tahî,
halúthut, halóthot).

_sursír_, (Sp. zurzir) To darn; to fine-draw.

_súr-ub_, To fill, enter, overrun, flow over or into. Nasúr-ub sang
túbig ang áwto sang pagtabók sa subâ. The automobile was flooded with
water (was awash), when it forded the river. (cf. súr-o, sulúd, punô).

_surubakô_, See sulubakô. Surubakô (Nagasurubakô) kamí tulád kadyá kang
áni (pagáni). (Nagasákò (nagasinákò) kami karón sang áni (pagáni)). At
present we are kept very busy with the rice harvest.

_surúdlan_, (B) See sulúdlan--receptacle, etc.

_surukisók_, See sulukisók--entangled, twisted, dishevelled,
etc. Surukisók (Masurukisók) ang bohók na (níya). His hair is all in
a tangle. (cf. gomón).

_surumalâ_, To disagree, be at variance, be contradictory, be
inconsistent, go counter to, said of the testimony of witnesses,
of reports, of accounts, etc. (cf. salangiság, súmpung).

_surumbálì_, To urge or press forward, move about in all directions,
jostle each other, throng, gather, collect in large numbers,
crowd. Nagasurumbálì (Nagasinúrumbálì) gid lámang ang mga táo sa
plása sa pagtán-aw sang mga hámpang. The public square is crowded
with people eager to see the games. (cf. sarumbálì, but surumbálì is
the more common form; lininggóhot).

_súrung_, See súlung--to pay duty, etc.

_surúptan_, See sulúptan--store, etc.

_sus_, (A contr. of Hesús) An exclamation of surprise, wonder,
fear, etc.

_súsi_, To investigate, look into, examine, find out about, go over
carefully or thoroughly. Susíha sing maáyo ang íya mga binuhátan. Look
into his conduct thoroughly. (cf. usísà, túl-id, íd-id, úsoy, túltul).

_susmariusép_, (Contr. of Hesús, María, Hosép). An
exclamation. (cf. sus).

_suspendér_, (Sp. suspender) To suspend, debar. Suspendehá siá. Suspend
him. Ginsuspendér siá sang pangulopuód. He was suspended (from office)
by the Provincial Governor. (cf. paúntat).

_susténto_, (Sp. sustento) Support, maintenance, upkeep, keep,
livelihood; to support, keep, pay for the upkeep or maintenance
of, defray the expenses for. Sustentohá ang panimaláy. Support
the family. Ginasusténto níya ang ákon mga líbro. He pays for my
books. Sín-o ang magasusténto sa ímo dídto? Who will provide for you
there? (cf. sagúd, tátap, atipán, búhì).

_sústo_, (Sp. susto) Shock, surprise, start, astonishment, scare,
fright. (cf. kuyús, panguyús, pángyos, kibút, tingála).

_susúng-ol_, See súng-ol, pasúng-ol, patáka--Loathing, aversion,
dislike, etc.

_súsyo_, (Sp. socio) Companion, friend, partner, member,
associate. (cf. kumbúya, sákup, kadámpig).

_súsyo_, (Sp. sucio) Dirty, stained, soiled; to be or become dirty,
etc. See hígkò, láw-ay, lagôlagô, bulingón, etc.

_sutíl_, Naughty, bad, wicked, disobedient, mischievous; tricky,
cheating, crooked. (cf. sinutíl, maláin, maláut, malalíson).

_sútsut_, To push, impel, thrust; instigate. See sótsot.

_suwál, suwál-suwál_, See suál, suál-suál--to nibble, turn over with
the snout.

_suwáyang_, See suáyang, sawáyang--a portable fish-trap.

_súyà, suyâ-suyâ_, To surfeit, loathe, have an aversion, feel a
repugnance to. (cf. duyâduyâ, taká, sumó, súm-od).

_súyak_, Thorn, prick, prickle, a sharp splinter; to prick, said of
thorns, etc. Andam ka, agúd índì ka masúyak sang matalíwis nga mga
inágsap. Take care, lest the sharp chips should prick you. Nasúyak siá
sang tunúk. He was pricked by a thorn. (cf. tunúk, úngon, dalíngag,
dógi).

_suyákon_, Thorny, spiny, prickly, full of pricks, prickles, spines
or thorns; (cf. súyak, tunukón).

_súy-aw_, To visit, etc. See dúaw, súr-aw. Suy-awá siá. Visit him. Pay
him a visit. Call on him.

_suyô, suyó_, To visit, frequent, to use to, do usually or
customarily. (cf. dúaw, súr-aw, súy-aw, sayó).

_súyon_, Easy; to be easy, etc. See sáyon, hapús, hulás. (cf. pasúyon).

_súyup_, To sip or suck through a small aperture or tube, or
the like; to absorb, imbibe, suck up. Suyúpa ang butóng. Sip the
coconut milk. Ginsúyup níya ang ítlog nga hiláw. He sucked the raw
egg. Ipasúyup sa bátà iníng gátas. Let the baby suck this milk. Suyúpa
ang túbo túbtub nga maggwâ ang túbig. Suck the (air out of the)
pipe till the water flows. (cf. súpsup, sópsop, hígop, yúpyup,
sírib, láklak).

_swâ, swák, swál swál-swál, swáni, swéldo, swérte, swítik_. See suâ,
suák, suál, suál-suál, suáni, suéldo, suérte, suítik.




T


_t_, The letter "T" in Visayan is pronounced as in English. After the
prefix pan- "T" beginning a word is dropped, e.g. panábang (pan-,
tábang); panikáng (pan-, tikáng); panókap (pan-, tókap); panubús
(pan-, tubús). After the prefixes hi- and ha- "T" beginning a word
is frequently changed into "n", e.g. hinabón (hi-, tábon); hanungúd,
hanabô (ha-, tungúd, tabô) etc. etc.

_ta_, Short for náton. Buháton ta inâ. Let us do it. Ang baláy ta. Our
house. Our home.

_ta_, Why, well, now then, etc. "Ta" is either merely an exclamation
or it is employed to avoid abruptness. Ta, ikáw lang dirâ sa baláy
magbántay. Well, you must be the one to guard the house. Ta, himóa
inâ. Now then, get it done. Ta, lakát na kitá. Let us go. (cf. hínta,
hatî).

_tâ_, Look here! You see! Didn't I tell you? There you are! Well! Now
then! See tê, tî.

_taánay_, For hínta (ta), ánay. Wait a little. Wait a bit. Hold
on. Have a little patience. Stop a moment. Taánay, mabakál pa akó sing
abáno kag mapaúlì kitá. Wait a little, I am going to buy some cigars
and then we shall go home. Taánay, índì ka maghámbal sing súbung,
kay butíg. Hold on, don't talk like that, for it is not true. Taánay,
idógidóg, kay malántaw man ang mánghud mo. Stand back a little,
for your younger brother also likes to look out (through the window,
etc.). Taánay, patan-awá akó sang mga binakál mo. Now then, let me
see what you have bought. (cf. hulá tánay).

_táas_, Height, altitude, elevation, eminence, loftiness, exaltation,
tallness; to be or grow high, tall, elevated, eminent, lofty, exalted,
towering, soaring. Nagtáas ang kampanáryo nga iní, kay gindugángan
níla sing isá ka súnta. This belfry has become high, because they
have added one story to it. Magatáas gid ang baláy mo kon butangán
mo sing duhá ka panálgan. Your house will get very high, if you make
it one of two stories. Nataásan gid akó siníng búkid. This mountain
seems to me to be very high. (cf. tág-as).

_tábà_, To buy land or fields. Tabáa ang íya dútà. Buy his land. Tinábà
níya ang talámnan ni Fuláno. He bought N.N.'s rice-field. Magpatábà ka
lang sing isá ka báhin sang ímo ulúmhan. Just sell part of your farm.

_tábad_, Banquet, feasting, feast, repast, regalement, junket,
junketing, celebration or party with plenty of food and drink;
to partake of--, assist at--, prepare or provide--, a banquet,
etc. May tábad silá dídto. They are having (had, will have) a feast
there. Nagtábad silá kahápon. They got ready--, They prepared--,
They assisted at--, a banquet yesterday. (cf. panábad, bádò, pamadô,
punsyón, pamunsyón, salósálo, sinalósálo).

_tábag_, A bird of prey; a hawk. (cf. banóg, salagyáwan).

_tábag_, The waste matter, dregs, impurities, remnants of fruit after
the juice has been pressed out; the refuse that remains behind in a
strainer or the like. Ang mabilín sa ginsálà ginatawág nga tábag. What
is retained by a strainer is called "tábag". Ang tábag sang lubí,
almidón, hinakí, etc. The remnants (waste) of coconut meat, starch,
hair-wash, etc. (cf. ugásip, urásip, bilín, lábud, lágdò).

_tabág_, Feeble, weak, thin, not strong (of beverages); faded,
worn out (of clothes, etc.); to be or become feeble, worn out,
etc. (cf. táb-ang, lús-aw).

_tabágwan, tabágwang_, A kind of a gourd with a neck like that of
a bottle.

_tabakéra_, (Sp. tabaquera) Tobacco-pouch, tobacco-jar; cigar-case,
cigar-tray, dish or plate for serving cigars. (cf. bulutángan sang
tabákò).

_tabakéro_, (Sp. tabaquero) Cigar maker, tobacco manufacturer,
tobacconist, a dealer in tobacco and cigars.

_tabákò_, (Sp. tabaco) Tobacco; cigar.

_tabakô_, To smoke tobacco, cigars, etc. Walâ siá pagtabakô. He does
not smoke. Indì ka magtabakô? Don't you smoke? Indi ka magtabakô
dirí. Don't smoke here. Patabakoón mo (patabakoá) lang siá. Just let
him smoke.

_tabál_, A kind of small fish.

_tában_, To run away with, elope with. Ang idô nagtában sang
kárne. The dog ran off with the meat. Tinában sang idô ang kárne. The
dog stole the meat and ran away with it. Nagtabanáy silá. They ran
off together. They eloped. Indì mo siá pagtabánon. Don't elope with
him or her. Tinában níya ang kwárta kag dinalágan pa subâ. He took
(stole) the money and ran away with it towards the river. Gintában
níya si Fulána. He ran away with N.N.


_tabanáw_, Jaundice, icterus. (cf. buláw).

_tabanawón_, Pertaining to jaundice; one affected with jaundice,
jaundiced.

_tábang_, Assistance, succour, help, aid, relief, rescue, ministry,
ministration, helping hand; to assist, succour, to aid, relieve,
rescue, help. Sín-o ang magatábang sa áton mga kalisdánan? Who
will help us in our difficulties or distress? Tabángi siá. Succour
him. Mangítà kitá sing itábang sa áton. Let us look for help or
assistance. O Diós ko, tabángi akó. Oh my God, help me. N.B. "tábang"
at times also means: to save one's life, rescue from death, but in that
case the accent of the passive voice is on the last syllable. Sugúng
gid ang íya pagbátì nga sa karón ginatabangán pa gánì. He is very
seriously ill and just at present they are trying to save him from
death. Napatáy siá nga walâ na matabangí. He died and there was no
possibility of saving his life. Indì na siá matabangán. He cannot
be rescued from death now. His death cannot now be prevented. He
(His life) is past recovery (saving). (cf. búlig).

_tabáng_, The rope that is attached to the shafts and passes under
the neck of a draught animal.

_táb-ang_, Lightness, mildness (of wines, spirits, tobacco, etc.); to
be or become light, mild. Nagtáb-ang ang lánggaw, kay nagsungáw. The
vinegar has become weak, for the air got into it. Natab-angán akó
siníng tabákò. This tobacco is too mild for me. (cf. táhaw).

_tabángkò_, A kind of fish.

_tabáng-tábang_, Dim. and Freq. of tábang. (cf. abángábang,
bulígbúlig).

_tabás_, Red and white, spotted (of chickens especially).

_tábas_, The cut of clothes; to cut out clothes as a tailor
does. Tabása ang hénero. Cut the cloth. Tabási akó sing báyò. Cut
the cloth according to measure and make a jacket for me. Gintabásan
siá sang manugtábas sing isá ka térno. The tailor made him a complete
suit of clothes. Maáyo sing tábas ang ímo mga panápton. Your clothes
are well cut or well made.

_tabáw_, A kind of rice. (cf. arabón).

_tábgan_, From tabúg--to fly away, etc. Tinábgan siá sang
painóíno. He was bereft of the faculty of thinking, he is
(was)--lost,--perplexed,--bewildered,--dumbfounded,--greatly confused.

_tábì_, A polite expression frequently used when passing another on
the road, or the like. Please, allow me to (let me) pass. Please make
room or give way. Tábì ánay. Kindly let me pass. Excuse me. Tábì sa
ímo. Pardon me. Excuse me. At times "tábì," has the same meaning as
tabîtábì, which see.

_tabíd_, To tie--, fasten--, bind--, secure--, attach--, lash--, to,
connect with. Natabirán ang manók sing buláng sa íya tahúd. The cock
has a knife fastened to his spur. Ang íkog sang kabáyo gintabirán sang
mga bátà sing láta. The boys tied a tin to the horse's tail. Itabíd
iní sa sídsid sang ímo báyò. Attach this to the hem of your
jacket. Tabirí ang íya kálò sing mga bulákbúlak. Bind some flowers
(flowery decorations) on his hat.

_tábid_, To hang together, be fastened or joined together (as two or
more cows, etc. by one rope, allowing them some freedom to move about;
or as ships, trucks, carts or the like taken in tow). Nagatabíray
iníng tátlo ka báka. These three cows are stringed or fastened to
one another.

_tabíd_, Appendage, attachment, anything tied or fastened to something
else; closely adherent, adjunct; clause, condition; impediment.

_tabíg_, The ordinary rice-harvesting basket made of bamboo splints.

_tabígi_, A kind of mangrove. (cf. bákhaw, tungúg, lunók).

_tabiláng_, To do or say something thoughtlessly, precipitately,
on a sudden impulse; to stumble or fall into (carelessly,
absent-mindedly). Andam ka, agúd índì ka dirâ matabiláng. Be on your
guard or you--will fall into that hole (trap, snare, etc.) there,--you
will put your foot in it. Nakatabiláng siá sa paghámbal sing súbung. He
spoke like that without thinking. (cf. hinálì, hinalî, tambiláng,
tabinás).

_tabinás_, To stumble against (on, upon), put one's foot in (into),
act carelessly, impulsively, on the spur of the moment, unwittingly,
without thinking. Nakatabinás siá magbutángbútang sa kay Fuláno. He
thoughtlessly slandered N.N. (cf. tabiláng, típlang).

_tábing_, To stitch or sew together a tear in a garment, separate
pieces of matting or the like. Tabínga ang duhá ka amákan. Stitch the
two bamboo mats together. Tabíngi akó sang ákon naúg nga nagísì. Mend
my torn clothes for me.

_tabiós_, A kind of very small fish much esteemed for food.

_tabirís_, To trickle down, flow down profusely (said of perspiration,
etc.). (cf. tululágay, talabirís).

_tabís_, A term much used in games: Out. Tabís ikáw. You are out. Tabís
siá. He is out.

_tabís_, Punishment, fine, mulct, penalty, damage, injury, harm;
forfeit (in games); to punish, fine, mulct, etc.

_tabî-tábì_, Dim. of tábì. Also: an opprobrious term and exclamation
of disgust, reproach or execration. Fie! Blast it! Confound! For
shame! Tut! Hang it! A plague upon it! Tabîtábì sa ímo, halín ka
dirí. For shame, go away! Tabîtábì siníng táo, índì akó kaúyon sang
íya batásan. Oh, this is a bad man (This man is not decent), I don't
like his ways.

_tabíyog_, To drop, fall down, flow (of tears, etc.); to throw away,
discard, reject, fling or hurl off. (cf. tululágay, talabirís, táktak,
táblog, pilák).

_táblà_, To stop, make an end of, interfere with. Tablaón mo ang íla
pagáway. Stop their fighting. (cf. tápnà, támbag).

_tabládo_, (Sp. tablado) Scaffold; stage, platform, boards (of the
stage). (cf. entabládo).

_táblaw_, To suppress, stop, placate, calm, quiet. Walâ mo siá
pagtablawá. You did not stop him. Gintáblaw níya ang íla pagsúay. He
put a stop to their quarrelling. Daw sa índì matáblaw iníng gamó. This
turmoil can hardly be quieted. It seems impossible to calm this
turmoil. (cf. pugúng, táblà, tápnà).

_tablíya_, (Sp. tablilla) Tablet, slab, cut stone.

_táblog_, (B) To throw, throw away, hurl, fling, cast off, discard,
reject, get rid of. (cf. pilák, habóy, bálang, tabíyog).

_tablón_, (Sp. tablón) A large piece of timber, log; thick board,
plank.

_tábnul_, Thickness, stoutness, heaviness; fleshiness; to be or become
thick, stout, heavy, fleshy, said of the calves, arms, etc. Nagtábnul
ang íya bútkon. He has developed stout arms. Natabnulán akó sang íya
mga bútkon. His arms seem to me very fleshy. (cf. dámol, tibúnog,
bahól).

_tábnus_, To snatch or tear away, pull off, separate from, take
off. Tabnusá ang tátlo ka nahót nga lánot. Pull off (from the line,
the bunch, etc.) three threads of hemp. (cf. hábnus, húnus, bíngkas).

_tabô, tabô_, An event, eventuality, occurrence, accident; incident,
happening, fact; to happen, occur, come about, take place, befall,
betide, fall out, come to pass, get or come upon by chance. Isá inâ
ka tabô nga makatitingála. That is (was) a wonderful event. Nakatabô
akó kahápon sing maáyo nga sóhot sang ísdà sa ákon bunóan. Yesterday
I happened to catch a good lot of fish that entered the pocket of
my fish-trap (fish-corral). Natabô nga sang pagabút ko dídto amó
gid man ang pagsulúd sang mga buyóng sa bánwa. It fell out that
the brigands entered the town just as I arrived. Natabuán akó sang
íya kamatáyon. I happened to be present at his death. Natabô ang
sulî sang íla ginpaabút. The reverse of what they expected came to
pass. (cf. hanabô, hatabô).

_tábò_, To meet, come together, fall in with, encounter, arrive. Buás
matábò kitá sa íya baláy. To-morrow we shall meet at his house. Kon
magkarí ikáw liwát dirí, tabóon mo nga madámò ang búnga sang páhò. If
you come here again, try to arrive at a time when there are many
mangoes. Kahápon nagtábò (nagtaboáy, nagtabóay) kamí ni Hosé sa
minurô nga N.N. Joseph and myself chanced to meet yesterday in the
village of N.N. Tabóon mo lang akó dirí sa ádlaw nga Huébes, kay
magaupúd akó sa ímo. Meet me here on Thursday and I shall go along
with you. (cf. tabô).

_tabók_, The opposite (other) side or bank, what is on the other side
of a river, lake, strait, etc.; beyond, on the farther side; to pass
from side to side, come or move across the pathway of, cross a river,
road, hill, water-channel, etc. Tabók ka lang sa subâ. Taboká lang
ang subâ. Just cross the river. Itabók dirí ang ákon maléta. Tabokí
ang ákon maléta kag dálhon mo dirí. Cross over (the river, or the
like) to fetch my handbag and bring it here. Pataboká (Itabók) ang
karabáw. Take the buffalo over to the other side (bank). Sa tabók
sang----. Beyond----. May ulúmhan man akó sa tabók sang subâ. I also
have a farm on the other side of the river. Sa tabók sang dálan. On
the opposite side of the street. (cf. tubá).

_tabón_, Cover, lid, spread, screen, cloak, disguise, anything used
to close an opening or to hide something out of sight. (cf. tábon;
bísò, loón, táklub, takúp, soón).

_tábon_, To cover, envelop, clothe, cloak, overspread the surface
of one thing with another, make use of any kind of covering in
order to shelter, protect or conceal (hide). Tabóni sing dáhon ang
tabungós. Cover the tabungós-basket with leaves. Tinabónan níla
sing dútà ang mga bató. They covered (overspread) the stones with
earth. Itábon iníng hábul sa masakít nga bátà. Cover the sick child
with this blanket. Tabóni ang dápat nga tabónan. Conceal what should
be concealed. Hide what should not be seen. Amó ang gintábon níla sa
íla sakayán. With that (In that way) they hid (concealed, camouflaged)
their boat. Indì na matabónan ang íla ginamús. Their pickled fish
(Their bad or secret doings) cannot be hid any longer. (cf. táplak,
tágò, tinagô, hinabón).

_tabón-ak_, A kind of reed that somewhat resembles the sugar-cane.

_tabonánà_, Flaccid, flabby, soft, applied especially to a stout or
fat person that lacks muscular strength. Tabonánà siá sing láwas. His
body is flabby. Si Pédro matámbok, ápang tabonánà lang, si Hosé
maníwang, ápang líson. Peter is stout, but flabby, Joseph is lean,
but muscular. (cf. mahómok, malúm-ok, lamî, yamî).

_tábong_, A kind of tree.

_tabongáw_, (B) To look on, be a spectator, be present. Nagtabongáw
(tána) sa sugál. Natabongawán na ang sugál. (Nagtámbong siá sa
sugál. Gintambongán níya ang sugál). He looked on (was present)
at the gambling. (cf. támbong, taroróng, tán-aw, solóng).

_tabongós_, A kind of basket. (tabungós id.).

_tábos, tabós_, To penetrate, go--, pass--, seep--, soak--, flow--,
through. Nagtábos ang ulán sa ákon páyong, báyò, etc. The rain went
through my umbrella, jacket, etc. Kon magdámol ang ulán magatabós
sa ímo kapóte. If the rain is heavy it will soak through your
raincoat. Natabosán sing túbig ang íya mga panápton. His clothes were
soaked with water. (cf. tahús).

_tabó-tabó_, The outer covering, consisting of small and very short
threads, of the chrysalis of a silk worm. (tabútabú id.).

_táboy_, To hang or bend down, sag, sink, as the middle of a hammock
or the like. Nagatáboy ang dúyan, ang pulungkóan, etc. The hammock,
the chair, etc. is hollow or sunk in the middle. (cf. lúyon, which
is more used for the bending  of sacks, boards, beams, etc.).

_tabríya_, See tablíya.

_tábtab_, To cut through, sever, part, divide, a rope, belt,
etc. Tabtabá ang tabáng. Cut through the neck-rope. Gintábtab níya ang
sinturón. He cut the belt in two. Itábtab iníng binángon sa kalát. Cut
the rope with this bolo.

_tabtában_, The cutting or severing of something, place where
something is cut off; end, termination. Magakitaáy kitá sa tabtában. We
shall meet in the end (before the tribunal of God). (cf. katapúsan,
katubtúban).

_tabúg_, (B) To fly, fly off, soar. Nagtabúg ron ang mga píspis sa
káhoy. (Naglupád na ang mga píspis sa káhoy). The birds have flown--out
of the tree,--away to the tree. Patábga (Palupará) ang buladór. Fly
the kite. (cf. lupád).

_tábug_, To drive away, scare off, expel, cast out. Tabúga ang
mga karabáw. Drive off the buffaloes. Tabúgi ang humáy sang mga
manók. Drive the chickens away from the rice. Tinábug níya ang mga
kánding sa pamulákan. He drove the goats out of the garden. Tinábug
ni Hesús ang yáwà. Jesus cast out the devil. Tinábug siá níla
sa bánwa. They expelled him (banished him) from the city (town,
country). (cf. paíway, pahalín, búgaw, parág).

_tabugî_, Plait, braid; plaited, twisted, braided; to be or make
in the form of a plait, to plait, twist. Tabugiá ang pagbódbod sang
amákan. Plait the border of the bamboo mat. Tabugií ang tohóg sang
karabáw. Twist a rattan nose-ring for the buffalo.

_tabúg-lamók_, One who drives away mosquitoes, i.e. an idler, loafer,
lazy fellow, good-for-nothing. (cf. tábug, lamók).


_tabukánon_, One living beyond or on the other (farther) side of a
boundary, such as a river, mountain, lake, sea, etc. In Iloilo the term
mostly signifies the inhabitants of the island of Negros. (cf. tabók).

_tabukáw_, A kind of very malignant, ulcerous skin-disease, often
ending in death; leprosy.

_tabukawón_, Affected with or pertaining to tabukáw, leper.

_tabuláli_, A kind of plant somewhat resembling talóng--egg-plant.

_tabulî_, Upside down, inverted; to bend down very low, turn upside
down, incline much (of full ears, etc.; cf. bulî).

_tabúl-tabúl_, To swing or shake to and fro as a basket carried on a
pole. Nagatabúltabúl ang bakág sa tuangtuangán. The carrier's basket
swings (is swinging) to and fro on the pole. (cf. tawóltawól).

_tabungós_, A wicker basket made of bamboo splints. It usually holds
two or three bushels (pásong) of rice.

_tabú-tabú_, See tabó-tabó--the exterior covering of a silk worm's
chrysalis.

_tabúyug_, A kind of (useless) tree.

_tádag_, To step on or in, walk over plants, trample on plants
in walking over a field, etc.; to do or speak recklessly or
thoughtlessly. Indì ka magtádag sang ákon mga tanúm. Indì mo pagtadágon
ang ákon mga tanúm. Don't walk over my plants. Nagatádag lang siá
sa íya paghámbal. He talks recklessly, speaks without consideration
or reflection, not minding whether he wounds the feelings of his
listeners or slanders another, etc. (cf. tárag, túdag, ládag, tásak).

_tádhan_, Having a (large) spur, spurred (especially of
cocks). (cf. tahúd, tárhan).

_tadiáw, tádiaw_, A large earthen pot or jar for containing water,
sugar, fruit, etc.

_tádlong_, Straightness, honesty, directness, rectitude,
rightness, straightforwardness; to be--, become--, make--,
straight,--right,--direct,--straightforward,--honest, to
straighten. Nagtádlong na ang íya batásan. His ways have become
right, direct, straightforward, honest. Tadlongá ang tikô. Straighten
out what is crooked. Gintádlong níla ang dálan. They made the road
straight. Tadlongí siá sang íya páyong nga nagtikô. Straighten out
his umbrella that has bent. (cf. tárung, tanús).

_tádong_, (B) To behave, be quiet (of children especially). See tárung.

_tádtad_, Flooring or matting of split and flattened-out bamboo, bólò,
etc.; to cut, break, split in two, tear, make cuts or incisions with
the point of a bolo or the like in sections of split bamboo, bólò,
etc. in order to be able to flatten it out; to prepare bamboo, bólò,
etc. for balántak-work (weaving). Tadtará (-adá) ang kawáyan. Make
cuts with the point of the bolo in the (split) bamboo (and flatten it
out). Tadtarí (-adí) akó siníng limá ka nahót nga bólò. Work these
five pieces of bólò up into material fit for flooring (partitions,
matting, etc.) for me. Ginbutangán níla sing tádtad ang salúg sang
íla ermíta. They laid tádtad-matting on the floor of their chapel.

_táduk_, (B) To take a short cut, make a bee-line, walk from one
place to another in a straight line, take a straight course over
fields, hills, etc. without following the windings of roads or
footpaths. Gintáduk na gid ang pagágto rúgto. (Ginláktud níya ang
pagkádto dídto). He went there by a short cut. Tadúkon ta lang ang
pagpánaw rúgto. (Lakturón ta lang ang paglakát dídto). Just let
us walk there in a straight line (keeping or following a straight
course). Táduk tána ti panghámbal. (Pát-ud siá sing panghámbal). He
speaks to the point. He is straightforward, forthright. (cf. láktud,
latás, tádlong, pát-ud).

_tádul_, To measure, take the measure (of liquids in jars, pots
etc.); to suit, fit, make amenable to; to overcome, subdue,
vanquish. (cf. patádul).

_tádyà_, To measure, take--, determine--, the dimensions of. Itádyà ang
bagát sa halígi. Measure the post with the rod. Tadyaán mo ang íya báyò
sang heneró. Measure off the cloth required for her dress. (cf. takús,
sókol, tádul).

_tadyáw, tádyaw_, See tadiáw, tádiaw--an earthen jar.

_tag_-, A distributive particle. Tagduhá. Two each. Mabáton silá sing
tagápat ka pisítas ang ádlaw. They shall each (Each of them shall)
receive eighty centavos a day.

_tag-_, A prefix denoting ownership or actual performance
of what is implied by the term which it is attached to,
e.g. tagpanghun-áhún-a--thinker, one who thinks out a plan, originates
an idea, or the like; tagbúhat--maker; taghámbal--speaker. (cf. tig--,
manog--, manug--).

_taga-_, A prefix denoting;
1) Origin or source, e.g. tagamanílà-- native of Manila;
tagabáybay--one who lives near the coast (beach); tagabúkid--a native
or inhabitant of the mountains, a mountaineer. Tagadiín ikáw? Where
do you come from? Where were you born? Where do you live? What place
do you belong to?
2) Attached to words indicating parts of the body taga- denotes
the height or depth as measured by that part of the body,
e.g. tagatúhud--up to the knees, knee-deep; tagalápaw----more than
man-deep, rising above the head of a man. Tagaháwak karón ang túbig
sang subâ. The water of the river is waist-deep at present. Tagaílok
ang túbig sang pagtabók námon. When we crossed the water came to
our armpits.

_tagâ_, A large fish-hook.

_tagâ_, A word, term, expression. Mga pilá lámang ka tagâ (tinagâ)
ang íya hinámbal. He spoke only a few words.

_tágà_, To give, bestow, donate, present, dispense, impart, confer,
grant, accord, award, assign. Natagáan siá sing kwárta. He was
given some money. Tagái siá sing diótay nga humáy. Give him a little
rice. (cf. hátag).

_tágà_, To get ready any kind of weapon for an attack or defense,
to take up a position of attack or defence with a gun, sword, dagger,
etc. Tagái siá sing lúthang, bólo, dága, etc. Get ready for him with
your gun, bolo, dagger, etc. Itágà sa íya ang pusíl. Point your rifle
at him. (cf. táyà).

_tagábang_, A vegetable plant whose oily leaves greatly facilitate
the act of swallowing.

_tagád_, An iron-pointed bar or dibble used in digging, making
holes for fence-stakes, etc. Ibákhay iníng tagád sa dútà. Use this
iron-pointed dibble to dig up the earth with. (cf. báhì--a wooden
dibble).

_tágad_, See tagád. In and near Iloilo tagád is mostly used, tágad
in other places.

_tágak_, To knot or bind hemp-fibre together and roll it up neatly
in a basket (tagakán) preparatory to weaving or reeling. Tagáka ang
lánot. Bind the hemp-fibre and roll it up in the basket. Tagáki
akó sináng lánot. Get me ready that hemp for reeling (or
weaving). (cf. súg-ut).

_tagakán_, The basket used in the operation of tágak. (cf. sug-útan).

_tagál, tágal_, To impel, drive, push forward, instigate, induce,
put forward; to make use of the services of another for obtaining
a favour, etc. from a third person; to guide, direct, point out,
show. Sonô sang maáyo ukón maláin nga paghimánwa ang isá ka púngsud
ginatagál (matagál) sa kaayohán ukón sa kalaínan. According to a
good or bad management of public affairs a nation is led (driven,
directed) towards prosperity or misery. Si Fuláno gid ang dáyon níla
ginatagál sa pagpanáysay sa ákon sang íla mga kinahánglan. They always
make use of N.N.'s services to let me know what they want. Itagál si
Fuláno. Instigate, induce, put forward N.N. Make use of (Use) N.N. for
your purpose. Kon sókton gánì siá sang íya útang sa gihápon ginatagál
níya ang íya kabáyo. Whenever payment of his debt is demanded of him
he always points to his horse, i.e. as much as to say: "Will you take
my horse in payment of my debt"? or "Please wait until I shall have
been able to sell that horse of mine". (cf. dáldal, tulúd, tányag,
tóytoy, túltul).

_tagála_, A Tagalog woman. (cf. alâ).

_tagaláling_, (H) Milling time, milling season for sugar
cane. (cf. gáling, galíng, galingán, gáring).

_tagaláni_, Time of harvest, harvest-time, harvesting season (for
rice). (cf. tigaláni).

_tagálog_, A male Tagalog. (cf. alóg).

_tagáltal_, To rattle, clatter, crash to the ground, make a noise as
of something striking or knocking against a hard surface. Ang láta
nagatagáltal sa trak. The can is rattling in the truck. (cf. dagáldal).

_tagám_, To be careful, take care, beware, be on the alert--, the look
out--, for danger, etc. Tagám (Magtagám, Tumagám) ka. Take care. Look
out. Beware. Tagamí si tátay mo, kay hanóton ka níya kon masápwan ang
ímo ginhímò. Beware of your father for he will give you a flogging,
if he finds out what you have done. (cf. katalágman--danger; ándam).

_tagámbay_, Small, fine; good, not sandy (of soil). Tagámbay nga
dútà. Good soil. Fertile ground. (cf. magamáy, tagámhay).

_tagámhay_, Small, little, tiny; fine, good (of soil); to be or become
small, etc. Lígsa ang dútà, agúd magtagámhay ang mga pugá. Harrow
the field so that the clods may by broken up small. (cf. tagámbay).

_tagámtam_, To taste, try the flavour of. (cf. dímdim, tiláw,
sagámsam).

_taganák_, Father, mother, guardian, tutor, person to whom a child
belongs (who looks after a child); godfather, godmother. (cf. anák).

_tágas_, A flow of blood, flow of decomposed matter; to flow, ooze out,
trickle, decompose and liquefy. Ang bángkay nagatágas na. The corpse
is already in a state of decomposition. Si Fuláno ginatagásan. N.N. is
suffering from a flux or a flow of blood.

_tág-as_, High, tall, etc. See táas.

_tagasák_, A slap, a clap; to slap, resound (as a blow struck with
something flat). Ang íya mga kamót nagtinagasák lang sa nawóng ni
Fuláno. His hands rained blows on N.N.'s face. (cf. lágsak, lágpak).

_tagâ-tágà_, Mantis, a fly similar to, but larger than, the
"dahón-dahón".

_tagâ-tagâ_, Dim. and Freq. of tagâ--a word, term. Also: to speak
slowly, pronounce distinctly syllable by syllable.

_tagáwtaw_, Very tall, high, large, lanky (colloquial); to grow
very tall, etc. Nagtagáwtaw siá sa sulúd siníng ápat ka túig. He has
grown very tall during these four years. Natagawtawán akó sa íya. He
appeared to me to be very tall (lanky). (cf. lántyog, matáas, matanús,
matág-as).

_tágay_, To offer, pour out, give a drink to. Tagáyi silá sing tubâ,
bíno, hinébra, etc. Give them some toddy, wine, gin, etc. Itágay sa
íya iníng moskatél. Offer him (pour out for him) this muscatel.

_tagayán_, A cup, small drinking vessel; chalice. (cf. ilímnan, báso,
sukî, sulúdlan, kális).

_tagbaláy_, Master, proprietor, owner of the house. N.B. On entering
a house it is polite to call out: "Tagbaláy!" and before going in to
wait for the invitation: "Sákà", "Hápit ka dirí sa ámon", "Sulúd!",
etc. (cf. tagíya, ámo).

_tagbaláyon_, A new unfinished house, a house that is not yet
ready to be occupied, a house to be got ready still to receive its
owner. Tagbaláyon pa iní nga baláy (diá nga baláy). This house is not
yet--finished,--complete,--fit for occupation by its owner. (cf. bálay,
baláy, tagbaláy).

_tágbas_, See tábas--to cut clothes, etc.

_tagbátà_, Father, mother; guardian, one who looks after a child or
who takes care of it; godfather, godmother. (taganák id.).

_tágbaw_, To fly off (away) to a great distance, be struck or beaten
off far, as a ball well hit by a bat, or the like. Nagtágbaw ang
bóla, kay naígò sing maáyo. The ball flew far, because it was well
hit. Patagbawá ang bóla. Strike the ball well. Hit the ball well that
it may fly far. (cf. tabúg).

_tágbò_, To meet, come together, encounter one another (by mutual
agreement or, more often, by chance, accidentally, unexpectedly). Buás
sa hápon matágbò lang kitá sa baláy ni Fuláno, sa bulangán,
etc. Tomorrow afternoon we'll meet in the house of N.N., at the
cockpit, etc.

_tágbon, tágban_, From tagúb--to sheathe.

_tágbong_, To be heavy, ponderous, etc. See búg-at.

_tágbong_, To cast overboard, sink, immerse, throw or put into water
or soil below the surface. Ang napatáy sa sakayán, gintágbong níla sa
dágat. The man that died on board was buried by them at sea, was cast
overboard. Itágbong iníng mga sáhà sa higád (binít) sang sápà. Put
these banana-shoots into the earth near the brooklet. Nagatágbong na
ang íya ginháwa. His life is ebbing away. He is sinking fast.

_tágboy_, To cling to, stick or adhere to, lean upon, take hold
of. (cf. ángot, únung, kupô, kúpkup, tákboy).

_tágduk_, A cupping glass; to apply a cupping glass. (cf. tándok).


_tágduk_, A fence post; to put or ram in the posts for a fence, etc.;
to arrange the warping board. (cf. búgsok).

_taghágnà_, One who brings in a motion or is responsible for a bill,
a maker of a law-draft. (cf. hágnà).

_tághap_, To be apprehensive, shy, timid, afraid. Indì ka matáhap
(magkatáhap) magsulúd. Don't be afraid to enter. (cf. táhap, hádluk).

_taghimatá_, Redness, inflammation of the eyes; having inflamed or
bloodshot eyes. (cf. tagimatá, tigmatá).

_taghimatâ_, Relative, relation by blood, belonging to the same stock
or family, kinsman, kinswoman, consanguineal, consanguineous. Sín-o
ang taghimatâ sa ímo? Si Fuláno ukón ang íya asáwa? Who is your
blood-relation? Is it N.N. or is it his wife? (cf. himatâ, bátà).

_taghiríro_, Branding season, time during which domestic animals are
usually registered and branded. (cf. híro).

_tághol_, The bark, barking, yelp, yap, bay (of a dog); to bark, yelp,
yap, bay. Ang idô nagatághol. The dog barks (is barking). Tinagholán
(tinághol) akó sang idô. The dog barked at me. Patagholá lang ang
idô. Let the dog bark. (cf. hólhol, úwang, láhay).

_tághoy_, To sigh, moan, to murmur, rustle, sough, babble, purl,
gurgle, brawl, plash (of wind, dry leaves, flowing water, etc.); to
chirp, chirrup, twitter, sing (of insects, birds, etc.). (cf. sághoy,
lághoy, panághoy).

_tágik_, To bind--, connect--, together, secure in place (split pieces
of bamboo in floors, in fish traps, etc.). Tagíka ang salúg. Tie
the flooring with any binding material like rattan, hípgid, sókdap,
etc. Itágik iníng owáy sa lág-i. Use this rattan for securing in
place the strips of bamboo in the lág-i netting (weir). Tinágik nga
mga ngípon. Teeth that are closely set together. A fine set of teeth.

_tagilám-an_, From tagiláum.

_tagiláum_, To expect, have apprehensions, forebodings, misgivings,
be of the opinion or belief that something will happen which actually
does not happen or is not the case, to suppose, think. Natagilám-an
námon nga índì ka magabút. We thought--that you would not come,--you
were not coming. Indì kamó maglágaw kon madulúm na ang kagab-íhon,
kay básì tagilám-an kamó nga mga makáwat ukón manughílò. Don't walk
abroad in the darkness of night, for you may be taken for thieves or
poisoners (of wells, etc.). (cf. láum).

_tagilínit, tagilinít_, Hot or warm season. (cf. tigilinít, ínit).

_tagílyas_, Charm, talisman, amulet (that protects its possessor,
makes him invulnerable, or the like, as supposed by the superstitious).

_tagilyásan_, The owner or wearer of an amulet called "tagílyas";
invulnerable, bullet proof.

_tagimatá_, An inflammation of the eyes, blood-shot eyes. (cf. tigmatá,
taghimatá).

_tagimíslon_, Kidneys, reins; cartilage, gristle. (cf. batóbáto).

_tagíngting_, Very warm or hot, burning, torrid, white (of heat),
scorching (of the heat of the sun, etc.); to be extremely hot,
etc. Tagíngting (Nagatagíngting) ang ádlaw karón. The sun is now very
hot. (cf. tagítì, salíit, síngkal, ínit).

_tagíngting_, Very ripe and hard (of beans, peas,
etc.). (cf. lángking).

_tagínop, tagínup_, To dream, have visions, perceive intuitively,
conceive a plan, an idea, a scheme, etc. See panagín-up, panagínup.

_tagín-op, tagín-up_, See tagínop, tagínup.

_tagínus_, To succeed--, follow--, one the other, do one thing
after another in regular succession, come or go one behind the other
without interruption, come--after,--next. Nagtagínus (Nagtalagínus)
silá sa pagpaúlì. They went home one after the other. Taginúsa ang
ímo mga buluhatón. Perform your duties regularly, one after the
other. (cf. sunúd, ápas, túndog).

_tagiposóon_, Heart; affection, sympathy, consideration, kindness,
benevolence, charity. (cf. kasíngkásing).

_tagíptip_, A kind of mould or mildew on clothes in the form of
clusters of small black dots (spots, stains); to be, or cause to be,
spotted with mould, to be musty, fusty, mildewy. Ginatagíptip ang
ákon pakô. My sleeve is getting spotted with mould. Tinagíptip
ang íya sárwal. His trousers are (were) spotted with
mould. (cf. agóp-op--mildew, mustiness of bread, etc.).

_tagiptipón_, Spotted with mould, musty, fusty, mildewy, rotten.

_tagítì, tagîtî_, Excessively hot, extremely warm, incandescent,
white-hot, at a white heat; very white, bright, clean. Nagatagítì karón
ang ínit. The heat of the sun is very great at present. It is very
hot at present. Nagatagítì gid yanáng mga panápton nga linátag. Those
bleached clothes look very white. (cf. salíit, tagíngting, putî,
lágtì, síngkal).

_tagíya, tag-íya_, Owner, proprietor, holder, possessor,
master. (cf. panagíya).

_taglulúngì, taglulungî_, The season or time of gathering the corn
(maize). (cf. lúngì).

_tágnà_, Prophecy, prediction, forecast, vaticination, prognostication,
presage, foretelling of future events; Book of Prophecies; to
prophesy, predict, foretell, prognosticate, presage, vaticinate,
announce beforehand. Ang tágnà ni (kay) San Huán. The Prophecy of
St. John, i.e. the Apocalypse. Ang mga gintágnà sang mga mananágnà
natúman na. What the prophets have foretold is fulfilled now. Indì
ikáw makatágnà kon anó ang mahanabô. You cannot foretell what will
happen. (cf. búgnà).

_tágnak_, To flow down, fall down, trickle, drip, drop down. Nagatágnak
ang íya mga lúhà. Her tears are flowing. Nagapatágnak siá sing
mapaít kag masulúg nga mga lúhà. She is shedding many bitter
tears. (cf. táktak, dágdag, tululágay, talabirís, túlò, ágay, ílig,
tubúd).

_tágò_, Hiding, concealment, privacy, secrecy, clandestineness,
stealth; a secret, what is kept secret, etc.; to hide, conceal,
secrete, stow away, put away, put by, keep out of sight,
abscond. Sa tágò. Clandestinely, surreptitiously, secretly, in
secret. Ginhímo níya inâ sa tágò. He did that in secret. Tagóa
inâ. Hide it. Conceal it. Put it by. Keep it out of sight. Tinágò
níya ang ákon kálò. He hid my hat. Tagói siá sing limá ka páhò. Put
aside for him five mangoes. Ipatágò sa íya inâ. Patagóa siá sinâ. Let
him put it--away,--in a safe, in a safe place. Order him to hide it,
to guard it well, or the like. Nanágò (from the Freq. panágò) siá. He
hid (concealed) himself. He was in hiding. (cf. tinágò, tinagô, tábon,
hinabón, palanagoán, likúm, lílong).

_tagoángkan_, See taguángkan--uterus.

_tágob, tagób_, See tágub, tagúb.

_tagódtod_, The back, shoulders. (cf. talúdtud).

_tagódtod_, Barren, unproductive, poor, sterile, unfruitful, unfertile,
impoverished, producing little, said of soil; to become barren,
etc. (of soil). Tagódtod gid ang dútà dirâ sa baybáyon. The land there
on (near) the beach is very poor soil. (cf. hínis, balasón; báw-as).

_tagók_, Sap, juice, mostly sticky, viscous juice (of
plants). (cf. dúgà).

_tagóm-a_, See tagúm-a--soft, loose, etc.

_tagosílang_, Spectacles, eye-glasses, glasses, pince-nez, monocle,
lens, microscope. (cf. tágò, siláng).

_tagótlo_, Three each, three by three, by threes. (cf. tagtátlo,
tatlótátlo).

_tágpò_, To gag, cover or close the mouth. Tagpoá ang ímo bábà, índì ka
magtalángkaw. Cover your mouth, don't laugh so boisterously. Gintágpò
sang mga buyóng ang íya bábà. The brigands gagged him.

_tágpon_, To gag. See tágpò. Tagponí ang bábà níya. Gag his mouth.

_tagpuyô_, Master of the house, occupant, dweller, settler, owner or
boss (of a house). (cf. puyô).

_tagrá-tágra_, To roam about idly, gad about, loaf, walk about doing
nothing worth while, said especially of women. (cf. lagáwlágaw,
landólándo, haráyháray, tiógtióg, puágpuág).

_tágring_, Tinkling, jingle, clink, tintinnabulation, vibration,
a tremulous sound as produced by the oscillation of musical strings,
etc.; to tinkle, jingle, clink, vibrate. Kabatî ikáw sang tágring sang
gitára? Did you hear the sound of the guitar? Dílì mo pagpatagringón
sing dáyon ang ímo sísta. Don't be always playing your mandolin
(guitar, ukulele). Abáw, katágring sináng mga linggánay! Oh the
jingling of those bells! How those bells jingle! (cf. kilíngkilíng,
huní, ragíngring, ragíting, tágsing).


_tagró-tágro_, A loafer, etc. (of men). (cf. tagrá-tágra).

_tágsa_, Each, every one, every individual. Ang tágsa ka táo. Each man,
everybody, every man. Ang tágsa ka baláy napunihán sing matahúm. Every
house (All the houses) was (were) beautifully decorated. Ang ginámot
sang tágsa ka bánwa----. The contribution of every town----. (cf. káda;
tanán, pulús-- all, without exception).

_tágsa_, One, one only, single, as a single stroke of a bell or
clock, one report of a gun, etc.; to do one by one, in single strokes,
etc. Tagsahá ang pagbágting sang linggánay. Ring the bells one stroke
at a time.

_tagsáon_, A rod, cane, stick, cudgel, rattan whip. (cf. bilogón,
náwì, bulunál).

_tagsá-tágsa_, One and all, everybody, each one (of a number or
quantity). Ang tágsa-tágsa sa áton----. Each and every one of
us----. Ang tagsá-tágsa ka táo. Every man. All men. (cf. tanán,
pulús, tágsa).

_tagsá-tágsa_, Seldom, rarely, scarcely ever. Tagsátágsa lang nímo
makítà inâ. Such a thing you can seldom see. (cf. tumalágsa, talágsa).

_tágsik_, To sprinkle, besprinkle, spatter, bespatter, scatter,
etc. See ásik, ágsik, ápok, ásang, wisík, lásik, lágsik).

_tágsing_, A loud, sonorous, piercing or shrill sound; to be
sonorous, to resound, to emit a shrill, far-reaching sound, to
be--clear,--sharp,--high-sounding. (cf. sílik, sulánting, áthag,
táas, lániog, lányog).

_tágtag_, To distribute, divide among a number, deal out, dispense,
give or bestow in portions. Itágtag na sa íla ang dólse, ang kwárta,
ang humáy, etc. Distribute to them the sweets, the money, the rice,
etc. Tagtagí dirí sing sábud, kay walâ na akó sing itánum. Distribute
some rice-seedlings here, for I have no more left to plant. Tinagtagán
(Gintagtagán) silá níya sing tagpisítas. He gave twenty centavos to
each of them. He gave them twenty centavos each. (cf. hátag, panágtag,
huláy, báhin).

_tágò_, See tágò--to hide, etc.

_tagu-, tago-_, A prefix related to, and partaking of the meaning of,
tag-, tig-, inog- and manog-.

_taguángkan_, Uterus, womb. (cf. balatáan, tiyán, búsung).

_taguánkan_, See taguángkan. (cf. tagu-, anák).

_tagúb_, Sheath, scabbard, case; to sheathe, put into a scabbard,
provide or make a scabbard. Itagúb ang ímo espáda. Sheathe your
sword. Tágbi (Tagubí) ang ímo binángon. Provide a scabbard for
your bolo.

_tágub_, Any kind of fish-trap used in rivers; to put--, place--,
set--, a fish-trap in the water. Itágub ang páta, báw-an, taón,
etc. Set the páta--, the báw-an--, the taón--fish-trap in the
water. (cf. súgmad).

_tagubánwa_, A kind of spirits or tutelary deities supposed by the
credulous to have charge over whole towns and districts.

_tagúbtub_, A thud, flop, thump, bump, a dull sound; to thud, bump,
flop, thump, drop with a dull sound. (cf. tagábtab, lagábung, lágpok).

_tagúbtub_, A bamboo-tube of two joints used especially in collecting
tubâ; (cf. pasók--a bamboo-tube of one joint; bayóng--a bamboo-tube
of at least three or more joints). (cf. talúbtub, tarúbtub).

_tagudilían_, Condemned, damned, sentenced to hell, reprobate,
lost. Ang mga tinagudilían. Those condemned to hell, the
damned in hell. Tumána ang mga sógò sang Diós, agúd índì ka
mangintagudilían. Observe God's commandments, lest you should be
damned or become a reprobate. (cf. inpiernohánon, tinagudilían).

_tagúd-tágud, tagúd-tagúd_, Full of small holes, punctured, porous,
bruised; to bruise, puncture; to bruise or indent with the teeth
búyò-leaves, etc. Tagúd-tagudá (--urá) ánay ang búyò, kay ihámpul ko
sa ímo dungándúngan. Bruise the búyò-leaf first with your teeth and
I will then put it as a plaster on your temple. (cf. hatókhatók).

_taguhúmok_, A lichen that grows on trees, tree-moss; anything that
softens or mollifies, demulcent. (cf. húmok, hómok).

_taguláway_, A plant and its medicinal juice used as a remedy for
wounds.

_tágum_, Indigo plant, indigo, indigo blue. (cf. anyíl).


_tágum_, Dye; to dye, stain, colour, steep in colour (particularly
in indigo blue). (cf. lúgum).

_tagúm-a_, Soft, loose, not hard, good for farming (of soil); to be or
become soft, etc. Tagúm-a iníng dútà. This soil is soft, is good for
farming. Nagtagúm-a na ang ákon talámnan, kay nadáro sing makadámò. The
soil of my rice-land is now quite soft, because it has been ploughed
over many times. (cf. hómok, húmok, lúm-ok, yúm-ok, hábok).

_tagumatáyon_, On the point--, on the threshold--, of death, near or
approaching death, in a dying condition. Tagumatáyon (Nagatagumatáyon)
na siá. He is in a dying condition. He will soon die. (cf. patáy,
matáy, kamatáyon, himatayón).

_tagúmtum_, Fog, mist, vapour, cloud; to be foggy, misty,
etc. (cf. ámbon, alopóop, gál-um, pangánod).

_tagunáhì_, To sew or stitch on, to fasten, attach firmly, unite,
tie together. (cf. tahî, higót, tábid, tabíd).

_tagúngtung_, Very clear, bright, vivid, outstanding or pronounced
of a colour, etc.; to be or become very clear, etc. Tagúngtung gid
ang íya pagkaitúm, pagkapulá, etc. The darkness, redness, etc. of
his skin is very pronounced. (cf. lútò, malútò).

_tagúntun, tagónton_, To spread, extend, propagate, diffuse, advance,
(particularly said of a swelling, of pain, etc.). (cf. panagónton).

_tagurî_, Half a day's work, half a day; to work half a day. Nagtagurî
lang siá kahápon nga ádlaw. Yesterday he worked only half-time. Taguriá
lang. Work only half a day. Tagurií siá. Work half a day for him. Do
half a day's work for him. Nagdúgay akó dídto sing tagurî. I stayed
(worked) there half a day. (cf. tungá sa ádlaw, utúd sa ádlaw).

_tág-us_, To tremble, shake, quiver. (cf. kíryo, kúrug, kúdug).

_tagusílang_, See tagosílang--eye-glasses, etc.

_tagusírang_, See tagusílang.

_tagústus_, A kind of worm that is very injurious to plants, especially
to rice. Humáy nga tinagústus (tinagustusán). Worm-eaten (wormy) rice
(in the field).

_tagútò, tagôtô_, A small lizard, sand-lizard. (cf. sóksok, tokô,
takâ--gecko; haló--iguana; kuyáyha--flying dragon; buáya--crocodile,
alligator; balangítaw, tambalihán, tikî).

_tágwa_, (B) For táwga from tawág. Tágwa tána. (Táwga siá). Call him.

_tagwángkan, tagwánkan_, See taguángkan, taguánkan--uterus.

_tagwatî_, A kind of small bird.

_tahâ_, Respect, reverence, honour, regard, consideration, deference,
esteem, estimation, veneration; to respect, esteem, appreciate,
venerate, revere, regard, reverence, look up to, defer to, honour,
hold in reverence, show regard or reverence for. Tahaá siá. Revere
him. Defer to him. Walâ siá magtahâ sa ákon. Walâ akó níya pagtahaá. He
did not show me respect. He was disrespectful to me. Ginatahâ siá níla
sing dakô. They look up to him with great respect (reverence). They
honour (value, appreciate) him highly. Walâ na silá pagtahâ sa
íya. They do not show him respect any longer. (cf. táhud, banâ,
bálhot, padungúg, panagubáli, hangád, tamúd, saólog).

_táhad_, Sharpness of a point, a sharp point; to sharpen to a point,
like sharpening a pencil. Waláy táhad iníng lápis. This pencil has
no point or is not sharp. Tahári (--ádi) ang lápis. Sharpen the
pencil. (cf. talíwis).

_táhak_, Daring; to dare. (cf. aháng, káhas, dáhas).

_tahák-tahák_, Dim. of táhak. Taháktahák nga táo. A daring
man. (cf. dahákdahák, tuháktuhák).

_táhal_, See táhad--to sharpen, etc.

_tahámlok_, A rope made of rags and used to drive or keep off
mosquitoes; to use or make such a contrivance. The tahámlok is lighted
like a taper and either carried in the hand or fastened conveniently
somewhere nearby. The resulting smoke keeps the mosquitoes at a
distance. Maglúbid ka sing naúg kay itahámlok ko. Twist some rags
together, for I am going to use them against mosquitoes. (cf. tabó,
hámlok, lamók, namók).

_taháng_, A gap in the teeth; having a gap in the teeth (either as
a congenital or accidental defect). Taháng siá. May taháng siá. He
is minus a tooth (some teeth). He has lost a tooth (some teeth). He
has a tooth (some teeth) missing. (cf. bingáw).

_táhap_, See tághap--to fear, etc.

_táhaw_, To deteriorate, get stale or weak or lose strength. Nagtáhaw
ang bíno, lánggaw, etc. The wine, vinegar, etc. has lost its
strength. Walâ gid magtáhaw ang íya paghigúgma. His love never
lessened. Pataháwa ang íya kaákig. Try to calm his anger. (cf. tábang).

_tahí, tahî_, A kind of small, brown-feathered bird.

_tahî_, Sewing, stitching, tailoring; to sew, stitch, tailor, do
needle-work, make clothes. Tahiá ang báyò ko. Sew my jacket. Tahií
akó sing delárgo. Make me a pair of trousers. Mákina (makiná) sa
tahî. Sewing machine. Tinahián na akó sang manugtábas sing duhâ ka
térno. The tailor has made me two suits. Indì siá makahibaló bisán
lámang magtahî. She does not even know how to sew (stitch).

_tahí_, To toughen, harden new earthenware by roasting salt in it,
so that it may not easily crack. Tahihá ang kólon. Harden (Toughen)
the rice-kettle.

_tahímik_, Nice, beautiful, tranquil, quiet; to be or become nice,
restful, quiet, etc. Nagatahímik na gid ang pagkatulúg siníng
bátà. This baby is sleeping restfully (quietly, nicely). Nagtahímik
na ang íla pagpuyô kag pagpangabúhì dídto. Their living conditions
there have now become quite happy (tranquil, without worry or
anxiety). (cf. táwhay, matáwhay, matahímik).

_tahín-táhin_, Well-dressed, spick and span, neat, clean and tidy. The
form panahín-táhin is more in use especially as verb. Nagpanahín-táhin
siá, kay mamiésta. She is well dressed, because she is going to assist
at the feast. Kon magkádto ka dídto kinahánglan nga magpanahíntáhin
(manahíntáhin) ka. When you go there you must be clean and tidy,--must
dress yourself with care. Nagapanahíntáhin siá, kay magapanganák
siá. She looks spick and span, because she is going to be godmother.

_tahô_, A kind of ginger-ale; a beverage prepared from the powdered
root, etc. of ginger (lúy-a).

_tahór_, A gambler, gamester, one who is addicted to gambling,
a gambling addict. (cf. sugaról, sumulúgal).

_tahós_, See tábos, tabós--to seep or soak through, etc.

_táhud_, Respect, regard, reverence, honour, consideration, deference,
esteem, estimation, appreciation, veneration; to respect, revere,
reverence, defer to, regard, honour, look up to, hold in reverence,
pay honour or respect to. Tahúra (-úda) siá. Honour him. Respect
him. Tumáhud (Magtáhud) ka sa ímo amáy kag ilóy. Honour your father
and mother. Walâ siá pagtáhud sa ákon. He shows no respect for
me. Ginatáhud siá sing dakô bangúd sang matárung níya nga batásan. He
is held in great reverence on account of his honesty (righteous
conduct). Ginatáhud ko siá, kay talahúron (siá). I honour him,
because he is worthy of honour. (cf. tahâ, matinahúron, katahurán,
talahúron, tinatáhud).

_táhud_, To agree, pull well together, live in peace or
amity. (cf. sábud, sábun).

_tahúd_, The cock's spur to which the knife (buláng) is fastened
in cock-fighting. Ihigót ang buláng sa tahúd sang manók. Fasten the
knife to the cock's spur.

_tahúm_, Beauty, loveliness, comeliness, pulchritude, prettiness,
handsomeness, goodliness, attractiveness, good looks; to be, become
or make beautiful, nice, handsome, lovely, comely, fair, beauteous,
pretty, good-looking. Nagtahúm na ang simbáhan, kay napintahán. The
church has become beautiful now, for it has been painted. Tahumá
ang pagpuní. Make beautiful decorations. Abáw, katahúm siní! What
a beauty! How beautiful this is! Natahumán akó siní. This seems
beautiful to me. (cf. ámbong, ányag, ayóáyo, gayón, dálig, mahî).

_táhung, tahúng_, See táhong, tahóng).

_tahúp_, Chaff, husks, refuse; to sift rice, separate the husks from
pounded rice by tossing it in a shallow basket called kalálaw. Itahúp
iníng kalálaw sa nalíg-as. Clean the pounded rice of husks by means
of this kalálaw. Táphi (Tahupí) ang binayó. Clean the pounded
rice. Ipatahúp na lang sa íya iníng isá ka lusóng nga humáy nga
nabayó na. Just let him clean (of husks) this mortarful of pounded
rice. (cf. sisíg, sirísíri).

_táhur_, To agree, pull well together, live in harmony. (cf. táhud,
sábud, sábun, hisáhò, etc.).


_tahurí_, A kind of beans. (cf. táwri).

_tahús_, To penetrate, soak through, etc. See tábos. (tahós id.).

_tái, tá-i_, Faeces, excrement, dung, ordure, stool. (cf. ípot, ití).

_táihop_, To blow through a tube, blow by means of a tube or by
means of a pair of bellows. Taihopí (Táiphi) ang kaláyo. Blow the
fire through a tube. (cf. húyup, huyúp).

_táihop_, See tahúp--chaff, etc.

_taíp_, To observe, notice, experience, go through, pass through,
undergo, taste, find out by experience, have a taste of by personal
trial or observation. Nataipán na níya iní. He knows this now by
experience. He has had a taste of this himself. (cf. tuíp, tiláw,
panílag, sukíb, tukíb, sapó, túltul, ánad).

_taís, ta-ís_, To chafe, fret, scrape, abrade, wear away, wear down,
wear through, rub. Ang kawáyan nagataís sa dútà kon guyúron. The bamboo
gets scraped by the ground, if it is dragged along. Ang iya sárwal
nagtaís sa púngkò. His trousers were worn through by sitting. Ang
káhoy nataisán (nata-isán) sang kawayan, ang kawáyan nataisán sang
káhoy. The tree got chafed by the bamboo, the bamboo got chafed by
the tree. Pata-isá lang ang tángkap sang tablón. Just let the end of
the log get rubbed.

_táka_, To become hard, compact, closely packed, to coalesce, stick
together, especially said of rice left too long in the kettle without
stirring. Natáka (Nagkatáka) ang tiníg-ang, kay walâ pagkalikára
(-áda). The rice stuck together in the kettle, because it was not
stirred. (cf. bilóg, dokót).

_taká_, Nausea, loathing, surfeit, disgust, aversion, repugnance; to
loathe, feel an aversion to, be disgusted with, etc. Nagakataká akó
siníng kárne. Naták-an akó siníng kárne. I have taken an aversion
to this meat. I dislike--, feel a loathing for--, am disgusted
with--, this kind of meat. Indì ka magkataká (magtaká) sang ákon
mga sógò. Don't be offended at my orders. Don't take exception to my
orders. Ginaták-an siá sang amó nga pangabúdlay. He feels a repugnance
to such kind of work. (cf. sumó, súm-od).

_takâ_, (B) The gekko, gecko, a kind of lizard larger than the ordinary
tagútò or sóksok. (cf. tokô, tikî).

_takáb_, (B) To pilfer, steal, purloin, take secretly or
stealthily. Anó ang tinakáb na? (Náno ang íya kináwat)? What did
he steal? Gintakáb na ang mga sáb-a ko. Tinakabán na akó kang sáb-a
ko. (Kináwat níya ang ákon mga ságing. Kinawátan akó níya sang ákon
mga ságing). He stole my bananas. (cf. tákaw, káwat).

_tákam_, To munch or chew noisily (audibly). Indì ka magtákam kon
magkáon, kay maláw-ay. Don't chew noisily when you eat, for it is
not nice (proper). (cf. támsak).

_takám-tákam_, Dim. and Freq. of tákam.

_ták-an_, From taká--to loathe, etc.

_tákang, takáng_, (B) A step, pace, stride; to pace, stride, step,
make steps. (cf. tikáng, lakáng).

_takáng-tákang_, Dim. and Freq. of tákang, takáng. Also: to take the
first steps, to learn to walk; to learn "the ropes", enter upon a
career. Ang bátà nagatakángtákang na. The baby is taking its first
steps,--is learning to walk.

_tákas_, Inland, interior, away from the sea, away from a river
or valley, land as opposed to water, a slope or hill as opposed
to a valley; to land, disembark, go on shore, go inland, go away
from the sea, from a river or from a valley; to go up-stream or
up-river. Nagtákas silá sa Manílà. They disembarked (went on shore) at
Manila. Sán-o ka matákas (magatákas)? When shall you--land,--go into
the interior,--go inland? Ang ámon baláy árà sa tákas sang subâ. Our
house stands back from the river. Ginpatákas níya dirâ ang napúlò
ka sáko nga bugás. He landed there (brought on shore) ten sacks of
rice. Patakása ang sakayán. Land (Try to land) the boat. (cf. iláya,
ilayá; ubús--lower down, near the sea; etc.).

_takasán_, Beach, coast, dry land, high ground, shore, bank, landing
place. Paunáuná kamó maghingágaw sang takasán. Race each other and
see which of you will reach land first. (tákas).

_tákaw_, (B) To steal, pilfer, abscond, purloin, take and carry
away feloniously. Tinákaw na ang kálò ko. (Kináwat níya ang ákon
kálò). He stole my hat. Indì mo pagtakáwon (pagkawáton) ang mga
tanúm na (níya). Don't steal his plants. Natakáwan nánda ang
páray nga diá. (Nakawátan níla iníng humáy). They stole some of
this rice. Tinakáwan nánda ang páray nga diá. (Kinawátan níla iníng
humáy). This sentence may be translated like the foregoing, but it may
also mean: This rice of theirs is stolen property (is not the result
of their labour nor the product of their land). (cf. takáb; káwat).

_tákay_, (B) Contribution, share, part; to contribute a share,
pay something towards a general undertaking, etc. Takáyi (Amóti)
nínyo ang pagpatíndog ti ermíta (sing ermíta). Contribute towards the
building of a chapel. Nagtákay (nagámot) tána ti (siá sing) tátlo
ka mángmang. He contributed three pesos. Patakáya tána ti (Paamóta
siá sing) tátlo ka mángmang. Make him contribute three pesos. Pirá
ang tákay mo? (Pilá ang ímo ámot)? How much is your share of the
contribution? How much are you supposed to contribute? (cf. ámot).

_takáy-tákay_, Dim. and Freq. of tákay.

_takáy-tákay_, A kind of flowering plant.

_tákba_, To mate, leap, cover, said of animals. Ang kabáyo nga babáye
tinákba sang laláke--or--ang kabáyo nga babáye nagpatákba. The mare
was covered by the stallion. (cf. kásta).

_tákbaw_, To jump, clear, take, leap over. Takbawá ang kalóg. Jump
over the ditch. (cf. lúkso, lúkbo, lúmpat).

_tákboy_, To put on, lay on, lie or lean upon. (cf. tángday, hámbuy)
Also: To add to, fasten or sew on. Lióngi na ang ímo báyò kag itákboy
ang mga pakô. Make holes in your dress for the sleeves and sew the
sleeves on. (cf. takúd, angót).

_tákdan_, From takúd--to close; hitch up, etc.

_tákdung_, To cover (the head, etc.). (cf. takuróng, kódong, tábon,
tútub, tutúb, sosoón).

_tákga_, Promise, engagement, pledge, plight, troth; to promise, to
give--, pass--, pledge--, plight--,--one's word,--one's honour,--one's
credit,--one's troth. Ang mga tinákga ni Hesukrísto. The
promises of Jesus Christ. Nagtákga siá nga----. He promised
that----. Tinakgahán níya akó nga báklan sing kálò. He promised to
buy me a hat. (cf. túg-an, sáad).

_takídlon_, From takílid.

_tákig_, Ague-fever, ague, malaria; a kind of fever that begins with
a fit of shivering. May tákig siá. Ginatákig siá. He has--an ague
fever,--malaria fever.

_takilíd_, Sideways, on the side.

_takílid_, To sit, lie, stand, walk, etc. sideways. Patakílid--to
put or turn on the side. Patakídla (Patakilíra, patakilída) ang
látok. Set the table down on its side. Tilt the table over on its
side. (cf. kílid).

_takín_, (B) To scrape together, collect, gather, heap, mass, bring
together; to separate, scrape or scoop away from a common heap,
or the like. Takiná ang barás kag hákpon. (Tipóna (paína) ang balás
kag hakúpon mo). Heap the sand together (with your hand) and scoop
it up. (cf. típon; káka, páin).

_takinís_, A plant with very rough leaves that are often used as an
abrasive, especially for rubbing and cleaning the skin of a slaughtered
pig, etc.

_táklad_, To ascend, climb, clamber, scale, go up-hill, march up an
incline, slope, hill, etc. Táklad na kamó. Now, march up-hill. Begin
the ascent. Tináklad níla ang búkid. They scaled the mountain. Takladá
(-ará) ang bakólod. Climb up the hill. (cf. tokád.)

_takládon_, (B) Ascent, going up. (cf. takláron, talakláron, tolokádon,
tolokáron, turukádon).

_táklap_, To cover, put or lay upon. Taklapán ta ikáw sing
hábul? Shall we put a blanket over you? Shall we cover you with a
blanket? (cf. tábon, táklub).

_takláron_, (H) See takládon.

_táklas_, (H) To climb up something steep, using hands and
feet, to clamber up, scale. Táklas ka sa padér, díngding,
kodál, pángpang, etc. Climb the wall, partition, fence, steep
river-bank, etc. Taklasá--or--taklasí ang pángpang. Climb the steep
river-bank. (cf. táklad).

_táklo_, The hollow of the hand; to grip or catch with the hollow of
the hand. (cf. pálad--the palm of the hand).

_táklub_, A small fish-trap. (cf. taón).

_táklub_, Cover, lid, cap; to cover, put a lid on, close. Taklubí
ang bangâ. Cover the water-pot (water-cooler). Itáklub iníng takóp
(loón) sa kólon. Put this lid on the rice-pot. (cf. táklap, takóp,
tabón, tábon).

_táklung_, A kind of snail and its shell.

_táklus_, To hang on to--, attach to--, the belt or hip a bolo, sword,
etc.; to gird on a bolo, sword, etc. Itáklus ang binángon. Gird on
your bolo. Sling the bolo at your side. (cf. sókbit).

_tákmò_, To suck. Ang bátà nagatákmò sa íya ilóy. The baby is sucking
the breast of its mother. Nakatákmò gid lang iníng bátà sing makaisá
kag napatáy. This baby sucked milk once and died. (cf. sópsop, súyup,
sóso, yúpyup).

_táknà_, Time, hour.

_taknáan_, Time-piece, watch, clock.

_táko_, (Sp. taco) Bung, plug, stopper, stopple; wad, wadding for guns;
rammer; billard cue; to wad a gun, etc. or load a gun. Takóhi ang ímo
lúthang. Load your gun. Itáko iníng papél sa ímo pusíl. Use this paper
as wad (wadding) for your rifle. Diín ang táko sang bílyar? Where is
the billard cue?

_tákon_, (B) On my part, etc. for sing ákon. Indì (akó) tákon magágto
rúgto. (Indì akó sing ákon--, Indì akó'y ákon--, magkádto dídto). I
for my part will not go there. As for me I won't go there.

_takón_, (Sp. tacón) The heel or heelpiece of a boot or shoe,
etc. (cf. tikód).

_takóp, takúp_, Cover, cap, top, lid, shutter; to cover, put a lid on,
to close, shut. Tákpi (takupí) ang gawáng. Shut the window. Natákpan
ang ganháan. The door is (was) closed. Ang mga buluthúan pagatákpan
sa búlan sa Márso. The schools will be closed in March. Itakóp ang
táklub sa kólon. Put the lid on the rice-kettle. Patákpa si Hosé sang
ganháan sang kosína. Let José (Order José to) close the door of the
kitchen. (cf. táklub, háom, soón).

_takoróng_, A head-dress for women consisting of a cloth or veil,
often worked in beautiful designs. (cf. mantelyína).

_tákpan_, From takóp.

_táktak_, To fall down in drops, let fall, shed, said of tears,
leaves, petals of flowers, etc. Nagakatáktak ang íya mga lúhà
sa íya kamót. Her tears are falling on her hand. Nagkalatáktak
na ang mga sinipád siníng búlak. The petals of this flower have
fallen off already. Tinaktakán níya ang ákon delárgo sing abó sang
sigarílyo. He dropped some cigarette ash on my trousers. Nataktakán
ang salúg sang abó sang íya abáno. The ash of his cigar dropped on the
floor. Natáktak siá sa íya nga palangakóan. He lost his position. He
fell from office. (cf. dágdag, húlug, tángtang).

_taktákon_, Corral, the fence-like structure put up in shallow water
and forming part of the fish-trap called punút. (cf. bunóan--the
enclosure where the fish are caught).

_takúb-takúb_, A shiver, shudder, tremble, quiver; to tremble, shiver,
quiver, shake, chatter (with cold, fear, etc.). Nagatakúbtakúb ang
íya bábà sa katúgnaw. His mouth is quivering with cold. His teeth
are chattering with cold. (cf. píri, pírik, kiréu, kíryo).

_takúd_, Shutter, door, window; anything that is to be tied, fastened
or hitched up to something else, as a draught animal, a cart, or the
like; to shutter, close with a shutter; to attach to. Tákdi (takudí,
takurí) ang báka. Yoke the ox. Itakúd ang pútyong sa báyò ko. Sew the
button on my jacket. Tákdan mo ang ganháan. Shut the door. Itakúd ang
takúd sa bintánà. Close the window-shutter. Tinákdan ko na ang karabáw
sang arádo. I have now hitched the buffalo to the plough. (cf. takóp).

_takúl_, Quick, careless, to do quickly, etc. The Dim. takúltakúl is
more in use.

_takúl-takúl_, Scamped, quickly or carelessly done or made; to do
quickly, carelessly, negligently. (cf. dakúldakúl).

_takúl-takúl_, The cry of a turkey, gobble; to gobble (of a turkey
or the like).

_ták-um_, To cover, put on, place upon. (cf. tábon, táklap).

_takupís, takúpis_, Clothes-basket, travelling basket,
suitcase. (cf. soklóban, tampípì).

_takúpis_, A kind of plant. See takinís id.

_takúpis_, Rough, not smooth. Pánit nga takúpis. Rough skin. Grained
or granulated leather. Shagreen.

_takurí_, Kettle for boiling water in, tea-kettle, coffee-kettle.


_takurî_, See tagurî--half a day's work, etc.

_takurúng_, See takoróng--a headdress for women.

_takús_, Measure, standard, measurement, degree, dimension; coming up
to the mark or standard, entitled to, deserving of, meriting, meet,
worthy; to measure, take the measure of, survey. Gintakús níya ang
ákon umá. He measured or surveyed my field. Nangintakús na siá sang
amó nga palangakoán. He has become worthy of that position of power
or office. Walâ siá sing ikatakús sa pagkapangúlo-bánwa. He has no
capacity for--, does not measure up to--, the office of Municipal
President. Táksa (takusá) ang kalabaón siníng kalát. Measure the length
of this rope. Táksi akó sing limá ka dupá sináng alámbre. Measure
out for me ten yards of that wire. Ipatakús mo ang ímo palangúmhan
sa agrimensór. Have your farm surveyed by a land-surveyor. Takús
siá sang tanán nga pagdáyaw. He is worthy of all praise. (cf. sókol,
sokób, sángkol, ángay).

_takús-ínit_, Thermometer. (A modern term; cf. takús, ínit).

_tákwas_, To climb anything steep, clamber up. See táklas id. Takwasá
ang díngding. Climb the partition wall. N.B. Sometimes tákwas is used
like tákba or kásta--to mate, cover (of animals).

_talá_, An exclamation used to draw attention, especially when making
a petition: Oh please! Do, please! Do this for me. Grant----. Deign
to----. Grant, I beseech you,--.

_tála_, To boil shell-fish (pakinháson). Taláha ang (Taláhi akó sang)
tahóng. Boil the tahóng shell-fish (for me).

_taláan_, Sign, mark, token, foreboding, omen, presage. (cf. tándà,
pát-in).

_talába_, A kind of shell-fish; oyster.

_talabáng_, See talába.

_talabangán_, Any person or object needing (worthy of)
assistance. (tábang).

_talabartéro_, (Sp. talabartero) Saddler, belt-maker, harness-maker.

_talabasán_, A tailor's; a shop, store (especially where textiles
are sold); commerce, business. (cf. tábas, talagbasán).

_talabasón_, Cloth, textiles, fabrics, woven goods; clothing materials,
stuff, dress-goods; cloth to be cut or tailored. (cf. tábas).

_talábid_, To connect, bind together, join or fasten to. Madámò
nga mga dálan ang nabúksan na nga nagatalábid sang mga
kabanwahánan. Many roads have been opened to (that) link together
the Municipalities. (cf. tábid).

_talabilís_, See talabirís which is more in use.

_talabirís_, To trickle, drop, drip, flow down, said of
perspiration, etc. Nagatalabirís ang íya bálhas. He is pouring with
perspiration. (cf. tabirís; tululágay).

_talabóan, talaboán_, Gathering, meeting, rendezvous, hiding
place. (cf. tábò).

_talabókan_, Crossing, place where a river, creek, etc. has to be
crossed or is usually crossed. Iníng subâ may tátlo ka talabókan
humalín dirí túbtub sa minurô nga N. This river has to be crossed
three times from here to the village N. (cf. tabók).

_talabókon_, A river, etc. that is to be crossed. Sa ginútlan sang
bánwa X. kag sang bánwa Z. may ápat ka subâ nga talabókon. Between the
towns of X. and Z. there are four rivers to be crossed. (cf. tabók,
talabókan).

_talabón_, A stretcher. See tulabón.

_talád_, The flesh and muscles of the loins, lumbar muscles; a kind
of fish; newly planted sugar cane. (cf. lomíyo, lomílyo).

_talagá_, A platform, usually about one step high, serving as a
foundation for a staircase or house-ladder.

_talagakón_, What is to be--knotted,--bound together,--got
ready for reeling or weaving; hemp-fibre, etc. that is to be
knotted (to be bound together) and to be rolled up neatly in the
tagakán-basket. (cf. tágak).

_talagbasán_, A tailor's, etc. See talabasán.

_talagbasón_, Textiles, etc. See talabasón.

_talagbóngan_, Place where a thing is sunk, buried or thrown
down. (cf. tágbong).

_talagínus_, (H) To follow--, succeed--, one another; to leave--,
disappear--, one after the other (as guests after a banquet, stars
in the morning, etc. (cf. tagínus, sunúd, abákabák).

_talágman_, Dangerous, risky, hazardous; danger. (cf. tagám,
katalágman).

_talagoán_, (H) Place where anything is hidden or
preserved, hiding place, place of concealment, safe nook or
corner. Talagoán-pílak. Bank. Money safe. (cf. tágò, talagoón).

_talagoón_, What is to--, should--, be hidden or kept secret;
secret, private, confidential, not destined for the public. Sulát
nga talagoón. A letter to be kept secret. A confidential
letter. (cf. tágò).

_talágsa_, Seldom, rare, difficult to encounter or to obtain;
rarely, seldom, not often, scarcely--, hardly--, ever, infrequently,
unfrequently. (cf. tagsátágsa, tumalágsa).

_talág-talág_, Careless, negligent, thoughtless, etc. See taláktalák.

_talaháon_, (H) Respectable, honourable, worthy of high
esteem. (cf. tahâ; talahúron).

_taláhì_, A needle. (cf. dágum, tahî).

_talahían_, (H) A tailor's shop, a dressmaker's shop, place (room)
where clothes are made or where sewing is done. (cf. tahî).

_talahíon, talahión_, Things to be sewn or to be made into clothes;
stuff, clothing material, broad stuff, dress-goods. (cf. talahían).

_talahúron_, Honourable, respectable, estimable, venerable,
noble, illustrious, meriting--, worthy of--respect,--reverence,
distinction. (cf. táhud, talaháon, halángdon, salaulugón).

_taláid_, Precise, strict, exact, conscientious, punctilious, nice,
scrupulous, careful; to act or do something with precision, exactness,
thoroughly, properly, carefully. (cf. túl-id, íd-id, talángkod, písan,
tútum, úkud).

_taláihom_, A smile, a quiet laugh (laughter); to smile, break out into
a laugh, to laugh (quietly, derisively, sarcastically). Nakataláihom
siá. He smiled. He burst out laughing. Natalaihomán akó sa íya. I could
not help smiling at him. Gintalaihomán níya akó. He smiled or laughed
at me. Ginpataláihom akó sang íya nga sinúgid. I was forced to smile
at his remarks. I could not help smiling at what he said. Natalaihomán
siá sa ákon. (Nagyuhúm siá sing may kayúbit (kahám-ut) sa ákon). He
smiled at me derisively (gleefully). (cf. yuhúm, kádlaw, lákhò, lámhò,
talángkaw, harákhak, ngirít, lángsì).

_talákdan_, That is to be--closed,--shut,--hitched up,
etc. (cf. takúd).

_talákdang_, To chance upon, arrive (unexpectedly), come unawares,
come to, appear on the scene. (cf. abút, sámput, sapút, dángat).

_talákdong_, (H) A cover (for the head, etc.); to cover (the head
with a piece of cloth, etc.). (cf. kúnop, takoróng, tákdong, kódong).

_talakláron_, (H) Ascent, going uphill, climbing. (táklad;
cf. takláron, takládon).

_taláksan_, Measure, measurement, measuring--standard,--rod,
tape-measure, chain (of surveyors), size (of clothes,
etc.). (cf. takús).

_talákson_, That is to be measured, etc. (cf. taláksan).

_taláktak_, See táktak. Nagakataláktak ang íya mga lúhà. Her tears
are flowing. She is shedding tears.

_talák-talák_, Careless, thoughtless, unconcerned; to be careless or
indifferent about, be unconcerned or easy-going, pay no attention
to, take no interest in. Indì mo pagtaláktalakán ang síngsing,
kay básì madúlà. Don't be careless about the ring, for it might be
lost. Tinaláktalakán gid lang níya ang íya palangitánan kag sa walâ
(man) madúgay napúto siá. He did not pay much attention to his business
and before long he was bankrupt. (cf. talágtalág, pasapayán, patúyang,
pasaburák, pasaburát).

_talakuróng_, See talákdong--to cover the head, etc.

_talál-as_, Plural form of tál-as--to run away, etc.

_találay_, See tulálay--music, etc.

_talamáyon, talamayón_, (H) Contemptible, despicable, deserving of
contempt, worthless, paltry. (cf. támay).

_talambáyaw_, (B) To cooperate, collaborate, join in, help each other,
unite, work in unison. See tarambáyaw.

_talámbal_, Remedy, ointment, salve, plaster. (cf. támbal, halámpul,
haláplas).

_talámbwan_, Window. See talamwáan. (cf. gawáng, bintánà).

_talámdan_, (H) Notice; consideration, observation, things to be
observed or to be paid attention to. (cf. tamúd).

_talámdon_, That is to be--paid attention
to,--noted,--observed. (cf. talámdan).

_talámnan_, (H) Field, plantation, tilth, arable soil, especially
rice-land. (cf. tánum, tanúm).

_talamnúnon_, (H) That is to be planted or sown (sowed), crops to be
planted. (cf. talámnan).

_talám-ok_, To choke, go the wrong way, fail to pass through the
gullet, to close or obstruct the passage of liquids by taking too large
a draught or by drinking too greedily and hastily. Natalam-okán akó
sang túbig. The water gave me a choking fit. (cf. talím-ok, síl-ok).

_talámos_, See támos--to bite, etc.

_talampóan_, Gathering, meeting, assembly, congregation, place where
a meeting is held. (cf. támpò, tilipunán, talapuán, talapuánan,
kilitáan, tinipóntípon).

_talampúkan_, Hole, pit, etc. See talap-úkan. (cf. támpok, táp-ok).

_talampúyuk_, (H) To congregate, assemble, gather, meet, crowd
together, come together in large numbers, go to--, assist at--, a
meeting or wherever there is a great concourse of people. (cf. típon,
hubónhúbon, dúguk, gúbuk, támbong, taroróng).

_talampuyukán, talampuyúkan_, Assembly, gathering, meeting,
caucus, congregation, concourse, place where people collect or
come together. (cf. talampúyuk, tilipunán, tinipóntípon, katipúnan,
katilíngban).

_talamwáan_, (H) Window, look-out; view, vista, prospect, perspective,
belvedere. (cf. támwà, talámbwan, bintánà, gawahán, galawahán,
panilagán, palanilagán, gawáng).

_talan-áwon_, (H) Sight, show, view, spectacle, scene, display, drama,
stage-play, anything to be seen or worth while seeing. (cf. tán-aw).

_talandáan_, Sign, mark, indication, symptom, symbol, token,
observation, prospect; list, memorandum, record, composition or
exercise book, note-book. May talandáan sang----. There is a sign
or symptom of----. May talandáan nga----. There is a prospect (an
indication) that----. May nasulát nga talandáan sang----. A pamphlet
has been written about----. (cf. tándà, timáan, tilimán-an, tilimád-on,
pát-in, talámdan).

_talandúgon_, What is to--, should--, can--,
be--touched,--stirred,--moved; tangible, evident. (cf. tándog).

_tálang_, Failure (by missing), error, mistake; to miss one's way,
lose oneself, lose one's way, go astray, take a wrong--turning,--road;
to err, mistake, make a false step. Nagtálang siá sa dálan. He missed
his way. He went astray. Pinatálang siá. He was misdirected. He was led
astray. Indì ka na magtálang. Don't make a mistake again. (cf. salâ,
sayúp).

_taláng_, Erring, astray, gone wrong, mistaken, wandering, rambling,
having--missed one's way,--made a false step. (cf. tálang).

_talangág_, Cave, cavern, hole, den, lair, burrow. (cf. gíkab,
gíab, kwéba).

_talángkaw_, A guffaw, a coarse (noisy, boisterous) laugh, a horse
laugh, a loud burst of laughter; to guffaw, roar with laughter, laugh
outright, laugh boisterously, burst out laughing. Nagtalángkaw silá
nga tanán. They all burst out laughing. Tinalangkawán níla ang íya
mga linahóg. They roared (nearly split their sides) with laughter at
his jokes. (cf. halákhak, harákhak, arók-ok, arík-ik, hîhî, kádlaw,
yuhúm, lákhò, lámhò, lángsì, rángsì, ngirít, bangirít, taláihom).

_talángkod_, Prudent, wise, knowing, circumspect, cautious, wary,
astute, shrewd, sage, sagacious, discerning; to grasp, comprehend,
get hold of the facts, perceive, understand. Walâ siá makatalángkod
sang kasaypánan sang íya nga bátà. He did not know of his son's
shortcomings. Magtalángkod ka ánay sang íya nga ginhímò. First learn
the facts about what he did. Talángkod gid ang íla nga pagbinuligáy
kag paghiliúgyon. They have the wisdom to help each other and pull
together (well knowing the advantages of union (unison). (cf. hangúp,
sáyod, álam, hibaló).

_talángkod_, Exact, to the point, proper; determined,
fixed. (cf. taláid, pát-ud).

_talangkúnon_, Roots, tubers, vegetables, that have to be boiled
before being eaten. (cf. tanók).

_taláng-tálang_, Dim. and Freq. of tálang--to miss one's way,
etc. Nagatalángtálang na ang íya panumdúman. His memory is--often at
fault now,--no longer reliable,--often failing him. (cf. talángtaláng).

_taláng-taláng_, A fool, idiot, cretin, one who is mentally
deranged or often wanders in his mind; to be out of one's mind,
perplexed, confused, upset, bewildered. Kon may súnug gánì índì
na siá makapanghímos, kay nagatalángtaláng. Whenever there is a
fire somewhere she is unable to do her work, because she gets so
upset. (cf. talángtálang).

_talángtang_, Plural form of tángtang.

_talángtang_, A stile, fence. (cf. lakarán, lakadán).

_talangwáyan_, Refreshment bar, inn, place where drinks are
sold. (cf. tángway).

_talapakán_, What is to--, should--, be trodden or trampled upon;
a treadle; foot-stool. (cf. lápak, lapakán, tapakán).

_talap-anán_, A sort of flooring placed above a hearth for drying
maize, rice, etc. upon, especially in wet weather. (cf. tápa).

_talapgóhan, talapgohán_, Splint-machine, frame for the dressing and
cleaning of splints for wickerwork and basketry, particularly the
hole or slot through which the bamboo, etc. that has been split by
the operation of tádtad, is pushed in the process of giving it the
finishing touch for weaving it into floors, partitions, balántak-work,
or the like. (cf. tápgo, batakán).

_taláphan_, That is to be sifted, etc.; rice to be cleaned of its
chaff after pounding; the mat on which the chaff falls or is deposited
when sifting rice. Taláphan pa iníng binayó. This pounded rice has
to be sifted. Diín ang taláphan? Where is the mat for catching the
rice-chaff? (cf. tahúp; alugáyan).

_talapíkan_, (H) That is to be--adhered to,--stuck to,--clung to;
susceptible of, impressible, impressionable, liable to; susceptible--,
accessible--, receptive--, predisposed--, to (diseases, suggestions,
schemes, etc.). Ang pisára nga nadagtaán sing lána dílì talapíkan
sang yéso. A blackboard smeared with oil will not take marks of
chalk. Ang mga malúya sing láwas amó sing masamí ang talapíkan sang
balatían. Those who are weak of body are often liable or predisposed
(accessible, receptive) to disease. (cf. tapík).

_talapión_, Fit for boards, to be worked up into planks, etc., said
of trees, logs, etc. (cf. tápì).

_taláptap_, Covering the whole, taking in all, sufficient for all and
everyone; to cover the whole, etc. Ang maís nagataláptap sang bilóg
níya nga umá. Ang bilóg níya nga umá natalaptapán sing maís. His
whole field is under corn. The whole of his field is given over to
corn. (cf. tóptop, túptup, tápud, talápud, kámpod).

_talapuán_, Society, company, assembly, meeting; stock-company,
trust. (cf. tápò, katápò, tilipunán, katipúnan, katilíngban,
kambuyahán).

_talapuánan_, See talapuán.

_talápud_, To take in all or everything, distribute to all, suffice
for all, cover all the needs, treat on a level, do the same for
everyone. Talapúra (-úda) silá (sa paghátag) sing kwárta. Give an
equal sum of money to each and everyone of them. (cf. tápud, kámpod,
tóptop, taláptap).

_talapukán_, Exile, place of banishment, isolation, detention camp,
any remote and solitary place. (cf. tápuk).

_talap-úkan_, Hole, hollow, pit, sink, depression, any place or
cavity that is to be filled up or serves as a depositary or storage,
(especially for the collection of garbage, refuse, rubbish, offal);
cesspool. (cf. táp-ok, talampúkan).

_talapusón_, What is to be--, should be--, can be--,
finished,--terminated,--stopped,--brought to an end; terminable,
performable, achievable, accomplishable. (cf. tápus).


_talarík_, A bird, a kind of woodpecker.

_talarík_, The cue-rest (in billiards).

_talás_, Smoothness, slipperiness; to be smooth, slippery, easy to
swallow, etc. See tánlas. (cf. dánlug).

_tál-as_, To run away, scamper off, leave quickly, flee, go away
swiftly, disperse, scatter. (cf. lágyo, palágyo).

_talástas_, To know, understand, comprehend, grasp; to explain,
expound, elucidate, mention. Makatalástas ikáw sinâ? Do you understand
that? Talastasí siá sang nahanabô (nagkahanabô). Explain to him what
happened. Iní nga tanán kag madámò pa nga ibán nga maláwig kaáyo nga
italástas----. All this and many other things that would take too
much time to mention (explain)----.

_talá-talá_, Rattle, especially the Good-Friday rattle; to use or
employ such a rattle. (cf. palagupák).

_talatapán_, Administration, office, bureau, management, direction,
governing (administrative) board. (cf. tátap, talatapón).

_talatapón_, (H) Things to be attended to, business, duties to be
performed, that is to be administered or taken care of. (tátap).

_talatlóhan_, The third part, one third of a given standard
unit. Pulakán nga talatlóhan. A measure containing one third of a
gántang. (cf. tersyóhan, alapátan).

_talaúma_, Arable soil, tillable land, ground fit for cultivation;
good, fertile (of soil). (cf. umá).

_tálaw_, Cowardice, pusillanimity, faintheartedness, timidity;
to be or become cowardly, discouraged, skittish, to lose courage,
quail, flinch, slink, cower, crouch, be cowed down, be timid or
fainthearted. Nagtálaw siá. He became a coward. He winced, flinched,
or acted like a coward (on this occasion, not having been a coward
before). Nagpakítà siá sang íya pagkatálaw (pagkamatálaw). He showed,
that he was a coward. Indì ka magpatálaw. Don't allow yourself to be
intimidated. Don't lose courage. Ginataláwan akó sa íya. I consider him
a coward. He appears to me to be a coward. Indì kamó magpakatálaw,
kóndì magpakaísug kamó. Don't be cowards, but be brave. Ginhímò
níya iní sa pagpatálaw sa ínyo, ápang índì gid kamó magpatálaw. He
did this in order to make you fainthearted, but on no account permit
yourselves to be discouraged. (cf. hádluk, ísol, patubalíng, paubág,
pakitidalúm, paubús, dírham, kúlbà).

_taláwgon_, That is to be--called upon,--summoned;
citable. (cf. tawág).

_taláwik, talawík_, A squeal; to squeal, squeak. See iwík, tarawík,
etc.

_taláwis_, (H) Sharpness (of a point); to be or become sharp-pointed,
to sharpen a point. Gintaláwis níya ang dága. He sharpened the point of
his dagger. Natalawísan akó siníng búgsok. This stake appears to me to
be sharp-pointed. This stake is too sharp-pointed for me. Ipataláwis
mo sa manugsálsal ang ímo tagád. Let the smith (Get the smith to)
put a sharp point to your dibble. (cf. talíwis, taráwis).

_taláy-an_, Stake, wager, bet, bettings; place where money is put down
or paid in at gambling and betting; that is to be backed, that on which
money is to be put, as on a race-horse, on a card, etc. (cf. tayâ).

_taláyhang_, A fabulous animal, an evil spirit that haunts forests
and assumes at times the shape of a lizard (tambalihán) or the like.

_taláyhop_, (H) A pair of bellows, an air-pump, any instrument
for causing a stream of air, as a tube to blow a fire with,
etc. (cf. táyhop).

_taláyhum_, To smile. See taláihom id.

_taláytay_, To go along the ridge or crest of a hill, mountain, etc.;
to balance oneself in going along a ridge, in crossing a narrow bridge,
etc. (cf. látay, táytay, panaláytay).

_talaytáyon_, A ridge or crest to be gone along, a beam to be walked
over in crossing a river, etc. (taláytay).

_tálbò, tálbo_, To rise (as a cloud of dust); to plunge, thrust
oneself forward, jump or fly off, be impelled or projected (to a great
distance). Ang yáb-ok nagtálbò nga daw pangánod. The dust rose like
a cloud. (cf. alintabó, ásik, lisík, táyog).

_tálhà_, To be or become easy to split. (cf. matálhà, súlhay).


_tálhò, tálho_, See tálbò, tálbo--to rise, etc.

_táli_, (English: tally) Tally, score; home ran in
baseball. (cf. bálay).

_tálì_, Luck, fortune, fate, lot; the "water" in the game of
tinubigán; a piece of stone, an egg, or the like, used by a babáylan
for casting lots.

_talibás_, Loose, separate; erring, missing, straying, stray,
wandering; to be or become loose, etc. (cf. talíbkas, talíbwas,
bariwás).

_talíbkas_, To stray, wander from, separate from, lose contact
with. Iníng mga soldádo nagtalíbkas sa íla mga kaupdánan. These
soldiers have lost contact with their comrades, have become separated
from their company. Bantayí sing maáyo ang mga karabáw nga bág-o ko
lámang mabakál, agúd índì makatalíbkas sa ibán. Watch the buffaloes
I have lately bought with great care, lest they should stray from
the rest. (cf. talíbwas, bulág, sipák).

_talibóbò_, To fall, pour down (said especially of a heavy
rain). Nagatalibóbò gid lang karón ang ulán. At present the rain is
pouring down in streams. (cf. bóbò).

_talibóng_, A large, heavy bolo. (cf. sandúkò, siántong, binángon).

_talíbtib_, Steep bank or slope, precipice,
hill-side. (cf. panalíbtib).

_talibúsgan_, The calf (of the leg). (cf. batíis, busúgbusugán,
pusúpusuán).

_talíbwas_, To get loose, become separate from, get clear of, get out
of a difficulty, to escape. Nakatalíbwas siá sa amó nga katalágman. He
escaped that danger. Magpaningúhà ka gid, agúd makatalíbwas ikáw sa
malisúd nga pangabúhì. Make great efforts to free yourself from such
a wretched mode of life. (cf. talíbkas, talibás).

_talidungán_, Equal, together, simultaneous, coeval,
contemporaneous. (cf. dungán, talirúngan).

_taligmatô_, Confusion, perplexity, impediment, hindrance; to confuse,
perplex, be incongruous or unharmonious, out of order. (saligmatô id.).

_taligpáan_, (B) To wonder, marvel, be astonished, be taken aback, be
surprised (at anything happening unexpectedly). (cf. búlung, tingála).

_taligpuyúng_, To close the eyes in sleep, fall asleep. Sang pagabút
nínyo bág-o gid lang siá nakataligpuyúng--or--nataligpuyungán. When
you arrived, he had just fallen asleep. (cf. tulúg, túlug).

_talikalâ_, Chain, fetter, gyve, manacles, shackles. (cf. higót,
gapús, pósas).

_talíkdan_, From talikód.

_talikód_, To turn one's back upon, leave, go away, flee, take to one's
heels. Nagtalikód siá sa ákon. Gintalíkdan níya akó. He left me. He
turned his back upon me. Talíkdi ang maláut nga batásan mo. Turn your
back upon your bad habits. Give up your bad habits. Daw sa magatalikód
na sa madalî sa kalibútan si Fuláno. It looks as though N.N. is
soon going to leave this world (i.e. he will die soon). Tumalikód
siá kag dumalágan pa búkid. He took to his heels and ran towards the
mountain. Sang túig (búlan, semána, etc.) nga tinalíkdan. Last year
(month, week, etc.). (cf. talíwan, halín, lígad, likód, talikurán).

_talikudán_, See the following talikurán.

_talikurán_, The back, background, rear, space or position behind, or
at the back of, anything. Sa talikurán sang----. At the back (rear)
of, behind----. Maáyo ang íya hámbal sa tamparán, ápang maláin sa
talikurán. He speaks well of another in his presence, but maligns
him behind his back. (cf. likód, talikód; tamparán--front).

_talimádmad_, To understand, take in, comprehend, grasp, have a clear
idea of, be well aware of. Walâ siá makatalimádmad sang nahanabô. He
had no clear idea of what had happened. (cf. mádmad, marásmas, sáyod,
hangúp, hibaló).

_talimáskog_, A stiffening; spine, vertebral column, backbone. Butangí
sing talimáskog ang balatibát, kay mahúyang. Put some stiffening in
the lattice-work, for it is (too) weak. (cf. báskog, balískog).

_talimbabága_, A centipede. (cf. bagátbagát--a larger kind of centipede
or myriapod).

_talimbabatáng_, The swallow (bird). (cf. salimbabatáng).

_talím-ok_, To choke, go the wrong way, cause a choking fit, have a
spasm of the throat caused by irritation or stoppage of the windpipe,
as when eating or drinking too greedily, etc. Andam ka, índì ka maginúm
sing gólpe, kay básì matalim-okán ikáw. Look out, don't drink in
too greedy draughts or you may choke yourself. Natalim-okán siá sang
tubâ. The toddy he drank went down the wrong way. Natalim-okán silá
sang kádlaw. They were choked with laughter. (cf. síl-ok, talám-ok).

_talímuas_, See talímwas.

_talímwas_, To get loose or free, to separate from, extricate oneself,
escape. (cf. talíbwas, luás, bulág, talíbkas).

_talín_, A chicken that no longer follows the mother hen. (tarín id.).

_talínga_, (B) The ear; anything resembling an ear, as a small handle,
etc. (cf. dalúnggan, dulúnggan).

_talingí, talingî_, To be out of the straight or vertical line,
to incline, bend sideways. (cf. hiláy, balingíg, tingíg, talingíg,
talitíg, takílid).

_talingíg_, See talingî, talingí.

_talió-tío_, To charm, cast a spell over. (cf. téu-téu, téwtéw).

_talipás_, Loose, separated, not straight or direct, at a tangent;
missing, straying; to be loose, etc. Buhís nga tádlong kag buhís nga
talipás. Direct and indirect taxes. (cf. talibás).

_talipukpukán_, Summit, top, highest point, apex,
climax. (cf. putókputokán, alipokpokán).

_talipuspusón_, Approaching the end,
nearing--completion,--ripeness,--termination, about to be
finished. Talipuspusón na ang áni. The rice-harvest is--coming to
an end,--nearly finished. Talipuspusón na ang pamúnga sang páhò. The
mango-season is now nearly over. (cf. tápus, katapúsan, hilingapusón).

_talirúngan_, (B) See talidungán--equal, together, etc.

_talísà_, A kind of small bird.

_talísay_, A kind of tree.

_talisáyon_, Pertaining or referring to talísay; coloured like talísay
leaves (applied particularly to black and reddish-coloured chickens).

_talíthi_, (H) Small--, fine--, light--rain, mizzle, drizzle; to
mizzle, drizzle, rain in small (fine, light) drops. Nagulán kaína,
húo, ápang talíthi gid lámang. It rained a while ago, yes, but only
a few drops. Nagatalíthi. It's drizzling. Ginahilántan siá karón,
kay natalithihán siá kahápon kag napásmo. He has a catarrh now,
because yesterday he was exposed to a slight rain and caught a
cold. (cf. taríthi, dabódabó, apókapók).

_talitíg_, (B) Sideways; to walk or stand sideways. (cf. takílid,
takilíd, tingíg, talingíg, talingî).

_taliwála_, Centre, middle; the air, atmosphere; the wide open spaces
of the universe; nothingness.

_talíwan_, To leave, retire, depart, go away, pass away, die, leave
the world. Kon magtalíwan ang kasánag magabulús ang kadulúm. When
the light goes out, darkness takes its place. Nagtalíwan siá sing
dáyon. He left for good, he went away never to return. (cf. halín,
lúmbus, lakát, íway).

_talíwis_, Sharp-pointed, etc. See taláwis.

_talô_, To see to it at once, apply remedies at once, act without
delay, stop, or take measures against, an epidemic, disease, or the
like, at the very beginning. (cf. dalî, kalít).

_tálo_, (H) Tallow, suet, grease, mineral wax, paraffin wax,
spermacetti, material of which candles are made; beeswax. (táro id.).

_tálo_, Sign, mark, indication; luck, chance to win, fortune,
opportunity. (cf. pát-in, tándà; pálad, kapaláran, katigayónan,
kadalág-an).

_talobokón_, (B) To be surprised, astonished, taken aback, to
marvel, wonder, be struck with astonishment or wonder. Nagatalobokón
(Ginatalobokón) akó kanímo. (Natingála (Nagakatingála) akó sa ímo). I
am surprised at you. You astonish me. (cf. búlung, tingála).

_talódtod_, The spine, shoulder-blades, back. (talúdtud id.).

_talóg_, Gutter, pipe. (cf. salólong, taróg id.).

_talogán_, Waterfall; channel, gutter, pipe. (tarogán id).


_tálok_, Post, stake, landmark, fence; to stake--out,--off, fence in,
mark the boundary of. Talóki ang ímo umá. Stake off the boundaries
of your land. (cf. búgsok, pálpal, kodál, tándà, pát-in, dólon).

_talokón_, (B) To move, stir, shake loose, loosen, lift or shift
slightly. Matalokón mo ang bató nga diá? (Maínghit (maíngkà, mahúlag)
mo iní nga bató?). Can you move this stone?

_talomátà_, (B) To investigate relationship, to examine one's
pedigree. Nagatalomataáy sánda kang ánda paghimatâ. (Nagausisaáy
silá sang íla paghimatâ (pagpariénte)). They are inquiring into their
relationship or genealogy.

_talón_, (Sp. talón) Stub-book, coupons, book of tickets; heel;
to kick. (cf. tikúd; tíndak).

_talón_, To infect, be contagious. See latón.

_tálon_, Jungle, forest, wild country, unoccupied territory,
uncultivated ground, land overgrown with brushwood,
thicket. (cf. talónan, talonánon, talonón).

_talónan_, See tálon. Also: full of jungle, consisting of wild
uninhabited country. (cf. kagulángan).

_talonánon_, Of or pertaining to the jungle, jungle-like, wild,
uninhabited.

_talóng_, (H) The egg-plant. (cf. taróng id.).

_talóngtong_, Second, of the second crop (of beans and peas yielding
a second crop in the same year). Amó iní ang talóngtong nga búnga
sang kádyos. This is the second crop of cadios-peas. Also: to put on,
place on; to add to. (cf. túngtung; áman).

_talonón_, The wild pig. Nagapangayám silá sing mga talonón. They
are hunting wild pigs. (cf. bakatín, báktin).

_táltag_, To determine, decide, make up one's mind, make a final
decision or arrangement (about a marriage).

_táltal_, To loosen, drive out, become or make loose (as a nail by
hammering it from behind). Natáltal (Nagkatáltal) ang íya ngípon. His
tooth fell out. He lost a tooth. Gintáltal níla ang bángkay ni
Hesukrísto sa krus. They took the body of Jesus Christ from the cross,
hammering out the nails from behind. (cf. hútal, hutál).

_tálu, talô_, etc. See tálo, talô, etc.

_talúbtub_, A piece of bamboo of two joints' length used for carrying
water, as a receptacle for a pig's swill, etc. (tarúbtub id.;
cf. pasók; bayóng, kawít).

_talúdtud_, See talódtod--the back.

_taluktukón_, The spine, back, backbone, (cf. tuluktukón, talódtod).

_talúm_, (H) Sharpness, keenness (of edge); to be, become or make keen,
sharp, cut well. Nagtalúm na ang súndang, kay ginbáid níya. The knife
is sharp now, for he has honed it. Talumá ("patalumá" better) ang
binángon. Sharpen the bolo. Ipatalúm mo ang wásay sa manugsálsal. Get
the smith to put a sharp edge on the hatchet.

_talumátà_, To inquire into one's pedigree. See talomátà.

_talungháyag_, Straightforward, open, honest, frank, sincere, upright,
outspoken, without circumlocution; to be or become straightforward,
etc. (talunháyag id.).

_talungkakâ_, Loose, not tight, etc. (See halungkakâ, halúg, tugák).

_talunháyag_, See talungháyag--straightforward, etc.

_talúnsay_, Straight on, continuous, steady, unbroken, uninterrupted,
without deviation or hindrance; pure, unsullied, unadulterated,
unalloyed, uncontaminated. (cf. tádlong, lángkoy, lubús, lúgus, etc.).

_talúntun_, Plummet, plumb bob, plumb rule, sounding
lead. (cf. túntun).

_talupángdan_, From tatupangúd.

_talupangúd_, To ponder or consider well, meditate upon,
concentrate (one's mind) upon, pay great attention to, reflect
upon. Talupángdi sing maáyo ang ímo nga ginabása. Pay great attention
to what you are reading. Concentrate your mind on what you are
reading. (cf. pamalándong painóíno, libólíbo).

_talús_, A plant that resembles dágmay in the form, colour and size
of its leaves, but poisonous.


_tál-us_, Substitute, Vice--, proxy; to take another's
place, supply for, supply the place of, stand proxy for, to
substitute, do something--in stead of another,--in another's
stead. Sín-o ang nagatál-us sa íya? Who has taken his place? Who
is his substitute? Gintal-usán siá ni Fuláno. N.N. took his
place. N.N. replaced him. N.N. stood proxy for him. Itál-us sa íya
si Fuláno. Substitute N.N. for him. Put N.N. in his place. Walâ sing
malúyag magtál-us sa íya. There is none who would like to take his
place. (cf. ílis, salíli, itál-us, italál-us).

_talútug_, Stockade, palisade, barrier or enclosure, often surrounding
a whole village, especially in the mountains, as a protection against
thieves and robbers; wall, defence, rampart, fortification. (cf. korál,
kodál, palamakurán, padér).

_talyákay_, A kind of plant. (kalyákay id.).

_talyér, talyír_, (Sp. taller) Workshop, laboratory, factory; studio,
office, atelier. (cf. buluhatán, sululátan, palangabudláyan).

_támà_, Excessive, overmuch, very, too much, too many, redundant,
super-abundant, inordinate, superfluous, exorbitant; to do to
excess, to overdo a thing. Nagakáon siá sing támà. He is eating
too much. Natám-an siá sang káon. He ate too much. Támà kamahál
iní (siní). This is too dear. Ginpatám-an níya ang karabáw sang
dáro. He overworked the buffalo at ploughing. Támà kalayô sang
(ang) ámon naláktan (laláktan). We have walked (have to walk) very
far. (cf. lakás, lám-ag, súkò, dúro, masyádo, túman, kaáyo).

_támad_, Laziness, indolence, idleness, sluggishness, remissness,
sloth; to be or become lazy, slow, slothful, idle, remiss, indolent,
sluggish. Ginatamáran níya ang (trabáho) pangabúdlay. He is too lazy
to work. Indì mo pagtamáran ang pagsímba. Don't be too lazy to go to
church. (cf. amád, tásmad, ligóy, búndul).

_tamád_, Lazy, indolent. Tinamád--to be lazy. (cf. matámad).

_tamád-támad, tamád-tamád_, Dim. and Freq. of támad, tamád.

_tamád-tamád_, The white of the finger-nails, or the like; hangnail,
agnail, corn, sore finger or toe-nail. (dotôldôtol).

_tamálus_, A kind of rice dish.

_táman_, Liking, intention, etc. See gáman.

_tamáo, tamá-o_, A kind of ghost believed in by the superstitious
and supposed to inhabit large trees (as the bóbog, lonók, etc.),
dense forests, or the like. (cf. tamáwo, tumáo, tumáwo).

_tamarán_, Lazy, indolent, idle, slack, remiss, slothful, sluggish;
not--inclined,--minded,--disposed,--in the vein,--in the humour,
averse to; to be disinclined, etc. Ginatamarán akó magkáon, maglakát,
magpanahî, etc. I am not in an eating mood, I am averse to walking
on foot, I am not in the humour to do any sewing, etc. (cf. támad).

_tamaríndo_, (Sp. tamarindo) Tamarind; the fruit of the tamarind;
a drink of extract of the tamarind-fruit mixed with sugar and
water. (cf. sámbag, samlági).

_tamasák_, See támsak--to plash, splash, etc. (cf. tagasák).

_tamásak_, A kind of fish (that is often kept in fish-ponds along
the beach).

_tamások_, A kind of boil or tumour, so called because of the belief
that the tamások-worm is the cause of it.

_tamások_, The caterpillar of a moth. It is very injurious to plants,
often causing great havoc in rice fields. Also used as a verb. Humáy
nga tinamások. Rice attacked by--, infested with--, tamások.

_tamáwo_, See tamáo.

_támay_, To despise, contemn, scorn, disdain, slight, look down
upon, scout, flout, scoff at, have or show contempt for. Tamáya ang
amó nga búhat (binuhátan). Despise such conduct (doings). Nagtámay
siá sa ákon. Gintámay níya akó. He despised me. He treated me with
contempt. Dílì mo pagtamáyon ang mga láygay sang ímo ginikánan. Don't
scorn the advice of your parents. (cf. ahígahíg, pahámak, híkay,
múlay, yagutâ, ulígyat).

_tamáy-támay_, Dim. and Freq. of támay. Ginatamáytámay gid lang
siá níla. They--think very little of him,--treat him with scant
consideration,--despise or ignore him. (cf. tamítámi).

_támba_, To plash, splash, strike or dash about the water (as in
swimming); to beat or strike the water with the hands, with a stick,
or the like, in order to scare and drive the fish into a trap.

_támba_, A gratuity, an addition, a "baker's dozen", something that is
not charged for, given free or without charge, thrown in, for luck,
to the good, an added gift. Patámba is mostly used for the verb--to
add, superadd, give a little gratis or without charge over what is
required by contract or in justice. Patambahí sing diótay ang ísdà nga
ákon binakál. Add a little extra to the fish I have bought. Ipatámba
iníng diótay nga maís sa humáy nga íya gindaláwat. Add this little corn
for luck to the rice he has bought. (cf. áman, támban, dúgang, tubúng).

_támbag_, To intervene, mediate, arbitrate, act as a peacemaker;
to separate--, pacify--, quarrellers or fighters, to prevent or stop
a fight, or the like. Tambagí silá, agúd nga índì magdáyon ang íla
pagináway. Separate (calm, pacify) them, lest their fighting should
continue. Waláy sapayán sang pagtámbag sa íya sang íya mga kasúbung
dinámhag níya si Fuláno kag binanál (ibanál) sa kalóg. Notwithstanding
the intervention of his companions he fell upon N.N. and threw
him into the ditch. Daw sa dílì na matambagán inâ nga gamó. It
is now well-nigh impossible to settle that riot (affair, tumult)
by peaceful means. (cf. patáwhay, pugúng, sagáng, tápnà, puút,
pasilabút, kapánkápan).

_támbal_, Plaster, medicinal leaves, poultice, unguent, ointment,
salve, or the like as a remedy for a wound, boil, swelling, etc. or to
relieve an ache. May támbal (inogtámbal, talámbal) ikáw nga maáyo sa
síkmat? Have you got a good remedy for back-ache? Tambalí ang íya ólo
sing búyò. Apply búyò-leaves to his head (forehead, brow). Itámbal
sa íya hubág iníng mga dáhon. Put these leaves on his swelling
(boil). Tinambalán níla ang íya hubág kag nagbúswang kag nagáyo sa
walâ gid madúgay. They put a plaster on his boil and within a short
time it broke open and healed. Ipatámbal ang íya pilás sa médiko
(manugbúlung). Have his wound seen to by a doctor. Get a doctor to
treat his wound. Indì siá magpatámbal. He does not want to be treated
with plasters, etc. (cf. hámpul, háplas).

_tambálà_, Scaffold, scaffolding, a temporary structure for supporting
workmen and materials in building; to make--, build--, furnish with--,
a scaffold, to scaffold. Magtambálà kamó ánay kag ugáling magpatíndog
sang halígi. Put up a scaffold first and then set up the post. Tambalái
ang baláy kag pintahán (mo). Put a scaffold (Put scaffolding) round the
house and paint it. Anó ang itambálà mo, káhoy ukón kawáyan? What kind
of material will you use for the scaffold, wood or bamboo? Nakadúpyas
siá sa tambálà, nahúlug kag napatáy. He slipped (made a false step)
on the scaffold, fell down and died. (tambárà id.).

_tambalihán_, A kind of lizard living in the open and somewhat
resembling a gecko in size. It is not poisonous, but its bite is very
painful. (tambilihán id.).

_támban_, Sardine; a kind of fish; a kind of sea-shell.

_támban_, Something thrown in without charge, a "baker's dozen";
to throw in for luck, etc. (cf. áman, tubúng, támba).

_tambárà_, (B) Scaffolding, etc. See támbálà.

_tambarúkò_, A kind of snail whose shell is used for making lime for
betelnut chewing. (cf. tibótíbo).

_tambasakán_, A kind of fish. See tamásak.

_tambá-támba_, Dim. and Freq. of támba. Nagatinambátámba ang mga
bátà sa línaw. The boys are dashing about in the quiet sheet of water
(pool, lake).

_tambáyaw_, (B) See talambáyaw, tarambáyaw.

_támbì_, (B) A raised level space, floor or platform as an adjunct
to a house or kitchen, a terrace, kitchen balcony. (cf. pántaw).

_támbi_, To be at the side of, be or place side by side, to adjoin,
be adjacent. Nagatámbi ang íla dútà. Their lands--adjoin,--are next to
each other,--are contiguous. Tambihí ang baláy mo sing kosína. Set up a
kitchen at the side of your house. Itámbi iníng heneró sa kúmbung agúd
nga maglápad. Join this piece of cloth to the curtain to make it wider.

_tambiádo_, Joined side to side, consisting of many pieces joined
one to the side of the other.

_tambihádo_, See tambiádo, both from támbi with the Sp. suffix -ado.


_tambiláng, tambílang_, Upside down, rolling over, to turn head
over heels (heels over head) in falling down, to roll over, turn a
somersault in falling down. Sang pagkahúlug níya nagtambiláng siá
sa sangá sang káhoy. When he fell down he turned a somersault on the
branch of the tree. (cf. tumbiláng.

_tambiláng_, To act impulsively, precipitately, thoughtlessly, on
the spur of the moment. (cf. tabiláng, tabinás, típlang).

_tambilihán_, A kind of (green) lizard. See tambalihán.

_támbing_, Cash, for cash, hard (ready) cash, cash-price,
cash-purchase, money (or its equivalent) paid immediately (promptly)
after a purchase; to pay cash, do business on a cash-basis, pay down,
make a bargain on cash-payment, pay at once (promptly). Gintámbing
níya ang báyad. He paid on the spot. Tinambingán níya akó dáyon sang
íya mga binakál. He paid me at once for what he had bought. Támbing
gid ang báyad sa ámon ginabaligyaán. Our shop is doing business on a
strict cash-down basis. Kon índì ka makatámbing sang báyad, índì akó
magbalígyà siní sa ímo. If you cannot pay cash at once I will not sell
it to you. Magbáyad ka sing támbing, índì ka magútang. Pay at once,
don't make debts. (cf. kábis, ímpas, túmbas--to settle in full).

_tambí-pálad_, Union, companionship, match, marriage; to join--,
throw in--, cast--, one's luck or fate with, to share another's
fortune or destiny, to marry. (cf. támbi, pálad).

_támbis_, Payment in full, settlement; to settle an account, discharge
a debt, pay in full, square--, adjust--, a debt or claim; square,
quit, quits, on even terms. Nakatámbis na silá sang íla útang sa kay
Fuláno. They have now paid in full their debts to N.N. Tinambisán ko
ang ákon útang sa íya kaína sang ága. I settled my account with him
this morning. Támbis na silá. Now they are square, quits, on even
terms again. (cf. kábis, túmbas, ímpas).

_támbis_, A tree and its edible fruit.

_tambí-támbi_, Joined side to side, etc. See támbi, tambihádo,
tambiádo.

_támbò_, Sucker, offshoot (of a bamboo, etc.); a young bamboo. May
támbò ang kawáyan. Ang kawáyan nagapanámbò. The bamboo has
suckers. (cf. sáhà).

_tambóbo_, Barn, granary, large rice-container (generally a small
out-house or shed separate from the main building). (cf. damiság,
malíndog).

_támbok_, Fat, fatness, adipose tissue, any oily or greasy substance;
to be or become fat, stout, plump, portly, obese. Indì akó kaúyon
sang támbok sang báboy. I don't like pork fat. Nagakabúhì silá sa
támbok sang dútà. They live on the fat (the best productions) of the
earth (land). Nagtámbok siá dídto. He put on fat there. He grew fat
there. Natambokán akó sa íya. He seems to me to be quite a portly
man. Ang tínday nga pinatámbok. The fattened calf. Patamboká ang
báka. Fatten the cow. Ang maís amó ang isá sang mga labíng maáyo
nga inogpatámbok sang mga báboy. Corn is excellent for fattening
pigs. (cf. matámbok, katámbok, tábnul, tibúnog, tíbsul, típsul).

_támbol, tamból_, Tambourine, drum; to beat a drum (as a sign to a
band--to play up,--to play a piece of music). Tambolí (tokarí) nínyo
ang mga kalasálon (kinasál). Play a piece of music for the couple to
be married (for the newly married, new-married couple). (cf. tambór).

_támbon_, A kind of fish-trap. (cf. taón, páta, báw-an, suwáyang,
etc.).

_támbon_, Brittle, fragile, spoilt through humidity; to deteriorate,
spoil, get spoilt through damp, especially said of rice. (cf. háp-og,
tapúk).

_támbong_, To be at, be present at, attend at, look on at, take part
in, make one of (at). Nagtámbong siá kaína sang ága sa mísa. He was
at mass this morning. Indì ka magtámbong sa mga kalingáwlingáwan
nga dílì ángay. Indì mo pagtambongán ang mga kalingáwlingáwan nga
dílì ángay. Don't take part in improper diversions. Nagtámbong
sa ákon hunâhúnà nga----. The idea (thought) crossed my mind
that----. Patambongá gid siá sa amó nga sinápul. Order him to come to
that meeting without fail. Ang tanán nga mga nagpakatámbong----. All
those that were actually present----. Ilisipón gid lang ang mga
nagtalámbong. Only a few--were present,--attended,--took part. Indì
akó makatámbong, kay----. I cannot be present, because----. Indì
akó magtámbong. I won't come. I will not be one of the
party. (cf. taroróng, tabongáw, solóng).

_tambór_, (Sp. tambor) Tambour, tambourine, drum; to drum, beat a
drum. (cf. tamból).


_tambúlì, tambulî_, To turn upside down, to stoop--, bend--, very
low. (cf. tabulî, sulî, balískad).

_tamburáray_, Dancing and singing (to the beating of a drum or
tambour); a kind of folk-dance. (cf. tambór, tamból).

_támdan_, From tamúd--to look down upon; to observe, etc.

_támhil_, To pull a sour face, to twitch or contract the muscles of
the face when about to cry, as is often done by children. (cf. yámbì).

_támiaw_, Salutation, address, greeting; to accost, address, greet,
speak to, salute, make up to. Tamiawá siá. Accost him. Salute him. Walâ
siá magtámiaw sa ákon. Walâ akó níya pagtamiawá. He did not (would not)
speak to me. Walâ na silá pagtamiáway. They are not on speaking terms
any more. Gintámiaw ko siá, ápang walâ siá magsabát. I addressed him,
but he would not answer. I saluted him, but he did not return the
salute. (cf. búgno, abíábi).

_tám-id_, To taste, test, experience, have experience of, try the
taste of. Walâ siá makatám-id sing bisán anó nga katám-is. He
has not experienced (tasted) any kind of delight (sweetness,
pleasure). (cf. tiláw, samít, dímdim, sagámsam, dimól).

_tamílok_, A large worm growing to about eight inches in length and
half an inch in diameter, often found in mangroves near the beach
and esteemed by some people as a delicate morsel of food; teredo,
shipworm, a mollusk that is very destructive to submerged or decaying
wood. (cf. búk-an).

_tamíng_, Shield, buckler. (cf. kalásag; panamíng--to use a shield).

_tamínsot_, A kind of small round fish.

_tám-is_, Sweetness, delightfulness, deliciousness; to sweeten, to
be, become or make sweet, delightful, sugary, honeyed. Nagtám-is
na iníng búnga. This fruit has become sweet. Natam-isán akó sang
íya nga hámbal. I found his talk very pleasant. He talked to
me very pleasantly. Tam-isá (Patam-isá) ang mamón. Make the cake
sweet. Sweeten the cake. Ginpatám-is níya ang ámon pangabúdlay sang
manámit (masádya, makawiwíli) nga sugilánon. He sweetened our labour
by pleasant talk. Malisúd ang pangabúhì nga waláy katam-isán. Life
without joy is difficult to bear. Ginapakatám-is níya iní. He considers
this delicious, delightful, glorious. He enjoys it, he gloats over
it. (cf. hinám-is, panám-is, rímis).

_tamí-támi, tamí-tamí_, To slight, ignore; despise. Mostly used
humorously for tamáytámay, which see.

_tamí-tamí_, Low, mean, common, contemptible, despicable, of no
consequence, not prominent, not in the lime-light. (cf. girígirí,
watíwatí, witíwití, lunák).

_támlang_, To chance, happen, come to pass (suddenly or unexpectedly),
to do something under a sudden impulse or the like. Nakatámlang siá sa
paghámbal sing maláin. He used bad language under the impulse of the
moment. Some improper words escaped him. Natamlangán ko gid ang gamó
sang pagabút ko dídto. It just happened that, when I arrived there,
the trouble had started. (cf. típlang, hinálì, hinalî, tabô, tabinás).

_támnan, támnon_, From tánum and tanúm--to plant (rice).

_támngan_, From tamúng--to blindfold, etc.

_támon_, (B) We (the person addressed being excluded). (cf. kamí).

_támos_, To chew, bite, gnaw, nibble at, scrape clean with the teeth
(as to scrape off with the teeth the flesh from the stone of a
mango, plum, or the like); to suck, sip, eat. Indì ka magtámos sang
lápis. Don't nibble at the pencil. Nagatámos (nagatalámos) silá sang
íla mapaít nga mga lúhà. They are shedding bitter tears. (Literally:
They are sucking in their bitter tears (running down from the eyes
to the lips)). (cf. talámos).

_támoy_, To satiate, fill--, stuff--, with food, to glut, gorge,
cloy. Natámoy ang íya ginháwa sang káon. He is--quite satiated,--full
to repletion. Natámoy (Natamóyan) siá sang kalípay. He is surfeited
with (tired of) pleasure. (cf. busúg, tíbal).

_tamóy_, Satiated, stuffed, crammed, filled, cloyed, gorged,
glutted. (cf. támoy, busúg).

_tamóy_, See kamóy--the legs of a crab, etc. Also: thread, fibre,
string, cord. Ang tamóy sang isá ka sugilánon. The threads of (The
incidents that make up) a story.


_támpà_, A slap, stroke, blow with the open hand (palm); to
slap, spank, strike with the palm of the hand. Tampaá siá. Slap
him. Tagái siá sing isá ka támpà. Give him a slap. Sinúmbag ko siá,
kay tinámpà níya akó. I boxed or punched him, because he had slapped
me. (cf. tapátápa, tampúyong, tapúngol búngbung).

_támpad_, Front, frontage, confrontation; to face, confront,
stand in front of, make a stand against, be opposite to. Sa támpad
sang----. Before, over against, in front of, opposite to, facing, face
to face with. Ang ámon baláy--árà sa támpad sang munisípyo,--támpad
sa munisípyo. Our house stands opposite (over against, facing)
the Municipal Building. Tampará (-adá) akó. Stand in front of me
(facing me). Nagtámpad siá sing maísug sa amó nga katalágman. He
faced that danger bravely. Gintámpad níya ang íya kaáway. He faced
his enemy. He openly withstood his enemy. Walâ siá mangahás magtámpad
sa kay Fuláno. He did not dare to confront N.N. (cf. atúbang).

_tampadán_, Front, etc. See tamparán.

_támpal_, To throw, fling, hurl, cast; put or heap upon. Ngáa man nga
ang tanán nga mga buluhatón nga mabúdlay ínyo itámpal sa ákon? Why
do you give (allot, heap upon) me all the hard or difficult jobs
(all the drudgery)? (cf. tápal, pilák, habóy, dát-og, dát-ol).

_tampálas_, Insult, affront, outrage, contempt, contumely, blasphemy;
to insult, revile, affront, outrage, blaspheme, treat with ignominy,
despise, contemn, vilify. Indì mo siá pagtampaláson. Don't insult
him. Gintampálas níya ang Diós. He blasphemed God. (cf. pasipála,
úmpit).

_tampalásan_, Bad, wicked, outrageous, insulting, contumelious,
contemptuous, blasphemous; a wretch, villain, rogue, rascal, scoundrel,
despicable person, criminal. (cf. lampingásan).

_tamparán_, Front, frontage, face, facade, what is in front of or
facing the spectator. Sa tamparán sang----. In front of, before,
opposite, facing, fronting----. (cf. támpad; talikurán--rear, back).

_támpì_, To put on an apron, kilt, or the like. Itámpì iníng
heneró. Use this cloth as an apron. Tamplí ang panápton mo, agúd
índì mabulingán. Cover your clothes with an apron, lest they should
get dirty.

_tampíon_, Apron, kilt, anything used to protect the front of a
person's clothes. (cf. támpì).

_tampípì_, A kind of wicker basket with a lid. This basket is often
used as a travelling case. (cf. soklóban, baúl).

_tampirás_, (B) Not straight, not upright, inclined, deviating from
a straight course; to be out of the straight, deviate from a straight
line or course. (cf. tumpilás id.).

_támpis_, A skirt as worn by women. (cf. patádyong, tápis, ámpis).

_tampóay_, To bury one's face in one's hands, etc. See panampóay,
which is more in use.

_támpok_, Something set within a hole or opening, as a precious
stone or jewel set in a ring, or the like; to fill up, fill in,
pile up, fill up a hole with earth, rubbish, etc. Tampokí ang búhò
sing mga bató. Fill in the hole with stones. Itámpok iníng dútà sa
kalóg. Fill in the ditch with this earth. May támpok nga bató ang
íya síngsing. Her ring--has a stone setting,--is set with a jewel
(precious stone). (cf. táp-ok).

_támpò_, See tápò--to join, meet, be a member of.

_támpu_, A passing shower of rain, a short shower or squall, a flurry
of rain, a local downpour; a passing fit of bad humour, passion,
etc. (cf. tampútámpu).

_támpud_, To exclude none, take in all, be sufficient for all, cover
all. See tápud, kámpod, túptup).

_tampuháw_, (B) Fool, ass, crazy fellow, zany, simpleton. (cf. kólò,
búang, etc.).

_tampulánga_, (H) Hibiscus; a beautiful flowering shrub with (mostly)
red flowers. (tapulánga id.).

_tampulingán_, Staff, pole, shaft, post. Ang tampulingán sang
hayáhay. The flagstaff.

_tampulingán_, Well-bucket. See tímbà.

_tampú-támpu_, Dim. and Freq. of támpu. Anything done or happening
at intervals, at times, occasionally, from time to time, fitfully,
on and off, as showers of rain, fits of passion, gusts of wind,
etc. Ang pagdulús sang hángin tampútámpu (nagatampútámpu) lang. The
wind blows fitfully (only at intervals). (cf. turapók).

_tampúyong_, To strike with the fist, hammer with the fist (with
a swing of the arm). Indì mo siá pagtampuyóngon. Don't give him a
blow with the fist. (cf. súmbag--to box, strike with the fist with
a thrust of the arm; tapúngol, búksing).

_tampúyuk_, A crowd, group, heap; to come together, gather, assemble,
crowd together. (cf. talampúyuk, talampuyúkan, dúguk, támbong,
típon; túmpok).

_támsak_, To plash, splash, squelch; to smack the lips, chew noisily,
munch, mump; a plash, splash, a sound as of walking through slush or
mud, or the like. Nagatámsak ang lúnang kon lapákan. Mud squelches if
you walk in it. Indì ka magtámsak kon magkáon. Indì ka magpatámsak sang
ímo bábà kon magkáon. Don't munch, when you eat. Indì mo pagpatamsakón
ang lúnang. Don't splash the mud. Nagtámsak siá sa túbig. He fell
into the water with a splash. He plashed into the water. (cf. tagasák,
lágsak, tamasák, támsok).

_támsok_, To lick or suck (a finger, etc.); to lap, sip. Ginkúhit
níya ang íya túdlò sa lasáw kag tamsokán (tinamsokán). He dipped his
finger in the molasses and licked it. (cf. támos, sópsop, lótgot,
hábhab, láklak, súyup).

_tamúd_, To look upon, consider, notice, discern, perceive, advert
to, remark, mark, attend to, fix the eyes upon, bend one's look down
upon. Tamurí (tamudí, támdi) sing maáyo ang sulát. Look the letter
over well, consider it well. Támda akó. Look at me. Pay attention
to me. Nakasándad siá, kay walâ níya pagtámdi sing maáyo ang íya
ginaláktan. He stumbled, because he did not--mind well where he was
stepping,--look where he was putting his feet. (cf. túluk, tán-aw,
mulálong, bilíd, talámdan, katámdan).

_tamúdyos_, A kind of fish; naughty, frivolous, unmanageable, difficult
to restrain. (cf. sutíl, harásharás, darándarán, etc.).

_tamúng_, (B) A cover for the face, mask, vizor, face-guard of a
helmet; to blindfold, bandage the eyes, hoodwink (especially in the
game of butábúta (Blindman's buff, Blind Harry). Sín-o ang natámngan
(butábúta, butá)? Who was blindfolded? Who was "blindman"? Támngi nínyo
(tána). (Bugkusí nínyo sing pányò ang íya mga matá). Blindfold him.

_támwà_, To look out or in, have a peep at something, look at
something furtively, gaze at stealthily, pop one's head in (up);
to make one's appearance, inspect, look things over, look into,
examine. Walâ gid siá pagtámwà sa digamohán. She never even as much
as looks into the kitchen. Sang pagligad (paglubás) ko sa íya baláy
nagatámwà siá sa bintánà. When I passed his house he was looking out
of the window. Nagtámwà siá sa gawáng. He popped his head out of the
door (window). Tamwaá siá. Observe him. Watch him. Look at him (from
the window, the door, an aperture, etc.). (cf. gáwa, láaw, lántaw,
língling, bántay, panílag, túluk).

_támyaw_, See támiaw--to salute, etc.

_tan_, Short for kapitán. Si Tan Ipíng (Felípe). Kapitán Philip.

_tána_, (B) He, she, it. See siá.

_tánag_, To cover with, immerse, steep in, particularly said of
fruit steeped in a solution of lime previous to being put into the
boiling juice of sugar cane. Tanágan mo ánay ang sántol (sing ápog)
kag ugáling ilúnud sa kalámay. First dip the santol-fruit in lime-water
and then put it into the sugar. (cf. túgnod).

_tának_, A worm that is very injurious to trees and bamboo. Also
used as a verb. Tinának ang kawáyan sa siníng lugár. In this place
the bamboo is infested with the tának-insect. (cf. salíksik).

_tanákon_, Infected with tának, worm-eaten. (tának).

_tanán_, All, everyone, every one of, the whole number or quantity
of. Sa tanán nga túig. Every year. Ang tanán nga mga táo. All men. Huy,
dalágan na kamó, tanántanán sing dungán. Now then, run, all together.

_tanáng_, (H) Overripe, rotten-ripe, etc. See lanóng id.

_tanangáw_, An insect with a very strong offensive smell, very
injurious to plants, especially to rice. (cf. tiyangáw id.).


_tán-aw_, (H) To see, look, view, behold, contemplate, eye, look
upon, gaze upon. Tán-aw ka dirí. Look here. Tan-awá iní. Look at
this. Tan-awón ko ang íya binakál. I am going to have a look at what he
bought. Indì akó malúyag magtán-aw sing amó inâ nga mga talan-áwon. I
do not like to see such sights. Ipatán-aw mo sa ákon ang ímo bág-o nga
kálò. Let me have a look at your new hat. Nakatán-aw man akó sinâ sa
Manílà. I have seen that also in Manila. Tumán-aw ka kon sín-o dirâ
sa idálum sang baláy. Go and see who is there below. (cf. túluk,
kítà, mulálong, himútad, solóng, támwà, síplat, sípraw).

_tán-ay_, To offer, proffer, tender, afford, present, serve up, hold
out to. Ginatán-ay níya ang pílak sa buút magsáylo sa íya búnghay. He
is offering money to whosoever wants to join his party. Itán-ay ang
kamót mo kay butangán ko sing isá ka hakúp nga dólse. Hold out your
hand and I shall fill it with candies. Itán-ay ang kalípay, agúd
makapahúway akó sang kalisúd. Suggest (Propose) some way of passing
the time pleasantly, so that I may find some rest from my anxiety
(trouble). Offer some cheerful diversion, that I may get relief from
my distress. (cf. tányag, hátag).

_tánda_, (B) They. (cf. sánda, silá).

_tándà_, Sign, mark, token, symbol, symptom, note; to sign, mark,
observe, heed, notice, pay attention to. Walâ akó makatándà kon
pilá ka táo ang nagtalámbong. I did not notice how many people were
present. Tandaí ang ginbutangán sang ákon maléta. Mark well the spot
where my handbag has been put down. Anó ang tándà sang ímo báka, baúl,
panápton, etc.? What is the identification mark of your cow, trunk,
clothes, etc.? Nakatándà ikáw kon makapilá na siá nagabút dirí? Have
you observed how often he has come here? Tándà iní sang----. This
is a sign of----. Tandaán mo sing maáyo ang tanán nga mga sumalákà,
agúd ímo makilála. Take particular note of all the visitors, in order
that you may know them. (cf. timáan, pát-in).

_tandáan_, Sign, symbol, symptom, mark, note. (cf. tándà, talandáan,
timáan, pát-in).

_tandáyag_, Infernal, hellish, devilish, demoniacal, fiendish,
diabolic, malevolent, malign, malignant, evil-minded, mischievous,
execrable, accursed. Tandáyag nga bátà iní. This is--a very
bad,--very naughty boy,--a demon of a boy. This boy is the very
devil. (cf. yawán-on, sárot, gátud, sutíl, maláut; áswang).

_tándò_, To consent. See tángdò.

_tándog_, To touch, feel, handle, come in contact with, make
an impression upon. Indì ka magtándog sa ákon. Indì mo akó
pagtandogón. Don't touch me. Tinándog sang manugwáli ang íya
tagiposóon. The preacher touched his heart. Nakamatá (Nagmatá) akó,
kay tinándog níya akó sang nagakatulúg akó. I awoke, for he touched me
(in my sleep). (cf. kúhit, káblit, doót, salapáy).

_tándok_, A cupping glass, a horn used as a cupping glass, a tube
used for sucking blood from a wound; a blood-sucker; to cup, bleed
(transitive), suck blood from a wound by means of a tube, draw blood
by cupping. May súngay ikáw nga inogtándok? Have you a horn to use
as a cupping glass? Patandokí ang kinádtan (ginkádtan) sang idô. Cup
(Bleed) the dog-bite. Amó silá ang mga líntà kag tándok nga nagasúyup
sang mánggad sang bánwa. Those are the leeches and blood-suckers that
absorb the wealth of the town (state). (cf. bintósa).

_tandô-tándò_, Dim. and Freq. of tándò--to consent, agree. (cf. tángdò,
tangôtángò).

_tandó-tándo, tandô-tándò_, A kind of cicada allied to the grasshopper
and locust; death-tick, death-watch (beetle); chrysalis, pupa (of
insects). (cf. lagtók-lágtok).

_tandúay_, A kind of intoxicating spirit made from (distilled from)
the nípà-palm.

_tándus_, (B) To be or become diligent, handy, ready, quick,
expeditious, expert, dexterous; willing, well-disposed (to obey orders,
etc.). (cf. písan; tandusán--pisánan, pisanán).

_tánga_, The cockroach, black beetle.

_tangâ_, To look up, tilt back one's head, lift--, raise--, one's eyes
(head). Tangá ka. Hold your head up. Look up. Raise your head. Itangá
ang guyá mo. Tilt up your face. Nagtangá siá sa ákon. Natangaán níya
akó. He looked at me with tilted chin. Sang pagkakítà níya sádto
malahálon nga mga galamitón na urungán siá; nagtangá siá kag nagngangá
sang íya bábà sa dakô nga katingála. When he saw that precious
furniture he was surprised; he stared and gaped in wonder. Ngáa nga
amó ka pa lang magabút? Sín-o na man ang ímo gintangaán dídto? Why
are you so late? Whom did you look at there (i.e. listen to with
absorbing interest)? (cf. tánglà, tukháyaw, tukyáhaw, bayáw).

_tángab_, A constellation of stars.

_tangadál_, Dull, stupid, brainless; a fool. (cf. mangó, balingág,
kólò, tipangág, búngaw, tampuháw, etc.).

_tángag_, To rob or steal and carry off in the mouth, as birds of prey,
dogs, etc. do. (cf. tában).

_tangán-tángan_, The castor-oil plant, the Palma Christi tree. Its
beans yield castor-oil. (cf. tangóntángon id.).

_tangâ-tangâ_, Dim. and Freq. of tangâ--to raise one's
head. (cf. tánglà, tukháyaw).

_tángday_, To lie upon--, be placed upon--, crosswise. Nagatalángday
gid lang iníng mga kawáyan. These bamboos are lying one across
the other. Tangdayí ang káhoy sang kawáyan. Put the bamboos across
the timber. Itángday ang tiíl mo sa síya. Put your leg across the
chair. (cf. bángday).

_tángdò_, To consent, agree, concur, give--, yield--, assent,
acquiesce, accede, close with. Nagtángdo ikáw sinâ? Did you give your
consent to that? Did you approve of it? Tinangdoán níya ang maláin
níla nga búhat. He gave his consent to their wicked deed. (cf. hángdò;
tangô).

_tángga_, A game played with coins. A pile of coins is placed on
a pebble (called the tigí). The player using a coin as a missile
(called the máno, manohán or butánhan) tries to knock the coins away
from the tigí, or the tigí from under the coins, the object being to
leave the "mano, manohán or butánhan" nearer to the scattered coins
than the tigí. Also verb: to play at tángga.

_tánghag_, One who is weak-minded, forgetting everything, half-witted,
a half-wit. (cf. hángà, búngaw, kólò, pangág, pungág).

_tanghágà_, See tanhágà--wonderful, etc.

_tangígi_, A kind of fish of considerable size and much esteemed
as food.

_tángis_, To cry, weep, lament. Tinangísan níya ang kamatáyon sang íya
ilóy. He wept for the death of his mother. Indì ka magtángis. Don't
cry. Dáyon lang siá nagapanángis. She is always crying. (cf. hibî).

_tángkal_, Pig-sty, inclosure or pen where a pig is kept for fattening
and slaughter.

_tángkan, tángkon_, From tanók--to boil tubers, etc.

_tángkap_, End, point, top, tip, extremity; to lop or cut off the
extreme point. Tangkapí ang kawáyan. Lop off the bamboo. (cf. ótbong).

_tángkas_, To arrange neatly, put side by side, pile or stack in
regular order; a file or pile of leaves, books, etc.; pamphlet,
magazine, copy or issue of a periodical, magazine, or the like.

_tángkò_, To encompass, circle, encircle, circuit, make a circuit
around, go round, span; to reach, stretch, come to. (cf. líbut,
maglíbut; dángat, lámbut, lámpas).

_tangkógò, tangkúgò_, The nape of the neck.

_tángkol_, A stout strong piece of rope, wood, iron, or the like;
anything giving strength or security; leash, rope, tether (for dogs,
pigs, cows, etc.); fetter, shackle, gyve, manacles (for prisoners,
etc.); strait-jacket, strait-waistcoat (for lunatics); to secure,
make firm, tie or bind together, to leash, tether, shackle, fetter,
manacle. Tangkolí ang kawáyan kag ipaánod sa subâ. Bind the bamboos
together and float them down the river. Itángkol sa kamót sang buyóng
iníng talikalâ nga salsálon. Secure the hands of the robber with
this iron chain. Tinangkolán ko na ang karabáw nga índì na makabúhì
liwát. I have now tethered the buffalo in such a way that it cannot
escape any more. (cf. gápus, gapús, higót, gáid, góos).

_tángkol_, To reach, get at; to be fit or suitable. (cf. dángat,
dáb-ot; sángkol, ígò, ángay).

_tangkolán_, Any structure that gives support or strength, as a
buttress, abutment, bridgehead, or the like. (cf. tángkol).


_tangkolóy_, (B) Fool, idiot, ass, boor, boorish, uncultured, rude,
stupid, ill-bred, ill-mannered. (cf. kólò, kalúndong, tampuháw, etc.).

_tángkong_, A kind of vine whose leaves resemble those of the sweet
potato and whose shoots are edible.

_tángkup_, A cumulus cloud, a large pillar of cloud (a sign of coming
rain); to gather (of clouds for rain).

_tángkup_, The dents or small parallel slips of a weaver's reed;
to form, make, put in the dents in a weaver's reed; to finish, end,
close, terminate, complete.

_tánglà_, (H) To look up, raise the head or eyes towards heaven, lift
the eyes. Tanglaá ang lángit. Look up to heaven. Itánglà ang ímo mga
matá. Raise your eyes. Tinanglaán sang íya mga matá ang íya maguláng
(mánong) nga nagsákà sa matág-as nga káhoy. His eyes were raised
towards his eldest brother who had climbed a high tree. (cf. tukyáhaw,
tukháyaw, tangâ, bayáw).

_tánglad_, A kind of plant whose leaves are used as condiment for
meat, etc.

_tangó_, To be near, be at the side of; to attend to, attend on,
tend. (cf. dangô).

_tangô_, A nod, nodding, assent by nodding; to nod assent. The
form tangôtángò is more used as verb. Natangôtángò siá sa
ákon. Gintangôtangóan níya akó. He nodded assent to me. He gave me
his consent by (with) a nod. (cf. tángdò, tándò, hángdò).

_tángon_, The palate, roof of the mouth.

_tángon_, To settle, establish oneself, become fixed or permanent,
alight (as a swarm of bees, or the like).

_tangón-tángon_, (B) The castor-oil plant. See tangántángan.

_tangô-tángò_, Dim. and Freq. of tangô--to nod assent, etc.

_tángsò_, Looseness, shakiness, condition of not being firmly secured
or attached; to become loose or looser, to loosen, to be detached
or separated from, as the iron point of a lance from the shaft,
a knife or bolo from the handle, etc. Iníng binángon nagatángsò,
kay walâ sing kalólot. This bolo is working loose from its handle,
for it is not firmly glued in. Kaayóhon mo iníng súndang, agúd índì
na magtángsò sa kaláptan. Repair this knife so that it may not become
loose again from its haft (hilt). (cf. hútal, kútal, hosô).

_tángtang_, To loosen, untie, liberate; to fall, drop off. Matángtang
siá áyhan sa íya nga palangakóan. He will perhaps fall from
office. (cf. húbad; dágdag, húlug, táktak).

_tángtang_, To clink, tingle, jingle. (cf. tíngting, kilíngkilíng).

_tángub_, A loud peal of thunder; to thunder; to strike dumb,
dumb-found, confuse with astonishment. Natángban siá nga
índì makahámbal. He is so astonished that he cannot utter a
syllable. (cf. dagúob).

_tángub_, To fill or cover all, complete, finish, comprise or include
all, terminate (rice-planting, etc.). (cf. híl-ob).

_tángway_, To buy a drink like wine, beer, toddy, etc. Tangwayá ang íya
nga tubâ. Buy his toddy. Tangwayí akó sing isá ka báso nga tubâ. Buy
a glass of toddy for me. Itángway mo akó ánay sing ilímnon. Please
buy me a drink.

_tanhágà_, Wonder, marvel; wonderful, marvellous, wondrous, prodigious,
stupendous, extraordinary, miraculous; to be or become wonderful,
etc. (cf. makatalanhágà, katanhagáan, tingála, búlung, katingaláhan).

_tanihád_, Inclined, leaning, not straight, out of the vertical line;
to incline, etc. (cf. hibát, talingíg, hiláy).

_taníng_, Tight, taut, close. (cf. hugút, tádlong).

_táning_, To make taut, to tighten, straighten (a rope, etc.). Tanínga
ang kalát. Tighten the rope. Pull the rope straight. Mahámpang kitá
sang "habúlhábul sa táytay"; kon magsilíng gánì ang manugdumála
"taníngon" laboyán, kon "laboyán" taníngon. Let us play the game of
"weaving on the bridge"; when the leader says; "Tighten", let loose,
when he says; "Let loose", tighten. (cf. úntay, hugút, tádlong,
taníng).

_tánkig_, A small river snake of a reddish colour. It is harmless.

_tánkon_, From tanók--to boil tubers, etc.

_tánlas_, Smoothness, slipperiness; to be or become smooth, slippery,
easy--to move,--to swallow,--of passage. Lanáhi ang makiná, agúd
magtánlas. Oil the machine that it may run smoothly. Naguphalán siá
siníng pagkáon, ápang akó'y ákon natanlasán. He could swallow this
food only with difficulty, but I could swallow it quite easily. He
found this food difficult to swallow, but I found it quite easy
(to swallow). (cf. talás, dánlug.

_tánod_, Menial, inferior, servant; dirty, slovenly, carelessly or
shabbily dressed. Tánod siá ni Fuláno. He is a servant of N.N. Tánod
nga táo. A shabbily (meanly, poorly, carelessly) dressed man. Daw
tánod siá. He is shabbily dressed. He looks like a menial.

_tanód_, To follow, guard, watch, keep in sight or under surveillance,
(as a nurse following a child, a policeman bringing in a criminal or
watching a prisoner, etc.). (cf. sunúd, bántay, upúd).

_tánog_, The threading of a needle; to thread a needle. Itánog sa dágum
iníng hílo. Thread the needle with this thread. Tanógi ang dágum kag
tahión mo ang gisî sang ákon báyò. Thread the needle and mend the
tear in my jacket. Walâ gid siá pagtámwà sa talahían nga dílì gánì
makahibaló bisán na lang magtánog sing dágum. She never even looks
into the sewing room so that she does not know how to thread a needle.

_tanóg_, A length of thread sufficient for threading a needle;
threaded, needle and thread. (cf. tánog).

_tanóg_, A kind of tumour, boil or ulcer (particularly on the throat
or below the ear). (cf. banóg, hubág).

_tanók_, The cooking or boiling of tubers, bananas, or the like; to
boil tubers, etc. Ságing, maís, úbi, etc. nga tinanók. Boiled bananas,
corn, úbi, etc. Tánki (tángki, tanokí) akó sing kamóti. Boil me some
sweet potatoes. Tánka (Tángka) ang úbi, buhayán, etc. Boil the úbi,
buhayán, etc. Iníng sárì nga ságing manámit gid kon tánkon, apáng
malás-ay kon kán-on nga hiláw. This variety of bananas is very nice
(tasty) when boiled, but insipid when eaten raw. (cf. talangkúnon;
lâgâ, lapó, laúya, tíg-ang, bakól; bukál, pabukál).

_tánom, tanóm_, etc. See tánum, tanúm, etc.

_tánoy_, To be high, shrill, loud, sonorous, resounding, far-reaching
(of the human voice, of music, etc.). (cf. sílik, sulánting, tán-up,
tágsing).

_tánsan_, Tansan, a kind of mineral water.

_tántan_, To pack, make compact, shake together; to settle (of
food). (cf. hánhan).

_tantánan_, Talisman, amulet, charm, wishing-cap, magic hood, magic
ring the wearer of which can have every wish fulfilled. Bilídhon
nga tantánan. A precious charm. A wonderful enchantment (spell,
allurement, glamour, fascination). May síngsing siá nga tantánan,
konó. They say he has (possesses) a magic ring.

_tánto_, (Sp. tanto) So much, as much as, as large as, as high as,
etc. A, dílì (índì) tánto. Oh, not as much--, high--, tall--, great--,
easy--, difficult--, etc. as that. (cf. súbung, túlad).

_tántò_, Just sufficient, enough, adequate, competent, satisfactory,
ample; to suffice, be enough, etc. Ang kwárta ko tántò gid lang sa
ákon galastóhon. The money I have is barely (just about) sufficient
for my expenses (needs, wants). (cf. ígò, hústo, túman).

_tántos_, (Sp. tanto) Numbered tokens or counters used instead
of money in playing games; to use such tokens in playing games,
etc. Pilá nga (Pilá ang) tántos sa tungâ? How much does the stake
in the middle amount to? Tantosán lang nínyo. Just use the counters
(instead of coins or money) in your game.

_tánum_, Growing rice-plant, rice-planting; to plant rice, take
the rice-seedlings from the seedling plot and transplant them to
the field. Nagatánum na silá. They are planting rice. Walâ pa kamí
makatánum, kay kúlang pa ang ulán. We have not been able to plant rice
yet, for there is too little rain. Itánum na lang iníng sábud, kay
matáas na. Just transplant these rice-seedlings, for they are quite
high now. Húo, ipatánum ko iní sa madalî nga saráng mahímò. Yes, I
shall see to it that they be planted as soon as possible. (cf. tanúm).

_tanúm_, Any plant except rice; to plant any kind of seed, seedling,
layer, shoot, sucker, etc., except those of rice; to set, sow, put in
the soil (ground). Támna (Tanumá) iníng isá ka líso sang sandíya. Sow
this melon-pip. Ang íya palangúmhan madámò gid sing mga tanúm, ápang
walâ sing tánum. On his farm very many plants are growing, but no
rice. His farm is stocked with many varieties of plants (emblements),
except rice. Itanúm iníng tátlo ka sáhà sang ságing. Plant these
three banana-layers. (cf. tánum).

_tán-up_, To sound, echo, be heard from a distance, strike the
ear. (cf. aningál, aniníngal, tánoy, sulánting).

_tanús_, Straight, erect, standing upright, not curved, bent or
crooked; to grow straight. Tanús nga káhoy. A straight-growing tree.

_tányag_, To tender, offer, proffer, hold out to. Gintányag níya sa
ákon ang íya nga karabáw. He offered me (to sell) his buffalo. Itányag
mo sa íya ang umá nga ginabalígyà mo. Make him an offer of (Proffer
him) the field you are selling. Magtányag ka sa kay Fuláno sang amó
nga palangakóan. Offer that position to N.N. Gintanyagán níya akó
sing alagarán sa íya nga kumbuyahán. He held out to me employment in
his company.

_tányog_, Range, reach, stretch; to reach, take within one's range;
stretch to. (cf. sányog; lámbut, dángat).

_táo_, Man, person; to be a man, be born. Ang mga táo. Men. The
people. The human race. Mankind. Natáo siá sa----. He was born
in----. May mga táo nga----. There are people, who----. Si Hesús
nagpakatáo sa úlay nga tiyán ni María Santisimá. Jesus became man in
the virgin womb of Mary most Holy. (cf. táwo, but táo is the better
and more common spelling).

_táo_, To look after or guard the house, remain on the premises, watch
over--, be in charge of--, a house in the absence of its owner. Sín-o
ang nagatáo sa baláy sang útud mo, kay walâ siá dirí? Who is in charge
of your brother's house, as he is not here? Taóhi ánay ang baláy ko,
kay makádto akó sa Manílà. Please look after my house, as I am going
to Manila. Pataóhi ánay ang ákon baláy, kay may kadtoán akó. Please
get someone to look after my house, for I must go away.

_taó, ta-ó_, (B) To give, donate, make a present of, bestow upon,
hand over to. Itaó kaná ang síngsing nga diá. (Ihátag sa íya iníng
síngsing). Give him this ring. Táw-an ko ikáw ti kwárta. (Hatágan
(Tagáan) ko ikáw sing kwárta). I'll give you some money. (cf. hátag,
túgrò, dúlut, bugáy, amóma, túnghol).

_taohána_, Humorously used for táo--man, person. (cf. babayhána).

_taohánon_, Human, pertaining to human nature. (cf. táo, tawohánon).

_taón_, A small fish-trap, a wicker basket for catching small fish,
crabs, shrimps, etc. (cf. báw-an, páta).

_taón, táon_, Age, year, season. (cf. túig, panuigón, panahón).

_taó-táo_, Anything resembling a man, a picture or drawing of a man
or woman; a scarecrow, a figure set up in rags and tatters to scare
away birds, etc. Ang taótáo sa dúldul, sa humáy, etc. A scarecrow on
a kapok-tree, in a rice-field, etc.

_taó-táo_, (_sang matá_) The pupil (of the eye).

_tápa_, A thin slice of meat dried in the sun; to slice and
dry meat. May tápa kamó? Have you got any dried meat? Tapáha
ang kárne. Slice the meat and dry it (in the sun, on a gridiron,
etc.). Tapáhi akó siníng pámlay sang báka. Cut this leg of beef in
thin slices and dry it for me. (cf. kusáhos--to cut in strips).

_tapá_, To roast fish, corn, coconut, meat, etc. (and dispose
of it by sale to customers at wayside inns, refreshment booths,
etc.). Napérde kúntà ang íla lubí nga linúk-ad ukón kóprak kon walâ
níla pagtapahí. Their coconut meat that had been scooped out of the
shells or their copra would have been a complete loss, if they had
not roasted it (and sold it retail). (cf. sálay).

_tápad_, To include all, cover all, suffice for all, etc. (See tápud,
tarápad, kámpod, tóptop).

_tapahán_, Gridiron, anything used for drying meat upon, or the
like. (cf. tapá, talap-anán, tarap-anán).

_tápak_, A foot (measure of length); to step--, walk--, tread--,
on or upon. Ang íya sinâ nga kalabaón ápat ka tápak. Its length is
four feet. (cf. lápak; pié).

_tápak_, Length, breadth or width of cloth, etc.; size. Itámbi iníng
isá ka tápak sang heneró sa isá, agúd magígò ang kalaparón. Join this
width of cloth to the other, so that it may become sufficiently wide.

_tapakán_, Treadle; foot-stool. Tapáki ang tapakán. Work the
treadle. (cf. lapakán).

_tapák-tapák_, To step or pace noisily--up and down,--to and fro,
to shuffle the feet, to patter. Sín-o ang nagatapáktapák sa hulút
sa ibábaw? Who is walking (pattering) noisily to and fro in the room
above? (cf. tápak, lapáklapák).

_tápal_, To throw away, discard, thrust out, cast forth, eject. Itápal
sa bintánà iníng pánit (úpak) sang ságing. Throw these banana skins
out of the window. (cf. pilák, habúy).

_tapál_, To slap, strike. See dapál.

_tapalán_, A block, bench, any kind of surface on which something
is laid for cutting, etc.; a scape-goat, one made to bear the blame
for another.

_tapalíta_, Bow-legged, bandy-legged. (cf. koíng).

_tapalódo_, (Sp. tapalodo) Mud-guard. (cf. sagáng sa lúnang).

_tapál-tápal_, Dim. and Freq. of tápal, tapál. Also: to square up,
settle amicably, smooth things over (as a quarrel, controversy,
or the like). (cf. kamólkámol, kapánkápan).

_tápan_, To become or make even, level, flat, plain, plane. Nagtápan
na ang ámon plása. Our public square has become level now. Tapána
ang bakólod. Level down the hill. (cf. sáma, saláma, matápan).

_tápang, tapáng_, To happen, chance, come to pass, etc. See
tabô. Natapángan ko gid ang íla pagáway. I just happened to be present
at their fight. Nakatápang akó sang íla panyága. I chanced to come
upon them when they were--having dinner,--at dinner.

_tápang_, See tarápang, sápak. Nagpinalágyo silá kag nagdalágan nga
walâ sing tápang. They fled and ran without any set purpose where to go
or what to do next. Walâ sing tápang ang íla pagginásto. There is no
order or account-keeping in their expenditure. Kon kís-a nagakatápang
siá nga daw dídto siá sa íya baláy. Now and then he imagines as if
he were at home (in his own house).

_tapángko_, (Sp. tapanco) Awning; small shop, selling-booth; counter,
stall, table, especially in a market; tax or excise to be paid for
a stall in a public market place. May tapángko ikáw? Have you paid
your stall-tax? Have you got, or paid for, a stall or booth?

_tapán-tápan_, Dim. and Freq. of tápan. Also: To settle peacefully,
etc. (cf. kapánkápan, kamólkámol, tapáltápal).

_tapás_, To cut down, fell, mow, mow down, cut low shrubs, reeds,
under brush etc. Tápsa ang tígbaw. Cut down the tígbaw reeds. Itapás
iníng binángon. Use this bolo for cutting. (For felling large trees
púkan is more used).

_tápas_, Coconut-husks, the thick, fibrous layer surrounding the
coconut shell; also used as a verb. Gintapásan níla ang lubí. They
stripped the coconut of its husk. (cf. bunót).

_tapát_, To resolve firmly, be resolved, make a resolution, make up
one's mind, determine steadfastly, to do resolutely. Magtapát ka sing
malíg-on nga dílì ka na magliwát sinâ. Make a firm resolution not to
do that again. Tapatón mo gid ang pagpatáy sang mán-og (sawá). Kill
the snake resolutely (determinately).

_tapát_, With determination, in defiance of, determinately, resolutely,
in spite of, notwithstanding, nevertheless, however, yet, though,
although, but. Bangúd nga madánlug gid ang dálan ginámlig níya ang íya
pagtikáng; tapát gánì nakadúpyas siá kag nahúlug sa kalóg. On account
of the slipperiness of the road he picked his steps very carefully;
yet in spite of it he slipped and fell into the ditch. Dakô gid ang
íya paghingamó nga magmánggad, tapát gánì namúsmus siá. He had a great
ambition to become rich; he became, however, very poor. Tapát nga íla
ginahingabút ang Sánta Iglésya, tapát nagadámò ang íya mga sinákup
(tapát siá nagadúgang). They may persecute the Church, but she is
ever growing. (cf. agád, hinonóo).

_tapá-tápa_, To strike with the open palm of the hand, to slap,
spank. Tapátapáha siá. Slap him. Give him a slap. Spank him. Ang
mamumunák nagatapátápa sang lalábhan. The laundress beats the wash
with her hands. (cf. támpà, tampúyong).

_tápay_, To beat, strike, slap. Tinapáyan níya akó. He slapped
me. (cf. huyáp, támpà, tapátápa).

_tápay_, Leaven, yeast, barm; to leaven, cause to ferment. Tapáyi
ang kán-on, kay sapálon ko. Put some leaven into the cooked rice,
for I am going to pickle it. (cf. tinápay--bread).

_tápdas_, (H) A touch, rap, tap, stroke (of a whip, of the tip of
a finger, etc.); to strike or beat lightly, to touch, rap. Tinápdas
níya sang íya kamót ang ilóng ni Fuláno. He tapped N.N.'s nose with
his hand. Ang tápdas sang íya kamót. The tap (rap, stroke) from his
hand. Ang pagdaúg níya sa sugál tápdas gid lámang. He very seldom wins
at cards. Tapdasá ang íya dalúnggan. Rap his ear. (cf. kúhit, káblit).

_tapéte_, (Sp. tapete) Carpet, rug; tapis, table cloth. (cf. alpómbra;
mantél, tabón).

_tápgo_, To clean or dress split bamboo with the bolo so as to
make it fit for weaving purposes, to trim or prepare splints for
wickerwork. Ginatapgohán níya ang kawáyan nga tinádtad. He is
trimming or dressing the split bamboo in order to make it suitable
for wickerwork. (cf. talapgóhan, águs).

_táphan_, From tahúp--to sift rice, etc.

_tapî_, A step, rung (of a ladder, of a staircase,
etc.). (cf. halíntang).

_tápì_, Board, plank; wood; to make boards of; to board, cover with
boards. Baláy nga tápì. A house built of wood (not of bamboo). Tapíon
nínyo iníng tablón. Make boards of this log. Nagatápì na silá sang
salúg. They are now boarding (covering with boards) the floor. Támà
kanipís kag kakitíd siníng mga tápì. These planks are too thin and
too narrow. Kon buút siá magbána sa íya, tapían níya, konó, sing baláy
(balayán níya, konó, sing tápì). They say that if she will marry him,
he will build her a house of wood (not merely of bamboo). Ipatápì ko
sa mga manuglagarî yanáng mga káhoy. I shall see to it that the sawyers
saw that timber into boards. (cf. káhoy--tree; wood in general).

_tapí_, To strike--, give a sudden blow--, brush off--, with the
hand, to jerk off, knock off. Tapihá ang íya kálò. Knock off his
hat. Gintapí níya ang tinápay sa íya kamót. He knocked the bread out
of his hand. Tapihá ang kamót níya, agúd nga madágdag ang ginakáptan
níya nga tinápay. Hit him on the hand that he may drop the bread he
is holding. (cf. pípi, píphi, tápdas).

_tápia_, To throw away a card or exchange it for another in
certain card-games. Itápia ang baráha mo kon dílì úyon inâ sa ímo
buút. Exchange your card, if you don't like it.

_tápia_, To waft, etc. See dápia.

_tapík_, To stick to, adhere to, be attached to; to take or get
hold of, to attack (of a disease, etc.); clinging to, attached to;
married into a family. Tapikán mo ang sulát sing sílyo. Stick a stamp
on the letter. Ang mga malúya sing láwas matapikán sa madalî sang
mga balatían. Those that have weak bodies soon catch a disease. Walâ
siá lábut sa ámon panublión, kay tapík lang siá (sa ámon). He has
no share in our inheritance, for he belongs to us only by marriage
(for he (only) married into the family). Ang papél nagatapík na sa
díngding. The paper now sticks (adheres) to the wall. (cf. dokót,
pilít).

_tapíkan_, A kind of palm. Its fruit yields kolahós--a substance that
causes a terrible itch, when brought in contact with the skin.

_táp-ing_, Dirt, grime, mud, filth, stain, tarnish; to become or
make dirty, etc. Walâ gid sing táp-ing ang íya dungúg. His character
is perfectly blameless. He is a man of unblemished (irreproachable)
character. Ang íya guyá natap-ingán sang hígkò kag dugô. His face
was--grimy and blood-stained,--besmeared with grime and blood. Ayáw
pagbuháta inâ, kay matap-ingán gid ang maáyo nga ngálan sang ímo
panimaláy. For God's sake don't do such a thing, for it will certainly
bring dishonour on the fair name of your family (it will discredit--,
reflect upon--, your good family-name). (cf. dágtà, hígkò, bulíng,
rísmò).

_tap-ingón_, Dirty, grimy, soiled, sullied, tarnished, having a dirty
face, or the like. (cf. bulingón, mahígkò, rísmò).

_tapióka_, (Sp. tapioca) Tapioca. (cf. balínghoy, kamotingkáhoy).

_tápis_, A skirt as worn by Philippine women. (cf. ámpis, tápis,
patádyong).

_tápis_, A large apron or over-skirt in various designs and usually
of a black colour, as worn chiefly by Tagalog women. (cf. tampíon).

_tapisán_, A cotton gin. (cf. ipisán).

_tapí-tápi_, Dim. and Freq. of tapî--to knock off, etc.

_tapî-tápì_, Dim. and Freq. of tápì--board, etc. Anything resembling
a board or plank. Abáw, katámbok siníng karabáw, daw tapîtápì ang íya
nga likód. Just look how fat this buffalo is; his back is as flat
as a table. Ang diótay nga tapîtápì nasulatán: "----. On the small
tablet was written: "----.


_táplak_, See táklap--to cover, spread upon, put on. Itáplak (Itáklap)
ang mantél sa látok. Taplakí (Taklapí) ang látok sang mantél. Put
(Spread) the cloth on the table. (cf. tábon).

_táplak_, See háplak--to drop flat, etc.

_táplik, taplík_, A flick, jerk, a quick light stroke; to flick, jerk,
beat, strike, whip (with a quick light stroke). Taplikí siá sang ímo
kamót, kalát, pányò, etc. Flick him (Give him a flick) with the hand,
rope, handkerchief, etc. Tinaplikán akó sing lúnang sang íkog sang
karabaw. The buffalo flicked mud over me with its tail. Itáplik
sa íya ang ímo mga túdlò. Snap your fingers at him. (cf. wáslik,
tápdas, háplik).

_taplík-táplik_, Dim. and Freq. of táplik. To wag, move to and
fro, move up and down, shake, sway, vibrate, oscillate. Ang idô
nagataplíktáplik sang íya íkog. The dog is wagging its tail. Ang
kalát nga inogbágting sang linggánay ginataplíktáplik sang hángin. The
bell-rope is swinging (swaying) to and fro in the wind. (cf. paládpad,
hulághúlag).

_tápnà_, Stop, end, termination; to stop, put a stop to, prevent,
hinder, put an end to. Tapnaá ang íya pagpangúma sang ákon dútà. Stop
him tilling my land. Put a stop to his tilling my land. (cf. pugúng,
táblà, táblaw, sagáng).

_tápnan_, From tapón--to cover, etc.

_tápnay_, A handful; to carry or hold in the hand. (cf. sápnay).

_tapók_, To be or become brittle, weak, easily breakable or
fragile. Natapokán akó siníng hílo. This thread is too weak for my
purpose. Nagtapók na iníng hénero. This cloth is worn out, has lost
its strength, easily tears.

_tápok_, To hide, send away, exile, banish. Itápok siá sa malayô. Send
him far away. Gintápok níya ang karabáw sa masíot. He hid the buffalo
among the dense vegetation. (cf. sóbol, tábug, tágò).

_táp-ok_, To disperse, scatter, fly off in a cloud of dust. Kon
báyhon (bayohón, báywon) ang humáy nga háp-og magatáp-ok ang íya
upá. When brittle rice is pounded the husks fly off in a cloud of
dust. Natap-okán kamí sang yáb-ok. We were surrounded by (enveloped
in) a cloud of dust. (cf. alintabó; ápok, ásik, etc.).

_táp-ok_, To cover with, fill, fill up (a hole, etc.). See támpok id.

_tapokál_, Fish, especially hípon, cooked between two sheets of bark,
or the like; to cook fish sandwiched between two sheets of bark.

_táp-ol_, To be or become weak, frail, feeble, exhausted. (cf. lúya,
pígaw, póypoy).

_tapól_, A kind of rice. (cf. arabón).

_tapól_, Dark-coloured, applied particularly to some kinds of úbi,
rice, rattan, etc.

_tapón_, (Sp. tapón) Cork, stopple, plug, bung, cover, lid; to cover
as with a lid, etc. Butangí sing tapón ang botílya, pínggan, kólon,
etc. Cork the bottle, cover the plate, rice-kettle, etc. (cf. tabón,
tábon, súngsung, loón, soón).

_tapó-tapó_, Dust, dirt. (cf. gapógapó, yáb-ok, hígkò, rámò).

_tapóyay_, A kind of tree.

_tápò_, To meet, join, take part in, become a member of a society,
associate with, enter, side with (a party), embrace (a religion),
etc. Nagtapuáy silá sa baláy. They met together in the house. Walâ
siá magtápò. He did not join. Ipatápò (Ginpatápò) níya ang íya anák
sa amó nga talapuánan. He should order (He ordered) his son to join
(enter, become a member of) that society. Yanáng kambuyahán natapúan
na sang madámò nga mga tumalapô nga lutáw sa bánwa. Many prominent
citizens are now associated with that firm (company). (cf. katápò,
talapuán, talapuánan, tumalapô; pasákup, dámpig).

_tápud_, To take in all, include all, leave out none, cover the
whole, be sufficient for all needs. Natapúran (-údan) ang umá sang
mga háyup. The whole field is covered with cattle. Tapúron mo silá
nga tanán sa paghátag sing tagisá ka bílog nga tinápay. Give every
one of them without exception a piece of bread. Dílì makatápud iní
sa tanán. This is not sufficient for all. (cf. talápud, kámpod,
tóptop, tipatíp).

_tápuk, táp-uk_, See tápok, táp-ok.

_tapúl, táp-ul_, See tapól, táp-ol.

_tapulánga_, A kind of hibiscus. See tampulánga id. (cf. panapulánga).

_tapúngaw_, State of one dazed, crazy, cracked, mad, stunned,
stupefied, frightened out of one's wits, particularly said of
persons who on awakening suddenly from sleep cannot find their
bearings or collect their wits for some time; to daze, stun, stupefy,
etc. Natapungáwan siá. He was off his head when he awoke. Nagakatulúg
siá; índì mo siá pagtandugón, kay básì matapungáwan siá. He is
sleeping; don't touch him, for he may demean himself like a madman on
starting up. Nagbalíbad siá sa pagsilíng nga natapungáwan siá. He
excused himself by saying that he was quite stupefied (at the
time). (cf. tipúngaw id. and more commonly used).

_tapúngol_, A punch, blow with the fist; to punch, box, strike with the
fist. Tapungóla siá. Punch him. Ihátag sa íya (Tagái siá) ang (sing)
isá ka tapúngol. Give him a punch. Nagtinapungoláy silá. They fought
each other with their fists. They came to a hand-to-hand fight. They
came--to blows,--to close quarters. They buffeted each other with
their fists. (cf. súmbag, búngbung, áway).

_tápus_, Finished, complete, ended, closed, terminated, concluded,
all over; to finish, complete, end, close, conclude, terminate,
get through with. Tapúsa ang ímo sulát. Conclude (Finish) your
letter. Madúgay pa balá túbtub nga matápus inâ? Will it last a long
time yet till it is finished (concluded)? Walâ kamí makatápus sang
ámon pagarádo, kay nagab-ihán kamí. We could not finish our ploughing,
for night overtook us. Tápus na. Finished. That's the end of it. It's
all over. (cf. ápus).

_tapút_, To dress, clothe, wear clothes. (cf. sapút, panapút, naúg).

_tapô-tápò_, Dim. and Freq. of tápò. Also: to patch, mend, stitch
(torn garments). Indì gánì siá makahibaló magtapôtápò sang gisî
níya nga panápton. She does not even know how to mend her torn
garments. (cf. tókap, halúthut).

_tapútul_, A kind of small fish.

_tápya_, See tápia--to exchange one card for another, etc.

_tarádag_, To ramble in conversation, talk nonsense, speak in an
incoherent manner; to step or stumble in, act thoughtlessly or
carelessly. Nagatarádag lang siá sa íya paghámbal. He just rambles
on in his talk, speaks incoherently or carelessly. (cf. tárag, tarág,
talágtalág).

_tarádyon_, (B) Irascible, getting soon angry or excited, waxing hot at
the slightest provocation, hot-tempered. (cf. pikón, ádyò, kutóskutós).

_tárag_, (H) To wander, walk about, loiter, loaf. (cf. lágaw, lagúyaw).

_tárag, tarág_, (H) To step or stumble into a hole, walk through
or over mud, speak or act thoughtlessly, meddle or interfere with
light-heartedly. (cf. tarádag, tásak, túdag, lúdag).

_tarágman_, (B) What is to be--, should be--, steeped in tágum
(indigo).

_tarág-tarág_, (B) See talágtalág, taláktalák--careless, etc.

_tarág-tarág_, (B) Walking about constantly, never quiet, always on
the move, never at rest; a rover, loafer, tramp. (cf. darándarán,
harásharás, diwal-ogán, dingkalógan; lagáwlágaw, tiyógtiyóg,
landólándo).

_taraháon_, (B) See talaháon.

_tarahían_, (B) See talahían.

_tarahíon_, (B) See talahíon.

_tarahúdon_, (B) See talahúron.

_tarámbal_, (B) See talámbal.

_tarambáyaw_, (B) To work together, cooperate, unite, make common
efforts, join in. Nagtarambáyaw sánda sa pagámot kang galastóhon
(garastóhon). (Nagbuligáy silá sa pagámot sang galastóhon). They all
helped in contributing the money required. (cf. buligáy, tinabangáy,
híl-o, dágyaw, hiúsa, hiúgyon).

_tarámdan_, (B) See talámdan.

_tarámhak_, Negligent, careless, light-hearted, thougthless; to speak
or act carelessly, etc. (cf. patarásak, pasapayán, taláktalák).

_tarámnan_, (B) See talámnan.

_taramnúnon_, (B) See talamnúnon.

_tarámos_, (B) See talámos.

_tarampúyuk_, (B) See talampúyuk.

_taramwáan_, (B) See talamwáan.

_tarandáan_, (B) See talandáan.


_tarangitág_, Orderless, in disorder, confused, perplexed, bewildered,
crazy, frantic; to be or become disordered, confused, etc. (cf. palág,
lingín, libúg, líntong, salangiság).

_tarangkúnon_, (B) See talangkúnon.

_tarangwáyan_, (B) See talangwáyan.

_tarápad_, (B) To take in all, make no exception, treat equally,
extend to all, cover all. Gintarápad na ang pagákig kanánda. Gintarápad
(Gintarapádan) na sánda kang ákig. (Nagákig siá sa íla nga tanán). He
was angry with all (everyone) of them. (cf. tápud, tóptop, saláma).

_tarapál_, A kind of oil-cloth. (cf. úli).

_tarap-anán_, (B) See talap-anán.

_tarápang_, Attention, care, purpose, reflection, mostly with
"walâ sing" and then having the meaning: thoughtless, careless,
negligent, to no avail or purpose, or the like. Walâ gid sing tarápang
iníng bátà. This boy--is very careless or negligent,--acts without
thinking. Naglakát siá nga walâ gid sing tarápang. He walked away
without any idea of where he was going to or of what he intended to
do. (cf. sápak, tápang).

_tarápang_, To have an idea, to surmise, guess, suppose, imagine,
think. (cf. hunâhúnà, sáyod, hibaló, bántà).

_tarásak_, Thoughtless, nonchalant, happy-go-lucky,
careless. (cf. patarásak).

_taratalánda_, A loafer, idler, good-for-nothing, hobo: to loaf, be
an idler, idle away the time. (cf. karakalánda, tiógtióg, haráyháray).

_tará-tará_, (B) A rattle. See talátalá.

_tará-tará_, A loafer, idler, etc. See taratalánda, landólándo,
tarágtarág, tagrátágra, etc. etc.

_tará-tará_, Very voluble, quick (of speech); to speak extremely quick,
be very voluble, etc. (cf. garót, sorótsot).

_tarautâ, tara-utâ_, A piece of, a part, not the whole, broken-up,
not close together, spread out one by one, in or by pieces, piecemeal;
to be--broken up,--one by one,--spread in separate units, to do one
thing at a time, by piecework. (tarawtâ id).

_taráwik, tarawík_, (B) See taláwik, talawík--to squeal, etc.

_taráwis_, (B) See taláwis, talíwis--to be sharp-pointed, etc.

_tarawtâ_, See tarautâ--to be broken up, etc. (cf. lápta, utúdutúd,
pitápitá, atákaták, etc.).

_tárda_, (Sp. tarda) Slow, dull, tardy, sluggish, stupid,
late, behind-hand, a little foolish or weak-minded (of
females). (cf. buangít, pungág; kolôkolô, etc.).

_tárde, tárdes_, (Sp. tarde) Afternoon evening; late, behind
time. Buénas tárdes. Good afternoon. Good evening. (cf. hápon,
kahaponánon, maáyong hápon; atrasádo).

_tárdo_, (Sp. tardo) Late, too late, behind time; dull, stupid (of
males). (cf. tárda, tárde).

_tardón_, (Sp. tardón) Late, too late, a late-comer, straggler; slow,
dull, stupid foolish. (cf. kulihót, atrasádo, hugiánan, tárdo, tárda,
kulángkuláng, etc.).

_tárhan_, (H) Spurred, having a large spur (of cocks). (cf. tahúd,
tádhan).

_tarhéta_, (Sp. tarjeta) Card, label; tablet with inscription.

_tarî_, A kind of creeper whose root is edible. When peeled the root
is reddish, but underneath the reddish surface the root is white. Baóng
is the same plant, but its root is white throughout.

_tárik_, A young locust beginning to grow wings, and starting
to fly. (cf. lúkso--an immature locust without wings; apán--the
full-grown locust).

_tarík_, A cross-beam to which the outriggers of a paráw, etc. are
attached.

_tarík_, Tight, taut, straight; to tighten, straighten, make taut,
fasten well, pull tight. Tariká (Húgta) ang kalát. Tighten the
rope. Pull the rope tight. Gintarík na (Ginhugút níya) ang háblon. He
made the warp taut. (cf. hugút, taríngka).

_tarín_, A chicken that no longer follows the hen; to leave the growing
chickens (brood) alone, let them take care of themselves without
mothering them any longer, particularly applied to fowls. Ginatarín
na sang mungâ ang íya mga pisô. The hen--is leaving her chickens
alone,--does not accompany her chickens any more. (cf. talín id).

_taríngka, tarínka_, (Sp. trincar) To fasten, tighten, tie or
bind fast, make taut, tight; to be stuffed, crammed, full to
bursting. Taringkahá ang písì. Make the string taut. (cf. tarík,
hugút, gutúk, punô, busúg, butíngting).

_tarípa_, (Sp. tarifa) Tariff, price-list or schedule of
charges. (cf. típo, baláyran, hinákay, pagkítan (talandáan) sang
mga baláyran).

_tarí-tári_, To apply many strokes in quick succession, to thrash,
beat, chastise severely, flog or whip thoroughly; to scold, chide,
rebuke, vilify, vituperate, criticize sharply, flay. Indì mo siá
pagtarítaríhon sang búnal. Don't whip him too severely. Don't give him
too many strokes of the whip. Sa ílang pagpakigpulóngpúlong gintarítári
níla ang búnghay nga íla kasúmpong. In their speeches they flayed
(criticized sharply, vilified) their opponents. Kon magliwán ikáw
magbúhat sinâ ipatarítári ko gid ikáw kay tátay. If you do it again
I shall see to it that father gives you a good thrashing (beating,
hiding). (cf. búnal, hánot, hámpak; múlay, híkay, básol).

_taríthi_, (B) Light rain. See talíthi.

_taríwis_, (B) Sharp-pointed, etc. See taláwis, talíwis, taráwis.

_taríya_, (Sp. tarea) Task, job, duty, a day's work. (cf. buluhatón,
katungdánan, pangabúdlay).

_taríya_, (Probably from the Sp. tajea, atarjea) Row, line,
furrow, channel. Isá ka taríya sang arádo (dáro). One furrow of the
plough. (cf. ídas).

_tárma_, To overcome, defeat, outdo, conquer, discomfit, overthrow,
overpower, subdue. Indì akó katárma (makatárma) sa íya. I cannot--beat
him,--get the better of him,--manage him. I am unable to defeat
him. (cf. lútos, daúg, okóm, otóm).

_tarnáta_, Loquacious, talkative, chatterbox; to be very talkative,
to boast, brag, vaunt oneself. (cf. búrà, hádak, wákal, hámbog, etc.).

_táro_, (B) Tallow, candle grease, wax, beeswax, mineral wax, paraffin
wax. (cf. tálo).

_taró, tarô_, Lumpy, compact, packed, closely united, joined or knit
together; to be or become lumpy, packed, etc. (said of sugar, salt,
or the like). (cf. bilógbilóg, bitógbitóg).

_taróg_, (B) See talóg--gutter, etc.

_tarogán_, (B) See talogán--waterfall, etc.

_taróng_, (B) See talóng--eggplant.

_taroróng_, (B) To watch, keep watch, tend, attend on, to sit or squat
watching someone or looking at something curiously (attentively);
to attend, assist, be present at, look on, be a spectator. Tarorongí
pírme si tátay mo, hay nagamasakít. (Tambongí pírme si tátay mo,
kay nagamasakít). Constantly sit up with (watch at the bedside of)
father, because he is sick (ill). Kon magsári kaw kang taroróng sa
sugál magaáram ikáw ti madalî. (Kon magságad (magsáli) ikáw sang
támbong sa sugál magaálam ikáw sing madalî). If you are frequently
present at gambling (playing cards) as an attentive spectator you will
soon learn (the game, how to gamble or how to play cards). Ilisipón
gid lang ang mga nagtaroróng (nagtalámbong). Only a small number were
present (assisted). (cf. támbong, bántay).

_taróti_, (Sp. trote) To trot, run, run away, scamper off. Nagataróti
ang karabáw. The buffalo is running (runs). Patarotíha ang kabáyo. Make
the horse trot. Gallop the horse. (cf. dalágan, túwad, túad).

_tarótok_, See tarótot.

_tarótot_, A toy-whistle. See torótot. (cf. bantútut, turútud,
turútuk).

_társo_, Joker, jester, clown, buffoon, merry-andrew,
zany. (cf. oslitán, lahoglahogán, paskín, payáso, alakáyo, bilyáko).

_tarúbtub_, (B) A piece of bamboo of two joints'
length. (cf. talúbtub).

_tarúgo_, (Sp. tarugo) A wooden peg or pin, a bolt; to pin or
bolt together, make a hole for the reception of a pin. Tarugóha
ang págbo. Fasten (Secure) the rafter with a wooden pin. Anó ang
itarúgo mo, sibúkaw ukón kawáyan? What are you going to make the pin
of? Sebucao wood or bamboo? May tarúgo na ang págbo? Is the rafter
fastened with a pin? (cf. paláy, pintál, lánsang).

_tarúm_, (B) To be sharp-edged, etc.; to be difficult to
digest. (cf. talúm).


_tárung_, To be or become just, honest, upright, righteous, blameless,
irreproachable. Pabuthoá ang ímo anák sa maáyo nga buluthóan, agúd
magálam siá kag magtárung man ang íya mga batásan. Send your son to a
good school in order that he may acquire learning as well as accustom
himself to the practice of righteousness (virtue, gentlemanly bearing,
irreproachable manners, good conduct). (cf. matárung, katarúngan,
panghanarúngan, tádlong).

_tárung_, (H) To behave, show good manners, be quiet. Pagtárung
kamó. Be quiet. Behave! (An expression used to quieten noisy children,
or the like). (cf. tádong).

_tarús_, (B) To accomplish, execute, perform; to proceed on an
intended trip or journey, to actually undertake (an intended
trip, etc.). Nakatarús akó kahápon magágto (sa pagágto) sa
Ilóngílong. (Nakadayón akó kahápon magkádto (sa pagkádto)
sa Ilóngílong). I carried out my intention of going to Iloilo
yesterday. Mapánaw akó ráad kahápon sa minurô nga X., pay warâ akó
makatarús, hay nagurán. (Malakát akó kúntà kahápon sa báryo nga
X., ápang walâ akó makadayón, kay nagulán). I should have liked
to go to the village X. yesterday, but did not go, because it
rained. (cf. dayón, kadayón).

_tarútud, tarútuk, tarútut_, A toy-whistle. See
torótot. (cf. bantútut).

_tása_, (Sp. taza) A small cup or bowl; a cupful. (cf. tasón, yahóng,
kám-aw).

_tása_, (Sp. tasa) Measure, rule, standard; valuation, rate, tax,
duty. (cf. taláksan, solókban; baláyran, buhís, típo).

_tasá_, (Sp. tasar) To prescribe a strict diet or allowance (of food,
money, etc.), to regulate, give scantily, allow barely sufficient
for one's needs. Tasahí ang masakít agúd madalî magáyo. Put the
sick person on low diet (short allowance) in order that he (she)
may recover soon. Ginatasá gid níya ang mga hilinguyángon sang íya
anák sa buluthóan. He allows his son a very limited amount of money
for his expenses at school. (cf. tasár).

_tasádo_, (From the Sp. tasar) Taxed, prescribed, restricted, limited,
regulated. Tasádo ang panggásto sinâ nga mga kabatáan. Only a limited
(restricted) amount of money is available for (the upkeep of)
those children. But it may also mean: Those children--can--,--are
allowed to--, spend very little (for personal, casual, private
needs). (cf. tasá, látid, pát-od).

_tásak_, To put one's foot in, step in, walk through or over, etc. See
ládag, tárag, túdag, etc.

_tasár_, (Sp. tasar) To appraise, value, estimate, charge, tax. Tasarí
siá kon pilá ang bilí siní. Make him an estimate of the price of
it. Let him know the cost of it. Gintasarán akó níya sing limá ka
mángmang siníng delárgo. He charged me five pesos for this pair of
trousers. Gintasár níla ang (Gintasarán níla siá sang) íya bág-o nga
baláy kag kútub karón pabayáron siá sing buhís nga tátlo ka písos
ang túig. They have appraised his new house and henceforth he must
pay for it a yearly tax of three pesos. (cf. bilí, pabilí).

_tasasyón_, (Sp. tasación) Valuation, appraisement, estimate of value;
duty, tax, impost. (cf. buhís, pabilí, tása, tasár).

_táslot_, Cowardice; to be (become, act) cowardly, etc. See tálaw.

_tásmad_, To be or become lazy, etc. See támad.

_tasón_, A large cup, tasse, bowl; basin, sauce-pan. (cf. yahóng,
káldo, kaldóhan, tása, kám-aw).

_tástas_, To break, rend, tear asunder, unpick, open seams, pick
out. Tastasá na lang iníng dáan nga delárgo. Tear this old pair of
trousers asunder at the seams. Tinástas níya ang báyò. She unpicked
the jacket. Waláy pulús ang mga tinahián siníng bág-ong báyò ko;
makapilá pa lang nagámit kag natástas (nagkatástas) na. The seams of
this new frock (blouse, jacket) of mine are no good; it has been used
only a few times and it is torn already (at the seams). (cf. tíngkas,
bíngkas, láslas, káskas).

_tástas_, To cut off, cut through, sever. (cf. tábtab, útud).

_tâtâ, tátà_, To fray (out), untwist, unravel, wear out, tear to
(in, into) rags (tatters), to break or crush so as to unloosen the
fibres; to ravel out, become untwisted, broken, crushed. Ang amó
nga kasubô nagtâtâ sang mga nahót sang íya tagiposóon. That sorrow
broke her heart (heart-strings). Natâtâ (Nagkatâtâ) na ang kalát,
ang púnta sang búgsok, etc. The rope has become untwisted, the point
of the stake got blunted, etc. (cf. sâsâ, tástas, lúsì, lúsò, nútnut,
nátnat, lumâ, pusâ).

_taták_, To knock--, brush--, scrape--, shake--, off, as mud from the
boots, earth from a shovel, ash from the point of a cigar, etc. Tataká
ang kán-on sa túbò. Shake the rice off the bamboo plate. Gintaták níya
ang balás sa íya kálò. He shook the sand off his hat. Tatakí sang ímo
abáno ang bulutángan sang abó. Knock the ash of your cigar into the
ash-tray. Nagsulúd siá sa kwárto nga walâ gánì magtaták sang lúnang sa
íya sapátos. He entered the room without so much as scraping (knocking,
shaking) the mud off his boots. (cf. pípi, píphi, púlpug; tapí).

_tátap_, Management, administration, care, attention, solicitude;
to look after, attend to (on, upon), see to, manage, administer,
take care of, treat with attention or care, be solicitous for (about,
concerning). Tatápa sing maáyo ang mga dumulúaw. Be very attentive
to the guests. Treat the visitors well. Attend well upon--, Pay
great attention to--, the visitors. Ginatátap níya sing maáyo ang
tanán nga mga butáng sa sulúd sang íya baláy. She manages everything
well--within her house,--in her own house,--at her home,--within
doors. Walâ gid siá pagtátap sinâ. He does not mind that. He is very
negligent or careless about it. Indì akó katátap (makatátap) sinâ,
kay walâ akó sing tinión. I cannot attend to it, because I have no
time. (cf. dumála, baláka, sagúd, sapák).

_tátat_, To speak very fluently or volubly; to know a language well,
speak a language with ease (facility). Abáw, nagatátat na gid lang
siá sang hámbal nga ininglés. Why, he speaks English quite fluently
now. (cf. tídà, tírà).

_tátay_, Dad, daddy, father, da, pa, papa, pop. Si tátay ko. (Ang
amáy ko). My father.

_tatáy_, The vocative of tátay.

_táting_, (English: tatting) Knotted lace made of stout sewing thread,
etc. by means of a kind of shuttle; to make such lace. Maálam ka balá
magtáting? Do you know how to make tatting? (cf. púnà--to make lace,
nets, etc. by means of a crochet).

_tátlo_, Three. Makátlo. Three times. Tagótlo. Three each.

_táton_, (B) We, the speaker included. (cf. kitá).

_tátsa_, (Sp. tachar) To blot out, efface, expunge, wipe out; drop,
let fall, dismiss; to censure, tax with, blame, reprehend. Dílì mo
pagtatsahón ang sinulát sa pisára. Don't blot out (erase) the writing
on the blackboard. Mabúdlay na magtátsa sang amó nga hágnà. Mabúdlay
na tatsahón ang amó nga hágnà. It is now difficult to drop that
proposition (proposal, motion). (cf. páhid, dágdag, táktak).

_tátso_, (Sp. tacho) A kind of pan provided with two lugs or handles;
sugar-boiler, evaporator.

_táub_, Flood-tide, high tide, high water; to be at high water, to
flow, rise, come in (of the tide). Nagatáub ang dágat. The sea is at
high tide. The tide--is coming in,--is flowing,--is rising. Nataúban
kamí sa báybay. We were overtaken by the high tide, whilst we were
on the beach. (cf. hunás--low tide).

_taúl_, (Sp. ataúd) Coffin, casket. (cf. lungón).

_tawá_, A piece of wood with four equal faces used in the game of
lónggong--dice.

_táwa, tawá_, (B) To laugh. Nagkatáwa (tána) kanákon
(kanákò). (Nagkádlaw siá sa ákon). He laughed at me. Táwa seems to
have been introduced from the Cebuano dialect.

_tawág_, To call, name, call upon, call upon by name, summon, cite,
term, denominate, designate, style. Táwga (tawagá) siá. Call him. Anó
ang pagtawág mo siníng búlak (kon hingádlan mo)? What do you call this
flower? What is the name of this flower? (if you would call it by its
name)? Tinawág ko siá, ápang índì siá buót magkarí. I have called him,
but he will not come. Ipatawág siá. Have him summoned. Let him be
called. Ipatawág siá sa ímo sologoón. Let your servant call (summon,
cite) him. (cf. ámpit, ábat).

_táwag_, To proclaim, publish, make public (as the banns of a marriage,
etc.). Ginatáwag silá karón. They are being proclaimed now. Tawágon
kamó sa tátlo ka domíngo. You will have your banns published on three
Sundays. Sán-o matápus ang pagtáwag sa ínyo? When will your banns be
published for the last time? (cf. láwag, bantálà).

_táwas_, A kind of medicine used as a remedy for a sore tongue,
especially against ugám; alum.


_tawás_, (B) To accompany, go with. (cf. upúd).

_tawá-táwa_, A kind of plant.

_tawá-táwa_, Dim. and Freq. of táwa--to laugh.

_táwgi_, A kind of beans. See táwri. Also: Peas and beans
soaked in water and starting to sprout, especially applied to
mónggo. (cf. táwri).

_táwhay_, Quiet, tranquillity, calm, calmness, quietness, peace,
peacefulness, repose, comfortable life or circumstances; to be or
become peaceful, quiet, tranquil, restful, at peace, without worry,
unruffled, undisturbed, comfortable, rather well to do. (cf. matáwhay,
katáwhay, linóng, tínong, dáet).

_tawhiyó, táwhiyo_, A kind of Chinese and also Japanese dish; salt
or pickled beans. (táwsyo, tawsyó id.).

_tawílì_, To work without wages, etc. See dágiaw, dágyaw, id.

_tawís-táwis_, To sip, suck, eat, take food. (cf. súyup, hígop, káon).

_táwo_, Man, person; human being. (cf. táo).

_tawohánon_, Human, pertaining to human nature. (cf. taohánon).

_tawól-tawól_, See tabúltabúl--to dangle, swing, move to and fro or
up and down.

_tawó-táwo_, Dim. of táwo. Anything resembling a man, etc. See taótáo.

_táwri_, A kind of beans. (cf. táwgi, hámtak, hántak, balátong,
patánì).

_táwsyo, tawsyó_, See tawhiyó--salt or pickled beans.

_táwtaw_, To throw, fling, hurl, let down, cast (anchor, a fishing
line, etc.); to bob, dangle, swing (in front of, or before,
another). Itáwtaw ang paón. Cast (throw out) the bait. Gintáwtaw
níla ang sinipít. They cast anchor. Tawtawí siá sang amó nga
pamangkotánon. Throw that question at him i.e. ask him that
question. (cf. húlug, habóy, tónton, bálang, pilák).

_tay_, Pa, dad, daddy, papa, pop, father, mostly vocative (for tatáy).

_tay_, In some places "tay" is used for the personal article "si". Tay
Pédro--Si Pédro--Peter.

_tayâ_, A bet, wager, stake; to bet, wager, stake, lay (a
bet). Nagatayâ (Nagatalayâ) silá. They are betting. Itayâ ko iníng
duhá ka písos sa siníng kabáyo. I am ready to put these two pesos on
this horse. Tayâ ka sa hárì. Tayaí ang hárì. Back the king. Put your
money on the king (card). (cf. pústa).

_táyà_, To hold in front (as a shield), to expose oneself to, be
ready or get ready for an attack, take a defensive position, to face,
confront. Gintáyà gid níya ang íya láwas sa mga kaáway. He faced the
enemy. He exposed his body to the enemy. Itáyà mo ang tamíng. Have
your shield ready. Hold the shield in front of you. (cf. tágà, súlay,
súray, atúbang, pangáman).

_tayabá_, A variety of úbi that is comparatively small in size.

_tayám_, Piquancy, raciness, tastiness; to be piquant, tasty,
stimulating, giving zest (of fruit, etc.); to be brackish, nauseous,
salty, unpalatable, sweetish (of water). Natayamán akó siníng páhò. I
find this mango delicious (piquant, luscious). Walâ kamí paginúm sang
túbì sinâ nga bobón, kay matayám. We never drink the water from that
well, for it is brackish. (cf. námit, námì, dálig; yágsim, yám-is).

_tayánhag_, To stare, gape, wonder, look surprised, stand agape,
view with eyes and mouth wide open. (cf. pamalúng).

_tayâ-táyà_, Dim. and Freq. of tayâ and táyà--to wager; to hold in
front, etc.

_táyhò_, A fabulous creature, half man and half horse; centaur,
hippocentaur. (cf. sáyhò id.).

_táyhong_, A large draught, drink, potion, pull; to drink greedily,
take a large (long) draught, to guzzle, gulp, toss off, empty at
one pull, drink deep, finish a glass (bottle) at one draught (gulp,
go, pull). Gintáyhong níya ang isá ka dakô nga báso nga tubâ. He
emptied a large glass of toddy at one gulp (go). Itáyhong na lang
ang ímo serbésa, kay malakát na kitá. Toss off your beer and let us
go. (cf. tíbiong, láb-ok, tayón, inúm).

_táyhop_, See táihop--to blow through a tube, etc.


_tayóbong_, A plant whose roots yield a viscous substance useful in
the preparation of glue, starch, etc.

_táyod_, (B) To halt, come to a halt or standstill, to stand, stand
still, stop, rest, remain, cease to go on. Indì kaw magtáyod (Indì
ka magtíndog) sa ganháan. Don't stand in the doorway. Gintayódan na
ang ingód kang bág-o nga áwang. (Gintindogán níya ang luyó sang bág-o
nga bobón). He stopped at the new well. (cf. tíndog, dúlug).

_tayód-táyod_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of táyod. To keep stopping in one's
walk, to walk a little and then stand still, to walk on again and
stop and so on. (cf. tindógtíndog).

_táyog_, To fly off far, to be thrown, flung, shied, let fly, cast,
pitched, chucked, tossed, to a distance. Nagtáyog ang bóla, kay naígò
sing támà. The ball flew off to a great distance, for it was hit with
great force. Matáyog siá sing panghabóy. He can throw far (a ball,
stone, etc.). Patayóga ang bóla. Throw the ball to a distance.

_táy-og_, A quake, shake, tremble, quiver; to shake, quake, tremble,
rock, toss. Tay-ogá ang íya baláy. Shake his house. Nabugtawán námon
kagáb-i ang línog, kay natáy-og (nagkatáy-og) ang búg-os ngga baláy
námon. We started up (awoke, woke up) last night at the earthquake,
for our whole house shook. (cf. úyog, húlag).

_táyok_, A sipping tube, pipe, reed; to sip through a tube or piece
of straw. Tayóki ang gátas. Sip the milk through a tube. Táyok nga
góma. A rubber tube.

_tayók-táyok_, Dim. and Freq. of táyok. Somewhat like--, resembling--,
a tube, etc.

_tayók-tayók_, A thin, slender piece of straw or reed; a kind of grass
(straw, reed). Its pliable stalk is much used for binding purposes,
for hat-making, basket-making, etc.

_tayón_, To pour out a liquid in a quick strong stream; to flow--,
issue--, in a stream, to gush out, rush out. Itayón ang túbig sa
bayóng. Pour the water out of the bamboo tube quickly.

_tayóyon_, Steady, continuous, uninterrupted, without stopping,
incessant, ceaseless, without--a stop,--pause,--cessation, straight on;
to do something steadily, etc. Tayóyon ang íla paglakát. They walked
on without--stopping,--a stop (halt). (cf. dáyon, waláy dulúgdúlug).

_táytay_, A bridge; to bridge, span with--, make--, build--, a
bridge. Nagatáytay silá sang subâ. Ginataytayán níla ang subâ. They
are--building a bridge over the river,--bridging the river. (cf. tuláy,
latayán).

_táyud_, To stand still, etc. See táyod.

_tayúyun_, Continuous, at once, straight on; to do at once,
etc. (cf. tayóyon).

_tê_, An exclamation: There now! What did I tell you! Didn't I tell
you! Té, nagaulán na. There now! It is raining. Didn't I tell you it
would (was coming on to) rain! (cf. tâ, tî).

_tedéum_, (Sp. Tedeum) Te Deum, thanksgiving.

_tehído_, (Sp. tejido) Cloth, stuff, textile, texture, woven materials,
dress-goods. (cf. hinabúl, téla, heneró, balayoón, nalaugón).

_téla_, (Sp. tela) Dress-goods, stuff, cloth, clothing material,
etc. (See tehído, talabasón, heneró).

_telegráma_, (Sp. telegrama) Telegraphic despatch, telegram, cablegram;
to send a telegram, to wire. Telegramáhi siá. Send him a telegram. Wire
him. (cf. hatúddulús).

_telegrapísta_, (Sp. telegrafista) Telegraphist, telegraph operator.

_telegrapó, telégrapo_, (Sp. telégrafo) Telegraph. (cf. hatúddulús).

_teleponéma_, (Sp. telefonema) Telephone message. (cf. hunghungánan).

_teleponísta_, (Sp. telefonista) Telephonist, telephone operator.

_telépono, teleponó_, (Sp. teléfono) Telephone; to
telephone. Teleponohán ko siá. I shall send him a telephone message. I
shall--phone him,--ring (call) him up on the phone. (cf. húnghung,
hunghungánan).

_teleskópyo_, (Sp. telescopio) Telescope. (cf. largabísta;
tagosílang--microscope).

_telón_, (Sp. telón) Curtain, drop-curtain, drop-scene. (cf. kúmbung).


_téma_, (Sp. tema) Theme, subject, text, composition, proposition.

_temblór, témblor_, (Sp. temblor) Quake, earthquake. (cf. línog,
táy-og).

_témpano_, (Sp. témpano) Drum-head, kettle-drum, drum-skin, tympan.

_témpla_, (Sp. templa, templar) Tempera, distemper (i.e. paint mixed
with size instead of oil); to temper, soften, mollify, moderate;
to blend (colours, cement, lime, etc.). (cf. lakót, sakót).

_templádo_, (Sp. templado) Temperate, moderate; tempered, blended.

_témplo_, (Sp. templo) Temple, church, shrine, sanctuary,
basilica. (cf. simbáhan).

_témporas_, (Sp. témporas) The ember days.

_tempráno_, (Sp. temprano) Early, early in the morning, soon,
premature, too soon; in (on) time, punctual. (cf. agáp, ahát, ága pa,
ága pa gid; pát-od).

_tenedór_, (Sp. tenedor) Fork i.e. table-fork. (cf. tulúblok, tulúslok,
itulúblok, itulúbuk).

_tenedór_, (Sp. tenedor) Holder, guardian, keeper. Tenedór de
líbros. Bookkeeper.

_teniénta_, (Sp. tenienta) The wife of a teniénte.

_teniénte_, (Sp. teniente) The head of a village, one who is in charge
of a small district or village under the supervision of a municipal
councillor; lieutenant.

_ténis_, (English) Tennis; to play tennis, lawn-tennis.

_tenisán_, Tennis-court.

_tenór_, (Sp. tenór) Tenor, a male singer who sings the tenor part
in music; tenor, sense of language, condition, state, current, drift;
spirit, meaning, purport.

_tentasyón_, (Sp. tentación) Temptation, enticement, allurement;
also used as an exclamation: Blast it! Hang it! What a
nuisance! (cf. panuláy).

_teólogo_, (Sp. teologo) Theologian, divine.

_teolohía_, (Sp. teologia) Theology, divinity.

_terál_, (Sp. telar) Loom, weaving loom as found in nearly every
house throughout the Philippines.

_termómetro_, (Sp.) Thermometer.

_térna_, (Sp. terna) Ternary, (three names submitted for an office);
a game at dice.

_térna_, A kind of banana. (cf. túndal, kúndal, karintóndan).

_térno_, (Sp. terno) A suit of clothes; a set of vestments or the
like. (cf. huégo).

_térsya_, (Sp. tercia, terciar) The third part, one third; to divide
by three; to charge one third or even one half of the principal
in interest; to go shares in such a way that one third goes to one
person and two thirds to the other. Gintersyahán níya akó. He charged
me 50% in interest, e.g. for every two bushels of rice supplied
by him I have to pay him back three bushels. Gintérsya ko ang íya
dútà. I tilled (cultivated, raised crops on) his land for one (or,
as the case may by, by special agreement, for two) third (thirds)
of the product. Tersyahón ta ang ganánsya sang áton balígyà. Let us
go shares in the profit from the sale, I to receive one third (two
thirds) and you to receive two thirds (one third). (cf. tátlo).

_tersyóhan_, A measure containing one third of a given standard
unit. Tersyóhan nga pulakán. A pulakán measure containing one third
of a gántang. (cf. talatlóhan).

_tesoréro_, (Sp. tesorero) Treasurer. Tesoréro Munisipál. Municipal
Treasurer. Tesoréro Probinsyál. Provincial Treasurer. (cf. kuymibánwa,
kuymipuód, kúymi).

_testaménto_, (Sp. testamento) Last will, testament. (cf. Ang katapúsan
nga bílin, tógon, sógò, buút; testár).

_testár_, (Sp. testar) To make a last will or testament; to bequeathe,
will to, leave to. (cf. testaménto).

_testígos_, (Sp. testigo) Witness. (cf. sáksi).

_testimónyo_, (Sp. testimonio) Testimony, attestation, evidence,
proof. (cf. pamatúod, paháyag, sáksi).

_tétano, tetanó_, (Sp. tétano, tétanos) Tetanus, lockjaw.


_tetéra_, (Sp. tetera) Tea pot, tea kettle. (cf. tsaréra).

_téutéu_, To charm, cast a spell over, a wizard's trick by means
of which he is believed by the credulous to be capable of forcing
someone or something to appear or come forward. Ginteuteuán siá sang
manugtéutéu. The wizard caused him to appear (by means of a spell
cast over him).

_téutéu_, To frighten or intimidate children, etc., by showing them
the rod or whip.

_téwtéw_, See téutéu.

_téxto_, (Sp. texto) Text, quotation; writing, the original words of
an author; a verse or passage of Holy Scripture. (cf. sulát, sinulatán,
silíng, ginasilíng, púlong).

_ti_, (B) Has the same meaning as the indefinite "sing". Warâ
ti--walâ sing.

_tî_, There now! Why! Well! Didn't I tell you, or the like. Tî, ngáa
ári ka man dirí? Well, why are you here? Tî, náno (anáno) sa ímo? Now
then, what is your opinion? What is it to you? What have you got to
say about (to do with) it? Tî, ári na siá dirí. Look, he is here now,
(didn't I tell you he would come). (cf. tâ, tê).

_tíà_, (Sp. tia) Aunt, aunty; mistress, dame, matron; good
old--woman,--soul. (cf. darâ, mánding).

_tiábaw_, A plaintive cry; to yell, shriek, scream, squeal, squeak,
utter a shrill cry, cry out in a loud, shrill voice. (cf. siagít,
tiángak).

_tiád_, To strut, walk or stalk about proudly with the head thrown
back, walk with a lofty, proud gait. (cf. liád, biád-ad, biádbíad).

_tiágdok_, Headlong, head foremost, etc. See tibusók, tígduk, túgduk,
tiándok).

_tiahád_, Leaning backwards, reeling, tottering; to stumble,
reel, totter, be in danger of falling or tumbling over
(backwards). (cf. tiyahád).

_tiáhoy_, The setting of a cauldron, etc. See tiyáhoy.

_tián_, Womb, uterus; stomach, belly, abdomen. (cf. taguángkan,
balatán-an, búsung; pús-on, solóksolók).

_tiándok_, Going down straight and deep, straight down, direct,
vertical, said of roots, posts, etc. that go down straight and deep
into the ground, or the like. (cf. tíndog, tádlong, tanús).

_tiángak_, To whine, utter a plaintive cry, to squeal, squeak, express
with a whine; a squeal, squeak, plaintive sound, shrill cry (as of
an animal in pain, of a fretful child, etc.). Nagatiángak ang idô,
kay nabôboán sing maínit nga túbig. The dog is whining, because hot
water has been poured over it. (cf. tiábaw, siagít).

_tiangáw_, See tanangáw--an insect that is very injurious to rice.

_tiánggi_, A little shop, selling booth, small shed where tubâ,
fish, vegetables, etc. are sold; a retail grocer's shop or store;
a barroom. (cf. tiénda, talangwáyan).

_tíaw_, Ridicule, derision, mockery, scoffing, banter, raillery,
chaff, joke; to ridicule, deride, banter, chaff, rally, twit, quiz,
poke fun at, make fun of, tease, mock, scoff at, make or crack jokes
about. Indì ka magtíaw sa ákon. Don't make fun of me. Dílì tíaw
inâ. That is not a joke. I am not joking. Dílì tíaw nga kwárta ang
íya nga gingásto. He has spent a lot of money.

_tiáw-tíaw_, Dim. and Freq. of tíaw. Indì mo siá pagtiáwtiáwan. Don't
crack jokes at his expense. Don't trifle with him. Don't make a butt of
him. Don't joke him (about something he has done or said). (cf. sónlog,
ulígyat, yagutâ, lahógláhog).

_tiáyon_, To live together as husband and wife, have marital relations,
be married, wedded, in wedlock. Ang íla pagtiáyon----. Their married
life----. Nagatiáyon na silá. They are married. They live together as
husband and wife. Magtiáyon kamó sing matárung sonô sang binabuút sang
Diós. Live an honest married life according to the will of God. Ang mga
magtiáyon. Those in wedlock. The married people (persons). (cf. kasál,
pangasáwa, asawá, hilúngug).

_tibába_, A venomous insect with a sting that is very painful; a kind
of tarantula spider.

_tibákla_, Grass-hopper. (cf. apán--locust).

_tíbal_, Surfeit, disgust, horror, abhorrence of (for), loathing;
to nauseate, fill with disgust, give a person a dislike to a thing,
sicken a person of a thing; to have more than enough of a thing, to
loathe, be disgusted with, have a repugnance or aversion to, feel
an antipathy against, have a great dislike to, be sick of, have a
distaste for, receive a good lesson the very memory of which excites
unpleasant feelings. Natíbal (Nagkatíbal) na ang ginháwa níya sang
káon sang báboy. He is sick of pork. He cannot bear the sight of pork
(having eaten too much of it before). Gintíbal siá sang hánot sang
íya amáy. He received such a flogging from his father that--it will
be a lesson to him,--he has had enough for some time. Natíbal siá
sang pagpangabúdlay dídto. He has now an aversion (a repugnance)
to the hard work (drudgery) there. He has had more than enough of
drudgery in that place. (cf. sumó, súm-od, taká, dúdlà, túbal).

_tibanbádò_, (Estéban Bádò) A nickname for one who makes it a point to
go to social entertainments where there is plenty of food and drink; a
gourmand, glutton, epicure, greedy feeder or eater. (cf. dalók, kágud).

_tibáwas_, To get free, escape, get away unscathed, etc. See talíbwas,
luás, bagít, talímwas, tímwas, etc.).

_tíbhag_, A landslide, land-slip; to crack or break off and fall
down, to crumble away, to undermine and wash away, be undermined
and washed away. Nahúlug siá sa pángpang, kay natíbhag (nagkatíbhag)
ang íya tinindogán. He fell down the river-bank, for the ground he
stood on gave way under his feet. Tibhagá na lang iníng litík nga
dútà. Break down this ground that is cracked (and ready to fall). Ang
íya talámnan gináb-ab sang subâ, kag natibhagán sing kapín sa duhá
ka dupá nga kalaparón. His field was undermined by the river and a
part of more than four yards in width was washed away. (cf. tímpa,
típhag, hunâ, dálhay).

_tibí_, To be on the edge of, stand in a perilous or unsafe position,
so as to be in danger of tumbling over or falling down. Nagatibí
na lang iníng baláy sa pángpang sang subâ. This house is standing
perilously near the edge of the river bank. Indì ka magpatibí sa
pángpang, kay básì matíbhag kag mahúlug ka. Don't stand near the edge
of the bank, for it might give way and you might fall down. Indì mo
pagpatibihón ang báso sa lamésa, kóndì pasámla gid. Don't put the
glass near the edge of the table, but put it down at a safe distance
from the edge.

_tíbias_, To slip, make a false step and slip, to lose one's balance
by a false step. Nakatíbias ang tiíl ko sa bató kag natúmba akó. My
foot slipped on the stone and I tumbled over. (cf. dúpias, dalín-as).

_tíbiong_, To pour in liquids quickly and with some force, as by
turning upside down the vessel from which the liquid is poured; to toss
off, pour down the throat, empty a glass or bottle by putting it to the
mouth. Itíbiong mo ang túbig nga árà sa bayóng sa tadyáw. Tibiongí ang
tadyáw sang túbig nga árà sa bayóng. Empty (Pour) the water from the
bamboo tube into the earthen jar. Itíbiong na lang iníng isá ka báso
(botílya) nga serbésa, kay mapaúlì na kitá. Just empty (toss off,
pour down your throat) this glass (bottle) of beer, for we are now
going home. (cf. tayón; inúm).

_tibí-tibí_, Dim. and Freq. of tibí. (cf. panibítibí).

_tíb-ok_, To ascend, rise, said of smoke, dust, etc. Nagatíb-ok ang
asó sang íya tabákò. The smoke of his cigar is rising. (cf. túb-ok,
timbúok, íbwal).

_tíbong_, To shoulder, carry on the shoulder, carry a person pickaback
(pick-back). Gintíbong níya akó. He carried me on his shoulders. Kon
madálum ang túbig sang subâ mapatíbong akó sa táo. If the water of the
river is deep I shall have myself carried across on the shoulders of
a man. Ipatíbong mo sa íya ang bakág, bató, bátà, etc. Let him carry
the basket, the stone, the child, etc. on his shoulder. Tibónga akó sa
tabók sa subâ. Carry me pickaback across the river. (cf. abága, abá).

_tíb-ong_, To raise, lift up (the heart, the eyes, etc.); to raise to a
higher social position, promote, elevate, advance. Itíb-ong mo ang ímo
kasíngkásing sa lángit. Lift up your heart towards heaven. Ginatíb-ong
siá sang íya mga sumalákdag sa amó nga palangakóan. His supporters
are promoting him to (helping him to obtain) that office. (cf. báyaw,
bayáw; hangád, tánglà, tangâ).

_tibó-tíbo_, A small snail with a tapering spiral shell; also
the empty shell that is often burned to lime for betelnut
chewing. (cf. tambarúkò).

_tíbsok_, Headlong; to fall down head foremost; to drive in, ram down,
plant, set up (a post, etc.). (cf. tibusók, búgsok, tígduk, túgduk).


_tíbsol_, To be or become plump, fat, full, filled out, said of
persons, fruit, etc. Natibsolán akó siníng mga kadiós. These
cadios-peas seem to me to be very full or plump. Nagtíbsol na
ang íya nga písngi. His cheeks have grown fat now (have filled
out). (cf. típsul, tibúnog, matipólon).

_tibúd_, A jar or pot of earthenware, often used to hide or bury
money in, to hold pickled fish, mangoes, etc.

_tibúdbud_, To talk much, prattle, prate, be a chatterbox. The form
patibúdbud is more in use. (cf. búrà, wákal, etc.).

_tibudbúdan_, A chatterbox, a great talker. (cf. buraán, wakalán,
etc.).

_tibúdol_, Fat, plump, filled out, full; to be or become full,
etc. (cf. ribusól, tíbsol, mabahól, ribóok, tibúnog).

_tibúd-tíbud_, Dim. of tibúd--jar, pot.

_tibúnog_, Plump, fat, full, stout, thick, etc. See tibúdol, etc.

_tibusók, tibúsok_, Headlong, head first, head foremost; to fall
down from a height in such a way that the end, point or head reaches
the ground first and buries itself in it, to fall down (throw down)
headlong; to ram, drive down, plant, set up (a stake, post, upright,
or the like). (cf. tíbsok, paníbsok).

_tíbyas_, See tíbias--to slip, etc.

_tibyáyong_, A kind of vine yielding a gourd of a roundish shape.

_tíbyong_, See tíbiong. (cf. tayón).

_tídà_, To speak fluently, talk a language well. (cf. tátat, tírà).

_tidál_, Loom, weaving-machine. See terál id.

_tídlak_, To set in the soil, plant, sow; to begin (start,
commence)--sowing,--planting,--building a house. (cf. túdlak).

_tídong_, A cast, throw; to cast, throw, fling away; to reject,
cast aside a thing as a trifle or as of no use. (cf. tírong).

_tiémpo_, (Sp. tiempo) Time, epoch, period, era, age, generation,
term, date, season; weather, state (condition) of the sky (atmosphere,
wind). Maáyo ang tiémpo. The weather is lovely (fine, beautiful). It's
a lovely day. Maláin (gid) ang tiémpo. The weather is bad (most
unpleasant). Kon pabór nga hángin kag maáyo ang tiémpo----. Wind and
weather permitting----. Sádto nga tiémpo----. At that time----. In
those days----. Walâ akó sing tiémpo. I have no time (leisure,
off-time, time on hand). Sang úna nga tiémpo----. Formerly----. In
bygone days----. Long (Many years) ago----. (cf. panahón, túig,
dág-on, táon, tión, tig-).

_tiénda_, (Sp. tienda) Shop, stall, booth, store, warehouse, emporium;
market, market-place. (cf. balaligyáan, almasín, tiánggi, talangwáyan,
tínda, tindáhan).

_tig-_, A prefix denoting the agent, time or season of what the root
implies, e.g. tigpalamunít--the season for fishing with hook and
line, from bunít, pamunít; tigpalanyagá--dinner time, dining hour,
from panyága; tigpalamúgo--the time when the chickens come home to
roost, from púgo, pamúgo; tigilítlog--the egg-laying season, from
ítlog; tigsápul-- a councillor, adviser, from sápul; tigtampálas,
tigpasipála--a wretch, criminal, felon, blasphemer, etc., from
tampálas, pasipála; tigsákdag--a helper, supporter, advocate, from
sákdag, etc. etc. (cf. tag-).

_tíg-a_, (H) Hardness; to harden, become hard, hardened, unyielding,
indurate, unimpressionable, difficult to make an impression upon,
to be hard, firm, stiff, dense, stubborn, obstinate, self-willed,
and the like. Nagtíg-a na iníng tinápay. This bread has hardened,
has become hard. Ginpatíg-a níya ang íya tagiposóon. He hardened his
heart. (cf. áwot, tígdà, tígdas).

_tíg-ab_, To yawn, gape, belch, gulp, eructate. Nagtíg-ab siá, kay
nakakáon siá sing dasókdasók. He yawned after having crammed himself
with food. (cf. panghúy-ab).

_tigádlum_, A charm by means of which one can make himself invisible
and enter, or be present, everywhere without being noticed. (cf. tig-,
dulúm).

_tigadlúman_, One who is in possession of a charm called
tigádlum. Yádtong babáylan, konó, tigadlúman. That sorcerer, they say,
has a tigádlum charm (and can make himself invisible).

_tigaláni, tig-aláni_, The rice-harvesting season, (rice-) harvest
time, the time between October and February. (cf. áni, tagaláni).


_tigálbung_, Mudhole, a worn-out part of a road, etc. See
tigál-ub. (cf. linggálhub, danáw).

_tigál-ub_, Mudhole, washed-out parts of a road, pool, hole, hollow,
groove, deep rut. (cf. linggáhub, tigálbung, danáw).

_tigána_, Reserved, laid up, ready, provided, seen to,
in preparation, in readiness, kept in reserve for; to get
ready, make--ready,--preparation, provide for, see to, keep
in--reserve,--readiness for, lay up, retain, hold over to. Mabakál akó
sing isá ka búgsò nga kárne nga itigána (pagaitigána) sa panyága. I
shall buy a piece of meat in preparation for dinner. Nagtigána siá sa
ákon sing madámò nga mga páhò. Gintigán-an (Gintigánhan, gintiganáhan)
akó níya sing madámò nga mga páhò. He got many mangoes ready for
me. Tigán-i (Tigánhi, tiganáhi) silá sing kán-on. Prepare rice for
them. Itigána sa ákon ang pagkáon. Get ready something for me to
eat. Keep some food in reserve for me. Natigána (Naáman, nahándà) na
balá ang tanán nga mga kinahánglan sa pándut? Is everything ready for
the feast? Tigánhan mo silá sang íla nga kinahánglan. See to their
needs. Get (Make) ready what they want. (cf. hímos, híwat, híkot,
tigáyon, áman, hándà).

_tíg-ang_, To put a kettle, pan, etc. on the fire; to boil rice,
cook rice. Tig-angá ang bugás. Boil the rice. Tig-angí silá sing isá
ka gántang nga bugás. Boil one ganta of rice for them. Walâ pa silá
magtíg-ang. They have not cooked the rice yet. (cf. sún-ad, sín-ad).

_tig-angán_, Fire-place, hearth; tripod; rice-kettle, rice-pot,
rice-boiler. (cf. tíg-ang; sun-adán, sin-adán, kólon, kalán,
sig-angán).

_tigásaw_, A kind of red ants with a painful bite. (cf. lásgà).

_tigatubáng, tigatúbang_, One who stands before or represents another;
representative, senator, delegate. (cf. tigpangatubáng, tinugyánan,
tulugyánan, pumahaláyag).

_tígaw_, A shrub (small tree). Its fruit is used for fishing by
the túba-method.

_tigáwnan_, An angler's rod, fishing rod; angle. (cf. tigdawán).

_tígay_, To lavish, bestow upon in love and affection; to cherish,
fondle, caress, treat with great kindness. Amó inâ galî ang bálus
(ibálus mo) sang tanán nga kalolô nga gintígay ni nánay mo sa ímo! So,
that is the way of showing your gratitude for all the affection your
mother has lavished upon you! (cf. hátag hálung, dálò, ánggà).

_tigáykay_, The empty shells of various shell-fishes as often found
on the beach. (cf. pakinháson).

_tigáylo_, (B) Exchange, interchange, reciprocality, mutuality;
to exchange, interchange one thing for another, to reciprocate,
give in exchange for, give in return, repay, recompense. Tigáylo
diá kang kabúdlay mo. (Bálus iní sang ímo kabúdlay). This is to
repay you (This is in recompense) for your trouble. Tigaylohí ti
labí kamarahálon nga regálo kang sa dará na. (Balúsi siá sing labí
kamalahálon nga hátag sang sa amóma nga íya dalá). Give him a better
gift in exchange for the present of provisions he has brought. Anó ang
ikatigáylo ko kanímo kariá? (Anó ang ikabálus ko sa ímo sinâ)? What can
I give you in exchange for it? How shall I be able to repay (requite)
you? (cf. bálus, ílis).

_tigáyon_, Meet, fit, apt, proper, suitable, advisable; to bring
about, get done, procure, provide, see to, arrange. Dílì inâ tigáyon
sa----. That is not proper or fit for----. That is not the right method
(way, means) to----. Kon matigáyon mo ang ákon ginakinahánglan sa ímo
pagapasalamátan ko ikáw sing dakô. If you can procure for me what I
need I shall be very grateful to you. (cf. patigáyon, híkot, hímos,
híwat, áman, tigána; ígò, ángay, síbò, dápat, takús).

_tigáy-tígay_, Dim. and Freq. of tígay--to lavish, etc.

_tigbabaé, tigbabayé_, The parents, relations and friends of a woman,
usually of a bride or wife. (tig-, babáe; the relations of the man
are called the tiglalakí, from tig-, laláki).

_tígbak_, To sever at a single stroke, cut--, slice--, through, cut
off at one swing with a sharp-edged instrument; to kill outright; to
die--forthwith,--at once,--on the spot. Gintígbak níya ang ságing. He
cut down the banana at a stroke. Tigbaká ang ághò. Cut or slice through
the ághò-tree. Ginlúthang níya ang buyóng nga natígbak sa gilayón. He
shot the brigand that (was hit and) died on the spot. Naglabô siá sa
íya sa pagtígbak sa íya. He smote him with the intention of killing
him on the spot. (cf. tígbas).


_tigbaléu, tigbaléw_, To become changed or transformed into something
else, to be metamorphosed or transmogrified. Nagtigbaléu ang kuríng
kag nahímo nga idô. The cat was changed into a dog. (cf. bálhin,
báylo, baléu).

_tígban, tígbon_, From tigíb--to chisel.

_tígbas_, To cut off, sever at one stroke; to kill (die) outright,
etc. See tígbak.

_tigbatás_, Sufferer; martyr. (cf. tig-, batás).

_tigbató_, A piece, one piece; character, type, letter of the
alphabet. (cf. tig-, bató).

_tígbaw_, A kind of reed that is very common near river-beds.

_tígbong_, To lop off, cut off the end (top, tip, point) of a
bamboo, or the like. Tigbongí ang kawáyan. Cut off the tip of the
bamboo. (cf. ótbong).

_tigbulukád_, See tigburukád.

_tigbulungá_, Season of ripening fruits, time when the fruits
ripen. (cf. búnga).

_tigburukád_, The season of flowers (blossoms), flowering
season. (cf. bukád).

_tígdà_, To be or become distinct, sharp, clear in expression,
etc. (cf. áthag).

_tígdas_, To be or become hard, to harden; be clear (of pronunciation,
speech, etc.). (cf. tíg-a, tígdà, áthag).

_tigdawán_, An angler's rod (and line), fishing-rod. (cf. tigáwnan).

_tígduk_, Vein, layer, stratum (of minerals). Tígduk sang buláwan. A
gold vein.

_tígduk_, To plant, drive in, thrust. Itígduk ang sangá, sang ághò,
serigwélas, etc. Plant (put into the ground) the branch of the
ághò-tree, the plum-tree, etc. (cf. túgduk id.).

_tiggaláling_, (H) Sugar-milling season. (cf. gáling, galíng).

_tighabagát_, Season of the southwest wind, the time between July
and November. (cf. habágat).

_tíghok_, Shortness of breathing, respiratory difficulties, asthma,
dyspnoea, apnoea; to be asthmatic, breathe with difficulty,
to wheeze and cough, as those that are in an advanced state of
consumption. Nagatíghok na si Fuláno. N.N. breathes with difficulty
now. Ginatíghok siá. He is suffering from asthma. (cf. hápò, hímpok).

_tigî_, Crust, incrustment, rind, pastry-crust, crackling of roast pig
(barbecue); hard, crusty, incrusted, covered with a crust, having a
hard or baked exterior. (cf. tígì).

_tígì_, To bake, brown, crust, incrust, roast well, make hard
or crusty. Tigía ang letsón. Roast the barbecue or sucking-pig
well. Natígì na ang tinápay. The bread is baked now. The bread has
(become coated with) a crust. Nagakatígì na ang tinápay. The bread
is beginning to form a crust. Anó ang nakatígì (nagtígì) sang bagól
mo? What baked your head i.e. why do you look as if your head had
been baked or roasted?

_tigí_, A pebble, piece of wood, or the like, placed under coins in
the game of tángga; to put under (underneath); in an obscene sense
equal to dítil.

_tigíb_, Chisel; to chisel, mortise, gouge out. Tígbi ang káhoy dirí
kag sakálan. Mortise the wood in this place and bracket it. Iníng
dáan nga halígi índì na makasírbe, kay madámò sing tinígban. This
old post won't do, because it is full of mortises (holes made by a
chisel). Tígba lang ang labáw sang káhoy. Chisel off the superfluous
part of the wood. Anó ang itigíb ko, kay walâ akó sing tigíb? What
shall I chisel with, as I have no chisel? (cf. sinsíl).

_tíg-ik_, A yell, shriek, squeal, squeak, loud outcry; to yell,
shriek, squeal, squeak, utter a sharp shrill cry (of but a moment's
duration). Ang ilagâ (balábaw) nga naipít (nalígpit) nagtíg-ik. The
rat that was caught squeaked (gave a squeak). Ginpíslit níya ang íya
bútkon túbtub nga nagtíg-ik siá. He pinched his arm till he yelled
with pain. (cf. iwík, tiyábaw, siagít, tiángak, sínggit).

_tigilinít, tig-ilinít_, The hot (warm) season. (cf. tig-, ínit).

_tígis_, To pour out, empty (out), drain, exhaust; to drink off,
finish off, toss off; to transfuse, pour from one vessel into
another (particularly said of liquids). Itígis (Tigísa) ang bíno sa
báso. Pour the wine into the glass. Tigísi ang tádyaw sang túbig nga
árà sa bayóng. Pour the water from the bamboo tube into the earthen
jar. Gintígis níya sing gólpe ang isá ka báso nga serbésa. He drained
(tossed off) a glass of beer at one draught (go). (cf. tíbiong, tayón,
bóbò, táyhong, láb-ok, inúm).


_tigisán_, Glass, tumbler, cup, bowl, pitcher, chalice, etc., anything
used for pouring or containing liquids. (cf. tígis; tagayán).

_tigí-tígi_, Dim. and Freq. of tigí. Also: an insect that is injurious
to plants, particularly to balúnggay, búyò, etc.

_tigkahóy, tigkáhoy_, Wood, wood-work, timber, materials for the wooden
part or wooden structure of a house, cart, etc. as distinct from stone,
iron, cement, or the like. Ang mga tigkahóy sináng baláy gabúk na,
ápang ang padér maáyo pa. The wooden structure of that house is rotten,
but the stone-walls are strong yet. (cf. káhoy).

_tigkamás_, See tikamás, singkamás--a vine with edible roots.

_tiglalakí_, The kinsmen, relatives, friends of a man, usually of a
husband or bridegroom. (cf. tigbabaé--the relatives, etc. of a woman).

_tiglapák_, A spring-trap; provided with a spring, catching (that
catches) by means of a spring. Siód nga tiglapák--a spring-trap,
a trap that catches its victim by means of a spring. (cf. siód nga
tigsohót--a trap that closes on its prey). (cf. tig-, lápak).

_tiglawás_, One who represents another, representative, delegate,
commissioner, proxy, charge d'affaires. (cf. tig-, láwas).

_tigmatá_, An inflammation of the eyes. (cf. tagimatá, taghimatá).

_tigô_, To be scarce, rare, scanty, inadequate,
insufficient. (cf. íwat, hínà, íngol, higúshigús, maápsà).

_tígpak_, To sever, cut through; kill outright. See tígbak, tígbas.

_tigpakilála_, Toast-master, usher, one who introduces
strangers. (cf. tig-, pa-, kilála; manugpakilála id.).

_tigpangatubáng, tigpangatúbang_, One that confronts a situation
or presents himself (in stead of another); representative, senator,
delegate. (cf. tigatubáng, mangangatubáng, tinugyánan).

_tigpasáw_, Plash, splash, flop; to plunge, drop, fall, dash,
precipitate oneself into water, mud, or the like, with a splash;
to plash, splash. Nakabatî akó sang tigpasáw sang íya nga láwas
sa túbig. I heard the splash of his body (when he fell) into
the water. Tumigpasáw siá sa túbig. He fell into the water with
a splash. Nagámbak siá sa pángpang kag nagtigpasáw sa subâ. He
jumped down from the bank and precipitated himself into the
river. (cf. támsak, tagasák, lágsak, lágpok, pisík).

_tígpò_, Break, tear, severing, disconnection; to disjoin, disconnect,
break off, sever, separate from. (cf. útud, búgtò, búgras, bánggì,
sánggì, sipî).

_tigraramíg_, (B) The cool or cold season, winter. (cf. ramíg, lamíg,
tigturúgnaw).

_tígre_, (Sp. tigre) Tiger; a cruel, ferocious person, brute, tyrant.

_tigsalabúd_, (H) Sowing season. (sábud).

_tigsaláb-ug_, (H) Sowing season. (sáb-ug).

_tigsápul_, A party to a discussion, meeting or agreement; a
member of a board, or the like; adviser, councillor, counsellor,
counsel. (cf. sápol, kasápul).

_tigsará_, (B) To be scared, frightened, afraid. Nagatigsará ang
ginháwa na, hay nagadagóob. (Nakulbaán (Ginatagalióg) siá, kay
nagadagóob). He is scared because it is thundering. (cf. hádluk,
dírham).

_tigsará_, (B) One each. (cf. tig-, isá, tag-isá, tag-isará).

_tígsik_, To fly off, disperse, scatter; to sprinkle,
besprinkle. (cf. tágsik, ásik, ápok, wisík, lágsik).

_tígsim_, Sip, taste, mouthful; to taste, try, sip, take a small
draught of a liquid. Tigsimí iníng bíno, tubâ, sabáw, etc. Taste this
wine, tubâ, sauce, etc. Walâ akó katígsim (makatígsim) sang íya mga
ilímnon. I have not tasted (any of) his drinks. I have had no occasion
to try his drinkables (wines, liquors). (cf. tiláw, dímdim, samít,
dimól, sagámsam).

_tigtampálas_, Evil-doer, malefactor, delinquent, felon,
criminal, offender, one who has committed a heinous crime or
offence. (cf. tampálas).

_tigtulúgnaw_, (H) Autumn, winter, cold season. (cf. túgnaw).

_tigturúgnaw_, (B) See tigtulúgnaw, tigraramíg.


_tigúlang_, (H) Old, aged, advanced in years; to age, grew old,
advance (increase) in years. Nagtigúlang na siá. He has now become
an old man. Kon buút ka magtigúlang likawán mo ang tanán nga mga
kalakasán. If you wish to live long, avoid all excesses. Tigúlang na
siá kag malúya sing láwas. He is now old and worn out. (cf. mál-am).

_tigulángit, tigulangít_, Humorously used for tigúlang. Elderly,
not young; graybeard, honest veteran, old chap, old fellow (blade),
crone, old fogy; old woman, dam, gossip. (cf. mál-it).

_tigúlgul_, To cut off, clip, shear, fleece, crop. (cf. gúlgul, bulúg,
gúnting, alót).

_tiguná, tig-uná_, First, foremost; leader, pioneer. (cf. úna,
nahauná).

_tíhab_, Opening, slit, slot, hole; to slit open, cut a hole. Tihában
mo ang hénero. Cut the cloth. Tinihában níya ang ganháan, agúd
makaági dirâ ang kuríng. He cut a hole in the door for the cat to
go through. Tinihában sang swítik ang íya pálhuk kag ginkuháan níya
siá sang íya kwárta. The thief cut a hole in his pocket (cut out his
pocket) and stole his money. (cf. tábas).

_tihéras_, (Sp. tijeras) Scissors, shears; folding field-bed, camp-cot,
camp-bed; camp-bedstead, stretcher. (cf. gúnting; higdáan, tulabón,
liálía, urimón).

_tihín_, To tiptoe, stand or walk on the tips of one's toes. Dî mo
pagtihinón ang ímo paglakát. Don't walk on tiptoe. Tihín ka agúd
makakítà ka sa únhan. Stand on tiptoe, that you may see farther ahead.

_tihól_, To whistle, but the augmentative form panihól is more used.

_tihól-tihól_, Dim. and Freq. of tihól. Also: to woo, court,
pay--one's attentions to,--one's addresses to, make love to, make
advances to. Sín-o ang ginatihóltihól ni Fuláno? Whom is N.N. paying
his attentions to? Whom is N.N. courting?

_tihóng_, A kind of bird.

_tíid_, Observation, watch, surveillance; to observe, watch
narrowly, have (keep) an eye on, watch a person's steps, keep under
surveillance. Tiíra (-ída) siá. Watch him. Keep an eye on him. Ang mga
bátà nagatíid sang haló, píspis, etc. The boys are watching the iguana,
the bird, etc. (in order to catch it). Ginatíid gid níya ang mga gího
kag húlag ni Fuláno nga ginahunâhunáan nga siá amó ang makáwat. He
is carefully watching N.N.'s movements, as he is suspected of having
committed the theft. (cf. bántay, panílag).

_tiíl_, (H) Foot, paw, pad, leg; leg (foot) of a table,
etc. (cf. kahíg, sikí, páa; tiilán).

_tiilán_, The lower part of, the end or foot of. Sa tiilán sang----. At
the foot----. At the lower part of----. Sa tiilán sang krus. At the
foot of the cross. Sa tiilán sang látok. At the end (foot) of the
table. (cf. sikwayán; sa olohán--at the head of).

_tíin_, To drain, empty, pour out to the last drop, to exhaust,
empty--completely,--to the last drop (holding the receptacle upside
down). Tiína ang sulúd sang botílya. Pour out the contents of the
bottle to the last drop. Empty the bottle. Tiíni akó sang tíntà
siníng tolotádyaw. Pour out all the ink in this jar (and give it to
me). Natíin na ang túbig sa bayóng; súdli liwán. The bamboo water-tube
is empty; fill it again. (cf. tîtî, tíbiong, tayón, bóbò).

_tiís_, To endure, bear, suffer undergo. Madámò nga mga kalisdánan
ang ákon gintiís sa pagtúman sinâ. I bore many hardships in carrying
out that order. (cf. batás, ílub, ántus).

_tikâ_, To peep out from behind a screen, etc., to show one's
head suddenly from behind a curtain, or the like, to pop out one's
head. Tikaá siá. Peep (Look) at him. Show him your head. Gintikâ níya
akó sa pihák sang biómbo. He peeped at me from behind the screen.

_tikáb_, To open one's mouth, say, utter, give expression to. Walâ
siá makatikáb sang íya nga kinahánglan. He could not say what he
wanted. (cf. bungát).

_tíkad_, To take a firm stand by putting one leg forward or backward,
to plant--, put--, set--, one's feet firmly against, to dig one's
heels into the ground. Gintíkad níya ang íya tiíl sa bató kag ginbútong
(butóngon) ang kalát. He set his foot firmly against the stone (rock)
and pulled (at) the rope. (cf. síkad id.).

_tikád-tíkad_, Dim. and Freq. of tíkad. To make great efforts, struggle
or work hard. Nagtilikádtíkad silá sa pagtulúd sang trak sa únhan. They
struggled hard to push the truck forward. (cf. sikád-síkad).


_tíkal_, See tíkwal.

_tíkal_, To talk much, prattle, be a chatterbox. (cf. búrà, wákal).

_tikalán_, Boaster, braggart, chatterbox. (cf. buraán, wakalán, etc.).

_tíkam_, To smack one's lips, munch, mumble, chew audibly. See
tákam id.

_tikamás_, A kind of vine with edible roots. (cf. singkamás,
tigkamás id.).

_tikáng_, A pace, step, stride; to pace, step, stride, walk. Itikáng
ang tiíl mo. Walk a few steps. Patikangá ang karabáw. Make the
buffalo walk. Let the buffalo take a few steps. Magtikáng ka sing
mahinalúngon kay madánlug ang dálan. Walk with care, for the road is
slippery. (cf. túmban, patóng, lakát, tápak, lápak, pánaw).

_tíkas_, To steal, pilfer, pinch, filch, purloin, take secretly,
appropriate stealthily. Indì ka magtíkas sinâ. Indì mo pagtikáson
inâ. Don't steal (pinch) it. Tiníkas níya ang íya páyong. He stole
(took secretly) his umbrella. (cf. takáb, káwat, tákaw; kúhà, buúl).

_tikâ-tíkà_, Dim. and Freq. of tikâ--to pop out one's head, etc.

_tíkba_, To beware a second time, be warned by experience,
be--intimidated,--scared,--daunted, be--, teach--, a lesson to,
to live and learn. Natíkba siá. He was scared or afraid (to do it
again). Hanóta siá, agúd matíkba (magkatíkba). Beat him to teach him
a lesson. (cf. dúdlà).

_tíkhan, tík-han_, Shell-fish. See pakinháson.

_tikháyà, tik-háyà_, To fall backwards, fall on one's back,
fall supine, fall down face up; to lie on one's back, lie
prostrate. Nakadalín-as (Nakadúpias) siá sa nalomótan nga bató kag
dáyon nakatikháyà (tumikháyà). He slipped on the mossy stone and down
he fell on his back. Tikhayáa (Patikhayáa) siá. Turn him over on his
back. Lay him down on his back. (cf. hayáng, kayâ, tingkáyà, hayâ).

_tikî_, (B) Small, little, tiny. (cf. diótay, magamáy, isót).

_tikî_, (B) The ordinary lizard. (cf. tagútò, sóksok). The
gecko. (cf. takâ, tokô).

_tíkia, tíkya_, To exchange, transfer, transfuse, change the contents
of. See típia, típya id.

_tikím_, See daríri id. Indì mo matikím iníng táo. You cannot easily
prevail on this man, you cannot at an instant's notice make him comply
with your request or move him to do your bidding. (cf. dalîdálì).

_tikí-tíki_, Extract of rice-bran, a remedy for beriberi.

_tíkla_, (Sp. tecla) Key of a piano, etc.

_tikládo_, (Sp. teclado) The manual or keyboard of a piano or
organ. (cf. pamidyáan).

_tikláhag_, To observe closely, stretch one's neck, etc. See áohog,
áwhog. Also: to stumble, sway to and fro, fall down. (cf. sándad,
dulíngdúling, túmba, ikláhag).

_tiklíng, tíkling_, A kind of bird.

_tíklod_, Push, thrust, forcible onset; to push away (back), thrust
or press back with force, shove or impel backwards. Itíklod siá sa
idálum. Push him down. Tiníklod (Gintíklod) níya akó. He shoved me
aside. He pushed me back (down). (cf. dís-og, tulúd).

_tíkmà_, To take secretly or unawares, to pilfer, steal, seize; to
attack, come upon, assail, get hold of (said of diseases); to visit
secretly, appear unannounced, come unexpectedly (for an investigation,
etc.). Gintíkmà siá sang hilánat. He caught a cold. Tiníkma níya
ang mga alagád sa amó nga sululátan. He paid a surprise visit to the
employees of that office. (cf. tíkas, káwat; dúnggò, abút; sínuk).

_tíknul_, To move, stir, be up and doing something. (cf. bíknol,
túknul, mulikáw, murikáw).

_tikô_, Crooked, bent, curved, not straight; dishonest, disposed to
cheat, false, fraudulent; to be or become crooked, etc. Nagtikô ang
ákon bastón. My stick was bent (has become crooked). Patikoá ang
salsálon. Bend the iron. (cf. likô).

_tikód_, The heel. (cf. sikí, buúl).

_tikód-tikód_, Dim. of tikód. Also: to kick--, push--, hit--, with
the heel; to give the spurs to, prick with the spurs, spur (a horse);
stimulate. Tinikódtikorán (tinikódtikóran) níya ang kabáyo. He gave
the horse the spurs. He spurred the horse.

_tikóndong_, A wicker-basket that is usually smaller than a bakág
and larger than a tagakán.

_tikóng_, A small balloon-fish. (cf. butíti).

_tíkop_, Equally related to two or more persons, having a double or
multiple relationship with another person. Tíkop ang paghimatâ ko sa
íla nga duhá. I am related by blood to both of them.

_tíkop_, To surround, enclose, encircle, blockade, beleaguer, shut in
(up), invest, hem in. (cf. líkup).

_tikós_, A serious skin disease, kind of eczema or herpes; also:
elephantiasis, leprosy.

_tíkos, tikós_, Ring, circumference, etc. See líkus. Taknáan nga
tikós--a wrist watch.

_tikô-tíkò_, Dim. and Freq. of tikô. Winding, zigzag; rather dishonest,
crooked.

_tíkoy_, A dish of rice similar to púto, a rice-dish sweetened with
sugar; a kind of Chinese cake.

_tíkoy_, Bankrupt; to go bankrupt (used humorously). (cf. púto).

_tíktik_, The tick of a clock or watch; to tick.

_tíktik_, A spy, detective, secret service man, sly observer, pryer,
prier, one who stealthily watches the doings of others; to spy,
observe, investigate. Dakô nga tíktik iníng táo. This man is a very
sly observer. Andam ka sa íya, kay tíktik siá. Beware of him, for he
is a spy. (cf. lampitáw).

_tikúd_, See tikód--heel.

_tikúg-tíkug_, Crouching, cringing, on tiptoe; to crouch, cringe,
cower, tiptoe, be very quiet and silent. (cf. hípus, tihín).

_tíkul, tikúl_, (B) Border, rim, edge (of a basket, wickerwork, etc.);
to border wickerwork, make a rim by doubling over the weavers and
fastening them on the other side. Tíkli ang tabungós. Furnish the
tabungós basket with a rim. Finish the tabungós basket off with a
rim. (cf. abúd, etc.).

_tíkus, tikús_, See tíkos, tikós.

_tíkwal_, To move to and fro, pass over quickly, lick, suck at (as
when passing the tongue over the teeth in order to loosen adhering
or imbedded particles of food). Tikwalí ang tingá sang dílà mo, agúd
maggwâ sa ngípon. Suck at the particles of food, that they may come
away from the teeth. (tíkal id.).

_tíkwang_, Push, thrust, jerk; to push, shove, jerk, jostle, press,
move, thrust away with some force. Itíkwang ang síya dídto. Push the
chair over there. (cf. tíklod, tulúd, gíhit, síkway, túlak, síkdol).

_tikwáog, tikwá-og_, To turn one's head (upwards and (or) sideways,
as a snake does). Walâ na níya makuób, kag walâ man matikwáog, ang
íya líog. He could neither bow his head nor turn it to either side
(his neck having become quite stiff). (cf. húlag, bayáw, takílid).

_tikwaóg, tikwa-óg_, Turned upwards and (or) sideways; one with a stiff
(rigid) neck turned sideways.

_tíkwì_, A bird of prey that resembles a goshawk; its name is an
onomatope in imitation of its cry.

_tikyáhad, tikyahád_, To stumble, make a false step and reel in
consequence without falling altogether, to lose one's balance (by
slipping, etc.) and to regain it with some effort; to struggle,
make great efforts to escape (as a child struggling to get away from
the arms of its nurse, or the like). (cf. balít-ad, tikháyà; pólok,
rímpwal).

_tíla_, See téla. Tíla bordáda. Embroidered cloth.

_tilâ_, To stop, end, terminate, put an end (stop) to. (cf. puút,
tápnà, táblà, táblaw, túblag, sábdong, talô).

_tilád_, Spittle mixed with betelnut juice; an amount of betelnut
and accessaries sufficient for one chewing; to prepare betelnut with
all the ingredients ready for chewing. Tilarí (-adí) akó sing isá ka
malám-on. Give me a quid (chew, cud) of betelnut. Dílì nínyo pagilúad
dirí ang ínyo mga tilád. Don't spit out here your betelnut juice.

_tilád_, To scoop, dig out, as coconut meat with a tililád, which see.

_tilágà_, Wet, moist, watery, said of ground that in the rainy season
can be used for drawing water; a spring that flows only during the
rainy season.

_tíl-ak_, To nearly choke on account of eating too greedily, etc.;
to go the wrong way. Nagtilíl-ak silá sang kádlaw. They nearly choked
with laughter (laughing). (cf. síl-ok, talám-ok).

_tiláok, tilá-ok_, The swallow, gullet, oesophagus,
pharynx. (cf. laúk).

_tíl-as_, A worm similar to a centipede. (cf. lupák, irás).

_tiláw_, (H) To try, taste, experience, pass--, go--, through, endure,
prove, test. Walâ pa gid akó makatiláw sang páhò. I have never yet
tasted a mango. Tilawí siá. Try him, put him to the test. Decide
(by an appeal to physical force, or the like) which of you (two) is
stronger. Natilawán ko man inâ. I also have tried it (that). I also
have experience of it. I have had the same experience. Patilawá siá
siní. Let him try (taste) it (this). Kon magliwát siá magbúhat sing
súbung ipatiláw mo sa íya ang ímo kamót (patilawón mo siá sang ímo
kamót). If he does that again let him feel your hand i.e. punish him,
let him smart for it. (cf. dímdim, dimól, samít, sagámsam, pórba,
pruéba, tám-id, sagáwsaw).

_tílhà_, Serenity, clearness; to clear up (of weather); to be serene
(of the sky); to cease, stop (of rain). (cf. sánag, háwan, húlaw).

_tilíbkas_, See talíbkas--to stray, wander from, separate.

_tilig-ángon_, Rice, etc. to be--, suitable or preserved for being--,
cooked or boiled. (cf. tíg-ang).

_tílik_, (H) To spin, turn, revolve, rotate, whirl, whirl round,
turn round rapidly, to gyrate swiftly. Nagatílik na ang alíling. The
wheel is turning round. Patilíka ang kálò, pínggan, etc. Make the hat,
plate, etc. spin. Spin the hat, plate, etc.

_tililád_, (H) A chisel-shaped tool with a bent point, used for
scooping the meat from the coconut-shell or the like. (cf. tilád).

_tililáwan_, (H) Place where something is tested or tried; trial,
ordeal, test; that is to--, should--, can--, deserves to--, be tried,
etc. (cf. tiláw).

_tilimaánan_, (H) Mark, sign, observation, sign-post, indication,
index. (cf. timáan).

_tilimád-on_, (H) Sign, symptom, mark; right or proper time for
something as proved by observation or experience. (cf. tilimán-on,
talandáan).

_tilimán-an_, (H) See tilimaánan. Also: Time, season; almanac,
calendar, rule, guide; a person or object recognized or recognizable
by some special identification mark or marks. (timáan).

_tilimán-on_, (H) See tilimád-on. (cf. tilimán-an, panahón).

_tilindákan_, (H) That is--, deserves--, to be kicked; despicable,
contemptible, mean, vile, deserving to be ejected or turned
out. (cf. tíndak).

_tilíng_, A kind of thornless bamboo.

_tilinguháon, tilinguhaón_, (H) What is to--, should--, merits to--,
be brought about or striven for, worth while. (cf. tingúhà).

_tilipón-típon_, (H) Gathering, assembly; to gather, assemble, come
together. (cf. típon).

_tilipunán_, (H) Gathering, meeting, assembly, collection, deposit,
store, supply, magazine, storehouse. (cf. típon, katilíngban,
katipúnan, talapuánan, talagoán).

_tilód_, Slice, portion (of any fruit that has been cut up, as of a
squash, jackfruit, etc.).

_tíl-og_, A mouthful, bit, dose; to spoon-feed, give food to a
person who cannot feed himself (as a sick man, small child, or the
like). Til-ogá siá. Feed him. Itíl-og sa íya iníng linúgaw. Give him
this rice-porridge to eat. (cf. húngit, hungít).

_tilô-tilô_, To dole out sparingly, distribute or deal out scantily
or grudgingly, drop by drop. (cf. tulôtulô).

_timá_, To bend--, lean--, incline--, sideways, slant, be not level,
be lop-sided, be not well balanced. Ang íya kárga nagatimá. His
load is lop-sided, is higher on one side than on the other. Ang íya
panghunâhúnà nagatimá. His idea is one sided. His ideas (notions)
are not well balanced.

_timáan_, Sign, mark, symptom, manifestation, badge of distinction,
recognition or identification. Ang timáan sang Sánta Krus. The Sign
of the Cross. Ang isá ka timáan nga walâ pagsalâ (pagsayúp). A sure
or infallible sign. (cf. tándà, pát-in).

_timahâ, timahà_, Time of floods, the time (season) of the year
when rivers usually rise, the season of squalls (storms), rainy
season. (cf. bahâ).

_timáhan_, Not well balanced, lopsided, heavier or higher on one side
than on the other; at loggerheads, at variance with. (cf. timá).

_timáhò_, Smell, scent; to smell, scent, inhale. (cf. báhò, bahô,
panimáhò, panínghot).

_timakás_, To exert oneself, make great efforts, be diligent or
assiduous. (cf. bákas, mabákas, paningúhà, panikasúg).

_timalús_, To pay back, do anything by way of reprisal, take revenge,
to avenge, retaliate, return, give tit for tat, take--, wreak--,
one's vengeance on (upon), revenge oneself on (upon). Indì mo siá
pagtimalusón. Don't take revenge on him. "Akon ang pagtimalús; akó ang
magabáyad amó ang púlong sang Ginóo". "Revenge to me; I will repay,
saith the Lord". (cf. bálus, himalús; paupúk).

_timá-tíma_, Dim. and Freq. of timá. To be a little onesided or out of
balance. Also: a disagreement, falling out, controversy, difference,
variance, quarrel, enmity; to be at loggerheads, to disagree,
etc. Ináng duhá ka panimaláy nagatimátíma. Those two families are
at--loggerheads,----variance. (cf. suáysúay).

_timáwà_, Originally a freeman, a privileged citizen who was not
subject to taxation, but was liable to help his chief (dátò)
in case of national defense, etc. A "timáwa" was usually in
charge of a "barangáy". At present "timáwà" very often means: the
ordinary, respectable, common citizen, the common run of people,
the (unimportant) members of a community; to free, set free,
liberate. (cf. kasimánwa, banwahánon, luás; dátò--chief, chieftain,
headman; ulípon--slave; tumarámpok--serf (farmer) that in former
times held a middle position between the timáwà and the ulípon).

_tímbà_, A bucket, pail, receptacle to draw water from a well or
cistern called áwang. (cf. tampulingán).

_timbabâ_, Slanting, inclining, not horizontal, not level, applied
to oblong objects. (cf. timá).

_timbabaé, timbabayé_, After the manner of women, womanly, lady-like,
referring to, fit, suitable, proper for, women. Timbabaé ang pagsakáy
níya sa kabáyo. She rides on horseback in lady-fashion.

_timbakás_, To make great efforts, exert oneself, do one's best,
strive hard, endeavour earnestly. (cf. bákas; panikasúg, timakás).

_tímbal_, (Sp. timbal) Kettle-drum. (cf. tamból, tambór, garagadáng).

_timbálang_, To tumble, fall down head over heels, lie in disorder
or higgledy-piggledy. (cf. tumbílang, dúm-ok, lághit).

_tímbang_, Balance, equilibrium, poise, counterpoise, counter-balance,
equivalent; partner, help, assistant, mate; to balance, be a
partner, to help, assist, lend a hand. Itímbang iníng mga páhò sa
kamóti. Balance the sweet potatoes with these mangoes. Timbangá
ang ímo lúlan. Balance your load. Timbangí siá sa paggíhit sang
lamésa. Lend him a hand at moving the table. May tímbang ikáw? Have
you a partner or mate? Magtímbang sa atubángan sang baláy may duhá
ka akásya. In front of the house there are (were) two acacia-trees
(one on each side). Ang ákon ginbakál nga damáso tímbang (sang)
písos. The silk thread I have bought is equal in weight (not cost)
to a silver peso. (cf. tuáng, búlig).

_tímbang_, To weigh, measure the weight of; to balance (in one's
mind), consider, reflect, ponder. Gintímbang níya ang mga katarúngan
sa pihák kag sa pihák. He balanced the arguments of (on) both
sides. (cf. timbángan).

_timbángan_, Balance, scales, weighing machine, steelyard, beam,
spring balance, scales for weighing; a constellation of stars.

_timbáng-tímbang_, Dim. and Freq. of tímbang. Also: to ponder well,
reflect upon, think over, consider.

_tímbol_, Dry, hard, compact, not liquid, particularly applied to
faeces or stools; to be hard, etc. (cf. tubúl).

_timbólog_, Round, spherical; to be, become or make, round. Timbológon
mo ang káhoy. Make the wood round. Give the wood a round
shape. (cf. tipólon, manipólon, tibúnog).

_tímbre_, (Sp. timbre) Stamp, seal; to seal, put a seal on. Timbrehí
ang sulát. Put the seal on the letter, seal the letter. (cf. pát-in,
tándà, timáan).

_timbréra_, A corruption of the Sp. fiambrera. See
piambréra--lunch-basket, etc.

_timbúok_, To rise, whirl up (of dust, smoke); to blaze, flare up
(of fire); to spurt, spirt, issue in a stream or jet (of water); to
rise high, go up straight and high into the air (of stones, balls,
etc. thrown up). (cf. tíb-ok, túb-ok, alintabó, síbwal, íbwal, táyog).

_tímgà_, Lead, soldering metal, solder; to solder, weld. Timgaí
(Butangán mo sing tímgà) ang tohók sang alhíbi. Solder with lead the
hole (Plumb the leak) in the water-tank. (cf. súlda).

_tímgas_, Full, ripe, plump, completely and well matured, said
of cereals, fruits, etc.; prominent, experienced, wise, learned,
outstanding, the best of a class or kind; to be or become full,
etc. (cf. tínggas, lútò, lágting, lutáw, típsul).

_tímo_, (B) The personal pronoun singular: you. (cf. ikáw, ka).

_timó, timô_, To put into the mouth, feed, live on a little, have
little to eat. Walâ siá sing itimó sa íya bábà. He hasn't a mouthful
to eat. (cf. húngit, hungít, bókod, bokód).

_tímod_, To live economically, spend sparingly, live frugally; to
stint, be stingy or miserly. (cf. ínot, kínot, ímot, dingót).

_timód-tímod_, Dim. and Freq. of tímod. (cf. kinîkínì, kinótkínot).

_tímok_, Movement, commotion, stir, sign of life; to move, stir. The
form timóktimók is more in use.

_timók-timók_, Dim. and Freq. of tímok. Walâ gid sing timóktimók sa íla
baláy. There is no stir in their house. (cf. lihóklihók, litóklitók).

_timoláng_, Invective, insult, taunt, defamation, obloquy, diatribe,
insulting or abusive language (word, expression), affront, mockery;
to abuse in words, vituperate, scold, rail at, rate, revile, vilify,
use insulting (invective) expressions, taunt, call names, inveigh
against. Indì mo siá pagtimolangón. Don't insult him (verbally). Don't
call him names. Anó ang gintimoláng níya sa ímo? What invectives did
he hurl (throw, fling) at you? Ang pagtimoláng amó ang dalángpan sang
mga matálaw kag sang walâ sing katarúngan. Invectives are the refuge
of cowards and of those that cannot show (furnish, produce) evidence
(of what they claim). (cf. buyáyaw, pamuyáyaw, libák, múlay, híkay,
pamúlag, pamúyas).

_timón_, (Sp. timón) Helm, rudder, tiller, steering, steering wheel.

_timonél, timonéro_, (Sp. timonél, timonero) Helmsman, steersman;
director, boss, master, manager, guide. (cf. manugdumála, pangólo).

_tím-os_, To make an end of, finish, terminate (planting, harvesting,
or the like). Nakatím-os na silá sang íla pagáni. Tím-os na
ang íla pagáni. They have finished harvesting (reaping) their
rice. (cf. híl-ob).

_tím-os_, (B) Stable, well established, well ordered, organized,
settled, steady, tranquil; to be or become stable, etc. Kon tím-os
(magtím-os) ron rúgto ang pagpúngkò nínyo, maágto kamí sa pagdúaw
kanínyo. (Kon maglúntad na dídto ang ínyo pagpuyô, makádto kamí sa
pagdúaw sa ínyo). As soon as you are well settled there we shall pay
you a visit. (cf. lúntad, táwhay, linóng, tahímik).

_timós-timós_, A small ulcer on the edge of the eyelids, a kind of
stye. (cf. búntug, síng-it).

_tim-óstím-os_, Dim. and Freq. of tím-os.

_timó-timó, timô-timô_, Dim. and Freq. of timó, timô--to live frugally,
eat, etc. (cf. hungíthungít).

_timô-tímò_, (B) Dignified, solemn, stately, strutting; to strut,
walk about in a stately manner, prance, flaunt, have a proud air or
gait. The form patimôtímò is mostly used. Kon madálig gánì ang ulús
na, dáyon na gid patimôtímò. (Kon matahúm gánì ang íya panápton dáyon
gid níya paugdángúgdang (patolotískug sang íya líog). Whenever she has
on a nice dress, she walks about with a dignified air. (cf. kiáykíay,
liád, biád-ad, biádbíad).

_timó-timohán_, A mouthful, morsel, bit of bread or food, livelihood,
means of living; place where to get a living. Walâ gid siá sing
timótimohán sa íya baláy. She has not a morsel of food in her
house. She has nothing to eat at home. (cf. hungíthungít, pagkáon,
pangabuhián).

_tímpa_, Land-slide, land-slip, falling-in, falling-down; to cave
in (of a hole or mine); to fall--, slide--, glide--, burst--,
dash--, crash--, down (of a hill-side, of earth and stones from a
river-bank, etc.); to cause to fall down, undermine and wash away,
break down. Natímpa (Nagkatímpa) ang pángpang. The river-bank caved in
(broke down). Ang bahâ nagtímpa sang pángpang. The flood undermined
and broke down the river-bank. Natimpahán akó sang ákon umá dalá ang
napúlò ka púnò nga lubí. There occurred a landslide on my farm that
carried away also ten coconut palms. Walâ mo pagpúndi ang subâ, kóndì
nagasáli sang tímpa ang ímo dútà kon may bahâ. You have not embanked
(did not embank) the river and consequently (unless you build a dam
or dike) part of your land is--being washed away,--crumbling away,
with every flood. (cf. tíbhag, hunâ, hubág, dálhay).

_tímpos, tímpus_, To pay cash, pay in full, pay at once, settle or
square an account. (cf. kábis, ímpas, túmbas, támbing).

_tímsim_, A kind of wick for an oil-lamp.

_tímtim_, Smacking, smack; to smack at, smack one's lips, click one's
tongue, put out (forth)--, play with--, one's tongue, as a dog, snake,
lizard, etc. does when approaching its prey or food. The Freq. panímtim
is more in use as verb. (cf. dímdim, diwál).

_tímtim_, To dangle, swing, bob (as an object suspended by a
string). Natímtim ang bibíngka sa tamparán níya. The bibíngka-cake
dangled in front of him. Patimtimí siá sing mamón. Dangle a (piece of)
cake before him (and withdraw it at once, if he should try to catch
hold of it). (cf. táwtaw, tónton).

_tímuas_, See tímwas.

_tímug_, The north-east wind.

_tímwas_, To free; to get free, escape, etc. See luás, talímwas, etc.

_tínà_, A dark or blackish dye, dark-hued colouring matter; to soak
or steep in such a dye, to tinge or imbue with a dark colour. Ang
túbì nga íla ginainúm daw sa walâ sing tínà, kay maputî silá sing
pamánit. The water they drink seems to contain no black colouring
matter, for they are white of skin. (cf. tinínà; tágum, lúgum, etc.).

_tinabáan_, One who has sold his land or part of it. Sín-o ang tinabáan
mo? From whom did yo buy the land? Who sold you the land? (cf. tábà).

_tinabanáy_, Running away with, eloping, kidnapping; to run away
with, kidnap, elope with (if practised by many or on a large
scale). (cf. tában).

_tinábas_, Remnants, odds and ends of cloth or of materials for
dresses; a cut-off piece of cloth. Diín ang tinabásan siníng
tinábas? Where is the (roll, bale of) cloth from which this piece
has been cut. (cf. tábas, tinabásan).

_tinabásan_, Cloth, dress-goods, etc. from which a piece has been
cut off; a person who has been measured for a suit of clothes,
etc. (cf. tábas).

_tín-ad_, Prosperity, progress; to be or become prosperous, go on
well, be flourishing, become wealthy or well-to-do, be economically
or financially independent. (cf. kaayohán, úswag, táwhay).

_tinag-_, A prefix used with numbers, making them distributive,
e.g. tinagápat--four each, of four each, each containing four units;
tinagpúlò--ten each, etc.; tinagwaló--eight each, etc. (cf. tag-).

_tinágak_, Hemp fibre made ready for weaving, knotted and
reeled hemp-fibre. Iníng tinágak túman na sa ápat ka báyò. These
hemp-fibres made ready for weaving are sufficient for making four
dresses. (cf. tágak).

_tinágik_, Joined or fastened close together, near together, compact,
in a perfect row or regular line. Ang íya mga ngípon maputî nga súbung
sang gátas kag daw ang tinágik. His teeth are as white as milk and
perfectly regular. (cf. tágik).

_tinagiposóon_, Hearty, affectionate, generous, heartfelt,
earnest. (cf. tagiposóon).

_tinágò_, Hidden, secret, clandestine, concealed, furtive, stealthy,
secreted. Sa tinágò (tágò) nga pahítò--secretly, stealthily, unnoticed,
on the sly. Ginabuyágyag na ang íya mga tinágò. His secret doings
are now being aired in public. (cf. tágò).

_tinagô_, Hidden, out of sight; to cover, conceal, keep out of sight,
hide from observation, prevent the discovery of. Walâ gid siá makasáyod
sang mga likúm nga gintinagô sang íya nga umágad. He knew absolutely
nothing of the secret doings of his son-in-law, who cleverly prevented
the discovery of his misdeeds. (cf. tinágò).

_tinagótlo_, Three each, of or containing three each, by threes,
three and three. (cf. tagótlo, tagtátlo).

_tinágsing_, A loud, clear, distinct, resonant, sonorous voice;
to speak, sing, warble, carol, twitter, chirp (with a loud,
etc. voice). (cf. tágsing).

_tinágtag_, Distributed, apportioned, allotted, divided (amongst a
number of recipients); to distribute, etc. (cf. tágtag).

_tinagúbtub_, Thud, thump, sound of a blow, or the like; to strike
a blow, belabour with the fists, beat, drub. (cf. tagúbtub).

_tinagudilían_, Condemned, damned. See tagudilían, inpiernohánon.

_tinág-us_, Shaking, trembling; to shake, tremble. Nagatinág-us
ang baláy, ang salúg, etc. The house, the floor, etc. is
shaking. (cf. tág-us, línog).

_tinahî_, Sewed, sewn, stitched, mended (by machine or by
hand). (cf. tahî).

_tinahián_, Suture, seam. Panápton (Ulús) nga walâ sing tinahián. A
seamless garment. (cf. tahî).

_tinahúd_, A kind of chili that somewhat resembles in its shape a
cock's spur; hence the name. (cf. tahúd).

_tinahuráy_, Mutual respect, consideration, etc.; to respect one
another, have consideration for one another, etc. (cf. táhud).

_tinái, tiná-i_, Bowels, intestines, entrails, guts. (cf. tái).

_tinamád_, To be lazy, indolent, slow, sluggish. Indì ka
magtinamád. Don't be lazy. (cf. támad).

_tinamások_, Infested with tamások-worms; maggoty, rotten,
worm-eaten. (cf. torakón).

_tinambihán_, Joined side to side, bordered by (on), bordering on,
connected or attached side to side, contiguous. (cf. támbi).

_tinanód, tinánod_, Menial, servile, submissive, following the lead of
another; to be servile, behave like a tánod, etc. (cf. tánod, tanód).

_tináo_, Men, dependents, etc. See tináwo.

_tináo_, A solid morsel of food. See tínaw, pátaw.

_tinapahán_, Meat or fish roasted or dried over a fire, on a gridiron,
or the like. (cf. tápa, tapá).

_tinápay_, Bread. (tápay).

_tinapáyan_, From tápay--to slap, strike.

_tinapayán_, Bakery, bread-shop, a baker's shop. (cf. tápay, tinápay).

_tinapík_, Joined, connected, stuck or fastened together. (cf. tapík.)

_tinapík-tapík_, Dim. of tinapík.

_tinárso_, Jesting, joking, fooling, funny. Tinárso nga hámbal. A
witty or funny saying or speech. (társo).

_tinatáhud_, Valued, prized, esteemed, appreciated, held dear, dearly
beloved, dear. Tinatáhud ko nga ábyan. My dear friend. (cf. táhud).

_tinátay_, Fatherly, paternal. Tinátay nga paghigúgma (gúgma). Fatherly
affection. Sa tinátay nga kabaláka. With paternal care. (cf. tátay,
inamáy).

_tínaw_, A solid morsel of food. See pátaw, tináo.

_tín-aw_, (H) Clearness, limpidness, serenity; to be or become clear,
bright, limpid, transparent, pellucid, pure, fair, serene; to be or
become distinct, easy to understand, manifest, evident. Kaína malubúg
pa ang túbig sang subâ, karón nagtín-aw na. Some time ago the water
in the river was turbid still, now it has become clear. Tinloán
mo ang kátyà sing maáyo, agúd magtín-aw. Clean the glass well so
that it may be bright (transparent, pellucid). Ginpatín-aw níya
ang íya katarúngan. He made his argument clear. Matín-aw nga
túbig. Clear (pure, limpid) water. Nagtín-aw na ang lángit nga
walâ na sing mga gál-um. The sky is now serene; all the clouds have
disappeared. (cf. sínaw, sinág, áthag, háwan, tínlò).

_tináwo_, Men, persons, people, folk, folks; workmen, servants, hands;
dependents, subjects, followers (as of a master or boss, of a chief,
of a political leader, etc.). Ang íya mga tináwo may aligótgot nga
dáan sa mga tináwo ni Fuláno. His men (followers) have an old grudge
against the men (clique, partisans) lead by N.N. Ang mga tináwo ni
Fuláno. The men under N.N.'s control. Dîmaísip ang mga tináwo nga
nagtalámbong. A vast multitude (An endless number) of people were
present. (cf. táwo, táo).

_tinawohánon_, Human, pertaining to human nature, founded in
human nature. Ang pagsayúp tinawohánon. To make mistakes is
human. (cf. tawohánon).

_tínda_, Market, shop, etc. See tiénda.

_tindáhan_, Market, market-place, etc. See tiénda.

_tíndak_, A kick, blow (thrust, violent hit) with the foot or feet;
to kick. Tinindakán siá sang kabáyo. He received a kick from the
horse. Indì mo siá pagtindakán. Don't kick him. (cf. sípà).

_tínday_, The young of large domestic animals, as the calf of a cow,
the foal of a mare, the lamb of an ewe, the kid of a goat (but not
of pigs or dogs). (cf. totóy--a young dog; orók, idík--a young pig).

_tínde_, Upright, etc. See tíndog.

_tíndog_, The warp of a loom. (cf. pugáwa--the woof).

_tíndog_, Stand, position; setting, placing; standing upright, erect,
straight up; to stand upright, stand erect, to rise or stand up from a
sitting posture. Kon amó inâ ang tíndog sang ímo pamangkotánon----. If
you put the question in that way----. Tíndog ka. Stand up. Sang
pagsulúd ko sa íya hulút tumíndog siá sa pagabíábi sa ákon. When I
entered his room he rose to salute me (welcome me). Nalúsdan siá sang
látok nga íya tinindogán kag nahúlug siá sa salúg. The table on which
he stood toppled over and he fell down on the floor. Patindugá ang
halígi. Set up the post. Nasápwan nga ang tinindogán (natindogán)
nga káhoy sang amó nga laráwan nagubâ, kay inanáyan. It was found
out that the wooden pedestal of that statue was rotten, for it was
full of termites. (cf. paníndog, tindógan, tinindógan, tindógon;
bángon--to rise from a lying posture).

_tíndog_, To stand bail for, be or give security for, be sponsor. Sín-o
ang nagtíndog sa íya? Who gave security for him?

_tindógan_, Stand, position, stand-point, principle, point of view,
ground one stands upon. (cf. tíndog, tinindógan).

_tindógon_, Standing up straight, erect, upright, on end, vertical,
very steep, plumb, bolt upright, perpendicular, precipitous,
sheer. (cf. tíndog, píl-as, matáas).

_tingá_, Food clinging to (wedged in between) the teeth; a trifle,
very little. (cf. palanghiningá).

_tingâ_, The last gasp, death agony, death-rattle; to breathe
one's last, be in the last (death) agony, be gasping one's last,
be at the last gasp, to agonize, heave one's last sigh. Nagatingâ
na siá. He is now breathing his last. He is in the throes (pangs)
of death. (cf. tagumatáyon).

_tíngad_, To overhear, listen, eavesdrop, try to catch what others
say. The form paníngad is more in use. Buút gid siá maníngad
(magpaníngad) sang (sa) sugilánon. He wants (wanted) very much to
listen to the conversation. (cf. tingádtingád, paningádtingád, úgo,
úga, hángal, hangálhangál).

_tingádlaw_, The dry season, hot season, dry monsoon, the time from
about the end of November till May. (cf. tingúlan--the rainy (wet)
season).

_tingád-tingád_, Dim. and Freq. of tingád--to eavesdrop,
etc. (cf. hangálhangál).

_tíngal_, To force another's mouth open, open one's mouth, put into
the mouth, feed. Itíngal sa íya ang kutsára. Open his mouth with the
spoon. Itíngal sa íya ang bulúng, ang kán-on, etc. Force his mouth
open and give him some medicine, some rice, etc. Tingála siá sang
kán-on. Force him to eat some rice. (cf. tíl-og, húngit).


_tíngal_, To deafen, confuse, bewilder, din into a person's
ears, talk one to death, talk one's head off, annoy with noise or
shouting. Gintíngal níya akó sang ákig. Gintíngal níya ang ákon mga
dalúnggan sang ákig. He deafened me with his angry shouting. My ears
tingled with his violent language.

_tingála_, Surprise, wonder, astonishment, amazement; to
wonder, admire, marvel, be astonished, astounded, be amazed, be
surprised. Nagkatingála (Natingála) siá. He was astonished. Walâ
ko pagakatingaláhi inâ. I am not astonished at that. That does not
surprise me. (cf. búlung, urúng, makatitingála, katingaláhan).

_tingaláw_, To go out and watch for the arrival of someone who
is expected to come. Tingalawá siá. Go out and see, whether he is
coming. Go out and meet him. (cf. aláwálaw).

_tingálì_, Notwithstanding, in spite of, despite, but, but
yet, contrary to what one would expect, in defiance or contempt
of. Hántì tingálì nga mapaíway ang amó nga kalaínan tapát pa gánì nga
nagdúgang. In spite of the efforts to check those evils they still
increased. (cf. agád, tapát, waláy sapayán, hinonóo).

_tinganód_, (B) To stay, remain permanently (or for a long time),
to settle, be settled, be stationed, reside, live, dwell, have one's
abode. Nagatinganód ron lang tána kanámon, hay mál-am ron. (Nagalúntad
na lang siá sa ámon, kay tigúlang na). He is now staying with us,
for he is old. Sa diín dapít kang mga pinunâ nga lúpà nínyo ang
ginatinganodán nínyo? (Sa diín dapít sang ínyo mga pinunâ nga dútà ang
ínyo nga ginaluntarán)? On which of your farm-lands--do you live?--have
you got your living quarters? (cf. puyô, lúntad, amuyóng, buhî).

_tíngaw_, See tímok--movement, stir, etc.

_tingáw-tingáw_, Stir, noise, movement. (cf. timóktimók, lihóklihók,
litóklitók, tinióktiók).

_tingáy_, The small or little finger, ear-finger. (cf. tingayón,
tingáytíngay, kumalíngking).

_tingayón_, See tingáy.

_tingáy-tíngay_, Dim. of tingáy--the little finger.

_tíngban, tíngbon_, From tingúb--to gather, collect, etc.

_tíngeu, tingéu_, Tartar, the concretion which sometimes forms on
the teeth, salivary calculus. Naukáb ang ákon tíngeu, nakasalapáy
ang ákon dílà kag nahapdián. Part of the tartar between my teeth got
loose, my tongue came in contact with the remnants and became sore
(very painful).

_tíngew, tingéw_, See tíngeu. (cf. kíkì).

_tíngga_, Pole, rod, staff, stick, carrying pole; to carry on
a pole. Tinggahá lang ang sáko kag bakág. Carry the sack and the
basket on a pole. Tinggahí nínyo ang tabungós. Carry the tabungós
basket between you on a pole. Patinggahá si Hosé siníng (Ipatíngga
sa kay Hosé iníng) duhá ka búlig (nga ságing). Order José to carry
(See to it that José carries) these two bunches of bananas (slung to
a pole on his shoulders). (cf. píngga, tuángtúang, yáyong).

_tíngga_, To remind, bring to one's notice, draw (call, direct)
attention to, keep on the alert, put a person up to, point out
to, inform, notify. Tinggahá (Padumdumá) silá tungúd sinâ nga
tabô. (Tinggahá sánda tungúd kariá nga (kariáng) natabô). Bring that
event to their notice. Put them up to what has happened. Gintíngga
na silá nga dáan nga----. They were reminded some time ago of the
fact that----. Ngáa balá nga walâ mo silá pagtinggahá? Kon tiníngga
mo kúntà silá dílì gid maláin ang gwâ ta. Why did you not inform
them? If you had informed them the outcome would not have been so
bad for us. (cf. padúmdum, paálam, pamáan, pahibaló, paándam).

_tínggà_, Lead, soldering material, solder; to plumb, solder,
weld. (cf. tímgà id.).

_tinggáhan_, A carrying pole. (cf. píngga, tuángtuangán).

_tinggálhub_, Mudhole, puddle, deep rut, worn-out part of a road,
etc. (cf. linggálhub, danáw, tigál-ub).

_tinggálong_, Civet cat, etc. See singgálong.

_tinggarô_, (B) Standing up straight, on end; to stand on end,
stand up straight, stand erect. Tinggarô (Nagatinggarô) ang bohók
na. (Nagapaníndog ang íya bohók). His hair stands on end. His hair
is bristly. (cf. tíndog, paníndog, tunggarô).


_tínggas_, Full, ripe; the best of a kind, etc. See tímgas.

_tínggib_, To jag, indent, notch; break off a bit; to diminish,
decrease, lessen (a debt, or the like). (cf. bíngaw, píngas).

_tínggil_, See dítil.

_tínggol_, To yield, submit, listen to, pay attention. (cf. panínggol,
dîmanínggol).

_tínghoy_, A small pan or bowl filled with coconut-oil and used as
a lamp.

_tingî_, Inclined; to incline, etc. See tingíg, bingíg).

_tingíg_, Inclined, aslant, not straight, leaning, bent sideways,
out of the perpendicular. Nagatingíg iníng halígi. This post is not
straight, is inclined sideways. Indì ka magpatingíg sang úlo mo. Don't
carry your head bent on one side. (cf. balingíg).

_tíngil_, To pierce, penetrate, be sonorous, be shrill, etc. (of the
human voice, of sounds, etc.). (cf. sulánting, sílik).

_tingkádol_, Rattle, clatter; to rattle, clatter, etc. See rungkádol.

_tingkalángan_, To fall backwards, tumble over on one's back, to
drop on one's back off a seat. Natingkalángan siá, kay nalísding ang
bató. He tumbled over on his back, for the stone gave way.

_tingkarág_, Disordered, dishevelled, rumpled, tousled,
frayed, fretted, in a tangle; to be disordered, etc. Tingkarág
(Nagatingkarág) ang íya bohók. His hair is--dishevelled,--all in a
tangle. (cf. sarabusáb, búkag, gomón).

_tingkárol_, To rattle, clatter. See ringkádol, tingkádol.

_tíngkas_, Disjunction, disjointedness; to separate, disjoin, disjoint,
dislocate, fret, fray, break asunder. (cf. bíngkas).

_tíngkas_, Stack, pile; to arrange in order, stack, pile; copy of a
magazine or pamphlet. (cf. tángkas).

_tingkáub, tingká-ub_, To be or become unsteady, giddy, dizzy (as when
looking down from a great height); to lose one's balance and fall down
from a height or over a precipice, to be precipitated. Indì ka maggáwa
sa busáy, kay básì matingkáub (makatingkáub) ka. Don't look down into
the abyss (water-fall) for you may become dizzy, lose your balance
and fall. Nakatingkáub siá sa bintánà. He fell out of the window.

_tíngkaw_, To remind, refresh--, jog--, one's memory, bring
to--mind,--one's notice, to suggest; to warn, send word to, forewarn,
give previous notice. Tingkawá siá sinâ. Remind him of that. Forewarn
him with regard to that. Gintíngkaw níya akó nga----. He brought to
my notice that----. He advised me that----. (cf. padúmdum, tíngga,
pahibaló).

_tíngkaw_, See tínghoy--a primitive kind of lamp.

_tingkáyà_, Supine, prostrate, lying on the back (with the
face upwards); to fall (flat) on one's back, fall full-length
backwards. (cf. kayâ, tikháyà; úgsang, úsdang; dágpà--to fall down
on one's face (prone).

_tíngkì_, To touch, brush against, come in contact with. Táo siá
nga índì matingkián. He is a man not to be touched i.e. He is very
difficult to deal with. He is unapproachable. It is almost impossible
to keep up good relations with him. (cf. salapáy, tándog; tíngkò).

_tíngkò_, To collide with, knock against, hit against, come in sharp
contact with. (cf. búnggò, súnggò, lónggò, súntok).

_tíngkoy_, A knot, bunch or tuft of hair on the nape of the neck;
neck; mind, taste, inclination, concern, care. Walâ gid inâ sa tíngkoy
ko. That is no concern of mine. I don't care for it (about it). I
have no sympathy with such an idea. (cf. tangkógò, lubút; bángog,
búngug, kálag, lúyag).

_tingkóyan_, One who has a tuft of hair on the nape of his neck.

_tínglan_, From tíngal--to deafen; to force the mouth
open. (cf. panínglan).

_tinglá-tíngla_, A skin disease characterized by white spots on the
skin, especially on the throat and head.

_tíngting_, Tinkle, tinkling, jingle, jingling, ring, ringing,
tingle; to tinkle, tingle, jingle, ring. Kabatî ka sang tíngting sang
campanílya? Did you hear the bell ring? Did you hear the tinkling of
the bell? Patingtingá ang kampanílya. Ring the bell. (cf. kilíngkilíng,
lágting, bágting).

_tíngting_, To be or become strong, tough, durable (said of cloth,
of a rope, etc.). (cf. matíngting, húnit, dalísay, purús).

_tingúb_, All together, united, gathered, collected, connected,
combined, associated, assembled, general; to come together, unite,
gather, collect, bring together, amass, embody, congregate. Tingúb
(Nagatingúb) silá nga tanán dirâ. They are all together over
there. Tíngba silá. Gather (collect, bring) them together. Ang
paghokóm nga sing tingúb. The general judgment. Itingúb siá sa ibán
nga mga bumulúthò. Put him with the other students. Gintingúb níya
sa amó nga tulún-an ang madámò nga mga sinugígsúgid nga sinádto. He
embodied in that book many stories (legends) of bygone days. Tíngbi
akó sináng mga páhò. Gather (Glean) those mangoes for me. Natíngban
siá sang tanán nga pagkasampáton sa amó nga palangakóan. He has (had)
all the accomplishments for such an office. (cf. típon, ímpon, símpon,
karipón, holónhólon, hubónhúbon, hirípo, etc.).

_tíngug_, (H) Voice, speech, sound; call, summons, dictates. Ang
íya tíngug malúya (mabáskug). He has a feeble (strong) voice. His
voice is weak (powerful). Ang tíngug sang konsiénsya. The dictates
of conscience. Ang tíngug sang Diós. The voice of God. (cf. límug,
paníngug; tingúg).

_tingúg_, To voice, utter, speak, say, give expression to. (cf. limúg,
paningúg, hámbal, púlong).

_tinguhâ, tinguhá_, (B). See tingúhà.

_tingúhà_, (H) Effort, endeavour, attempt; to make great efforts,
strive, endeavour, essay, attempt, do one's best, try hard to
bring about, spare no pains. Tinguháa gid, agúd makadángat ka
sang ímo nga ginahándum. Spare no pains (efforts) to reach the
goal of your desires. Gintingúhà gid siá ni Fuláno, ápang siá sing
íya walâ magbáton sa íya. N.N. tried (strove) hard to win her, but
she would not accept him. Magtingúhà ka gid. Do your best. Spare no
pains. Tinguhái sa pagbakál ang amó nga umá. Make an attempt to buy
that land. (cf. paningúhà, panikasúg, pamurúg-ot, etc).

_tingúlan, tingulán_, (H) The rainy season, the rains, the wet season,
the wet monsoon. (cf. tingádlaw--the dry season).

_tingulánon_, See tingúlan. (cf. ulán).

_tingulî_, To recuperate, regain--, recover--, get back--, one's
appetite, relish food again. Nagatingulî na ang íya ginháwa sa
pagkáon. He is regaining a relish for food.

_tíngyo_, Salivary calculus, tartar of the teeth. See tíngeu.

_tiniáw-tíaw_, Derision, ridicule, mockery; to deride, ridicule,
tease, mock, scoff at, irritate or vex with jests, make sport (fun)
of. (cf. tíaw, tiáwtíaw).

_tiníg-ang_, Cooked--, boiled--, rice. (cf. tíg-ang).

_tiniguláng_, Old, of old, olden, of long ago, of yore, pertaining
to the customs and manners of bygone days, ancient, antique,
old-fashioned. (cf. minál-am, sinádto, dumáan, tigúlang).

_tinimótimohán_, A scanty living, precarious livelihood, what one is
earning and living on from day to day. (cf. timó).

_tinínà_, Steeped in tínà-dye. Patádyong nga tinínà. A skirt dyed black
(with tínà-dye).

_tinindógan_, Stand, position, posture, carriage, port, demeanour,
presence, figure, exterior aspect, appearance, look, mien,
form, guise. Matahúm siá sing tinindógan. He (She) has a fine
appearance,--presents a fine figure of a man (woman). (cf. tíndog,
tindógan).

_tiniók-tiók_, Movement; to move, stir, etc. See litóklitók,
lihóklihók, tiók-tiók).

_tinión_, Moment, short while, time, instant, a little spare time. Walâ
gid akó sing tinión sa pagbálus sang ímo sulát túbtub karón. Till
now I have really had no time to answer your letter. (cf. tión).

_tinióng-tióng_, Motion, life, stir, movement. (cf. litóklitók,
lihóklihók, tingáwtingáw, timóktimók, giónggíong, kuyúngkúyung, etc.).

_tinipón-típon_, Meeting, gathering, congregation, assembly, party;
to meet, congregate, gather, come together. (cf. típon).

_tinísdak_, Life; breath; stomach. (cf. kabúhì; ginháwa; solóksolók;
hinurángus, tirúsdak, gináhab).

_tinisdakán_, See tinísdak. Also: paunchy, pot-bellied, strong,
robust, powerful.

_tínlò_, To clean, purify, cleanse; be, make or become clean. Tinloá
ang pínggan. Clean the plate. Tinloí akó sing báso. Clean a glass for
me. Itínlo akó siníng báyò. Kindly clean this jacket for me. Nagtínlò
na ang salúg, kay nasilhigán kag nadagnasán. The floor is now clean,
because it has been swept and scrubbed. (cf. pútlì).

_tín-od_, (B) To be or become steady, settled, calm, tranquil,
peaceful, well ordered, established. (cf. táwhay, linóng, sányog,
sayón, tím-os).

_tinógnod_, Sugared (over), candied, soaked--, immersed--,
cooked--, boiled--, in sugar. Ságing nga tinógnod. Bananas boiled in
sugar. (cf. tógnod; tinúsmug).

_tinóhog_, Strung together, strung on a rope, wire, etc., connected
or fastened together with a string; a string or bundle of. (cf. tóhog).

_tinokápan_, Patched, repaired, mended. Panápton nga tinokápan. Patched
clothes. (cf. tókap).

_tínong_, Steadiness, firmness, security; to be or become steady, firm,
quiet, lasting and tranquil or peaceful. Nagtínong na ang pagdalágan
siníng kabáyo nga sang úna karandagán. The running of this horse,
that used to be so restless, has become steady now. (cf. tín-od,
linóng, táwhay).

_tinónto_, Foolish, nonsensical, bad, etc.; to behave like a "tónto",
be ill-mannered, be dissolute, etc. (cf. tónto, binúang, linóko).

_tinóo, tinó-o_, Long ago, of old, of yore, belonging to a bygone age,
ancient. (cf. tóo, sinádto, minál-am, tiniguláng).

_tinórno_, Turned, shaped by a lathe (of balusters, pilasters,
staircases, etc.). (cf. tórno).

_tinô-tinô_, Gold beads as often used in necklaces, etc. Kolíntas
nga tinôtinô. A necklace made of gold beads strung together.

_tíntà, tínta_, (Sp. tinta) Ink.

_tintéro_, (Sp. tintero) Inkstand, ink-pot, inkwell, ink bottle.

_tinteróhan_, Inkstand. (tintéro).

_tíntin_, To hop, jump about on one foot. Indì ka magtíntin dirâ
sa ságwà, kay magáhud. Don't hop about there in the reception room,
for it makes too much noise.

_tintín-bakâ_, A children's game with much hopping and jumping. The
players have to be careful not to touch with the feet the lines traced
on the ground.

_tínto_, (Sp. tinto) Red wine, ordinary table-wine. Bíno tínto id.

_tinúb-an_, The banana-stem, especially the layers that compose
it. (cf. búnlak, úpas, ángkag; tubâ).

_tinubígan_, Wet (moist) ground, fertile soil. (cf. lungasóg,
hagúbhagúban, túbig).

_tinubigán_, A game played by two parties, one defending all the
approaches to, the other trying to reach, the "well" or "water"
(táli). If one succeeds to reach the "water" without being touched
by any of the defending guards, his party scores a victory;
to play that game. Nagatinubiganáy silá. They are playing the
tinubigán-game. (cf. tubígtúbig).

_tinúbò_, Offspring, generation, growth. Ang bág-ong tinúbò. The new
generation. The young folks. (túbò).

_tinugóntúgon_, To enjoin, order, command; to advise, recommend,
talk things over, exchange ideas, (cf. túgon, katugóntúgon).

_tinugyánan_, Manager, care-taker, administrator, one entrusted with
the care of; representative, member of parliament. (túgyan).

_tinuháan_, Made of multicoloured or speckled yarn called túhà. Mabakál
ka sing patádyong nga tinuháan? Are you going to buy a skirt made
of túhà-yarn?

_tinúla_, A vegetable side-dish, mostly with sauce. (cf. tóla, túla,
útan, láswa).

_tinúlin_, Order, command, precept, injunction, commission; ordered,
commanded, enjoined, that which has been ordered, etc. (cf. túlin,
bílin, sógò).

_tinulínan_, Commissioner, one who is in charge or to whom a thing has
been entrusted; order, command, precept. (cf. tinugyánan; kasogoán).

_tinulinánan_, Commissioner, in charge, agent, proxy, plenipotentiary,
procurator, mandatary. (cf. tulínan, tinugyánan, tiglawás).

_tinulís-túlis_, To lead astray, cause one to miss the way, put one on
the wrong-road, mislead, misguide, misdirect, misinform; to be silly,
be foolish, to act stupidly. (cf. patalángtálang, paturístúris).

_tinúm-an_, For tinuóman, tinoóman from tóom.

_tinúm-an_, Leaves used for wrapping round fish, meat, etc. The fish,
meat, etc. thus protected is put in hot ashes or roasted over live
coals. (cf. túm-an).

_tinum-anán_, Fish, meat, etc. wrapped up in leaves and covered with
hot ashes or roasted over live coals. (cf. tinúm-an).

_tinumpúk-túmpuk_, In clusters or heaps, by the cluster or heap,
heaped together; to form a cluster or heap, etc. (cf. túmpok).

_tinún-an_, Learning, education, polite breeding, good manners,
training. Pagkawaláytinún-an. Ignorance, stupidity, lack of training,
impoliteness, rudeness, discourtesy, incivility. (cf. toón).

_tínung_, See tínong.

_tinuóman_, See tinúm-an.

_tinúsmug_, Candied, boiled in sugar, etc. See tinógnod (cf. túsmug).

_tinutulínan_, Commissioner, officer or official in charge, person
in authority, representative, delegate, proxy. (cf. túlin, tulinánan).

_tinutúyò_, Scheme, plan, idea, intention, aspiration, purpose,
design, plot, view, thought, aim. (cf. túyò).

_tíò_, (Sp. tio) Uncle; master, Sir, Mr., friend. Tíò ko siá. He is
my uncle. Si tíò António amó ang nagsilíng----. My friend Anthony
said----. (cf. batâ, ginóo, ábyan).

_tiô_, Puppy, whelp, young dog. (cf. totóy).

_tíog_, To turn round, spin, revolve quickly. (cf. búyung, túyub).

_tíog_, To roam about, loaf, wander, stroll, be a
vagabond. (cf. lágaw).

_tióg-tíog_, Dim. and Freq. of tíog.

_tióg-tióg_, A vagabond, vagrant, tramp, wanderer, loafer, idler,
hobo; one who wanders much about from place to place to little purpose;
to lead the life of a vagabond, lead a vagrant (roving) life, stroll
about, to (be on the) tramp, be a sturdy beggar. (cf. lagáwlágaw,
landólándo, haráyháray).

_tiók-tiók_, Movement, stir; to move, stir, etc. See timóktimók,
lihóklihók, litóklitók.

_tión_, Moment, time, little while, trice, instant, minute,
twinkling of the eye. Sa amó gid nga tión----. At the (that) very
moment----. In the very nick of time----. Walâ siá sing mga tión nga
maúsik (naúsik). He has (had) no time to lose. He does not (did not)
dawdle away his time. Sa isá ka tión. In an instant. (cf. tinión,
tiémpo).

_tión_, To move, shift, loosen, dislodge. Matión (maínghit, maíngkà)
mo balá iníng bató? Can you move this stone? Indì siá saráng matión
(maínkà) sa íya pungkóan. He cannot be made to budge from his
seat. (cf. tióng, gíhit, ínkà, ínghit, húlag).

_tióndò_, To grow stale, or old, to spoil, become useless, or
unserviceable. (cf. gubát, ulasón, átsoy).

_tióndò_, Erect, straight; to be erect or straight, stand upright, be
plumb or perpendicular. Nagatióndò ang búgsok, halígi, túbo sang kínke,
etc. The stake, post, lamp-chimney, etc. stands straight. (cf. tíndog,
tádlong, tanús, tinggarô, tunggarô).

_tióng_, (B) To move, etc. See tión, ínkà, ínghit.

_tión-tión_, Dim. of tión. Naghulát akó sa íya dídto kag sang
natióntión nagabút siá. I waited for him there and after a short while
he arrived. Sang pagabút námon matióntión gid lang kag mabutangán
kamí sing panyága. Soon after we arrived dinner was served to us.

_tíop_, Cheat, trickster, loafer, idler. (cf. tiópì, lág-it, agóng).

_tiópì_, To cheat, fleece, trick, outdo, defraud, swindle,
overreach. Indì siá malúyag nga tiopíon. He does not like to be--taken
in,--fleeced--cheated. (cf. dáyà, límbong).

_tipalô_, Sprain; to partially dislocate, sprain, strain (the
muscles). Natipalô (Nagkatipalô) ang íya tiíl sa bató. On account
of a stone his foot was sprained. He turned his ankle on a
stone. (cf. líw-as, lutá, lúak, súlpo).

_tipálo_, A small centipede. (cf. talimbabága, bagátbagát).

_tipálog_, To crush, smash, quash, squelch; to confound, dismay,
abash. (cf. pusâ, lumâ).

_tipál-og_, To stumble, reel, totter, make a false step; put one's
foot in. (cf. tiplaúg, tikyahád, tiahád, tádag, tásak, túdag, etc.).

_típan_, Covenant, agreement, promise (of marriage, etc.); to make
an agreement or covenant, come to an understanding. May típan
na silá. Nakatípan na silá. They have come to an understanding
(agreement). (cf. katípan, sugút, kasugtánan).

_tipangág_, Absent-minded, forgetful, not all there, not quite normal,
half-witted, foolish. (cf. balingág, pungág, tampuháw, kalúndong).

_tipás_, A rice-sifter. (cf. kalálaw).

_tipasáw_, A plash, splash, the sound produced when something
heavy drops into mud, slush, water, etc.; to plash--, flop--,
fall plump--, into the water, etc., to drop into a liquid with a
splash. (cf. tigpasáw).

_tipatíp_, Including--, sufficient for--, taking in--, all, without
exception; to cover all, include all, be sufficient for all, take in
all. (cf. kámpod, tápud, túptup).

_tipáy_, The flat transparent shell of a kind of oyster. The shell
is much used instead of glass for windows, etc.

_típay_, A kind of whitlow; a painful ulcer that attacks the top-joint
of a finger; Also: a poisonous slug. (cf. lípay).

_típdas_, Measles. See típgas.

_típgas_, Measles. Also verb. Ginatípgas siá. He has an attack of
measles. Tinípgas man siá sang úna. He also had the measles in bygone
days. Nagáyo na ang íya típgas. He is now cured of measles.

_típhag_, Landslide; avalanche, etc. See tíbhag, tímpa, hunâ, dálhay).

_tipî_, To twist or break off. (cf. sipî).

_típia_, To transfer, transfuse, exchange, change the contents of,
pour the contents of one vessel (receptacle) into another. Tipiahán
mo ang sulúd sang ákon báso sing bíno. Put (Pour) wine into my glass
(instead of its present contents). Change what I have in (what is in)
my glass for wine. (cf. báylo, ílis, waní).

_típig_, Preserving, keeping (in a safe state); to guard well, reserve,
preserve, keep, save, lay--aside,--by,--away,--up in store, deposit,
garner (up). Tipígi ang kwárta. Keep the money safe. Ginatipígan
níya ang íya sinâ nga handumánan. He cherishes (preserves well)
the memory of it. Ipatípig mo sa íya ang síngsing. Patipígi siá sang
síngsing. Hand the ring over to him for safe keeping. Yádtong bánko
amó ang pinatipígan níya sang íya pílak. He has deposited his money
in that bank. Kon buút ka magmánggad dápat ka magsáli sang típig
(sa pagtípig) sing tagdiótay sa inádlaw mo nga kinitáan. If you
want to become rich you must accustom yourself to lay by regularly
a small amount of your daily earnings. Ginpakamahál níya ang sulát
ni nánay níya kag íya tinipígan sing mabinalák-on. He valued very
highly the letter from his mother and kept it carefully. (cf. tágò,
hupút, matinipígon, palatipigán).

_tipík_, A broken-off piece, a crumb, fragment; to break in
pieces. Tinipík nga tinápay. Bread-crumbs, bread broken in small
pieces.

_típiok_, To join in a group, go over in a mass. Magtípiok kamó dídto
sa íla. Go over to them in a group (mass). All of you, join them over
there. Nagtípiok silá sa ámon. Gintipiokán níla kamí. They all of
them together came over to our side (party). (cf. sáylo; típyok id.).

_típlang_, To act or say something thoughtlessly, carelessly,
impulsively, unexpectedly, casually, precipitately, accidentally,
fortuitously, to stumble on (upon), fall into (bad company, a trap,
hole, etc.). Andam ka, agúd índì ka makatíplang sa pagbáton sing
kwárta nga kulirô. Take care not to accept unawares counterfeit
money. Nakatíplang siá sa búhò. Accidentally he fell (stepped) into
the hole. Nakatíplang gid lang siá sa amó nga butáng. He somehow
(without thinking) became involved in that affair. (cf. daláng,
tabinás, dalás, dalín-as).

_tiplaúg_, To stumble, stagger, reel, totter, make a false step,
trip, step in, do something thoughtlessly or inadvertently, drop or
fall into a hole, trap, or the like. (cf. tárag, túdag, tásak, ládag,
típlang, tipál-og, tikyahád).

_típlok_, See típiok--to join in a group. Tiplokí nínyo silá. All of
you together join them, associate with them.

_típlok_, To bend, fold, doubleup. (cf. pilô, pilók, tikô).

_típo_, (Sp. tipo) Type; use, custom, fixed price, usual charge or
contribution; to fix or charge a price, etc. Sa típo nga bilí. At
the usual--, customary--, fixed--, price. Salapî ang típo nga ámot
sang tágsa ka katápò. Fifty centavos is the customary contribution
of each member. Tipóhi ang bilí sang ímo báka. Fix (Name) a
price for your cow. Tipóhi akó sang bilí sang ímo báka. Let me
know--what you charge for your cow,--what price you will sell your
cow at. May típo ang íla gásto sa adláwádlaw. Their daily expenses
are--fixed,--restricted,--limited to a certain amount. (cf. látid,
pát-od, tasádo).

_típò_, See tígpò,--to disjoin, sever, etc.

_tipoló_, A kind of breadfruit tree (different from the kamánsi).

_tipólon_, (H) Round, spherical; to be or become round. (cf. timbólog,
tibúnog, matipólon).

_típon_, To gather, unite, assemble, collect, bring--, get--, put--,
draw--, together; to meet, come together. Tipóna silá. Gather them
together. Gintípon níya ang tanán nga mga katápò. He brought together
all the members. Nagtilípon silá dídto sa íya baláy. They came together
(They met) in his house. (cf. tingúb, ímpon).

_típos_, (Sp. tifus) Typhus fever. May típos (Ginatípos) siá. He has
typhus fever.

_típsul_, See tíbsol--to be plump, etc.

_tipúngaw_, Dazedness, bewilderment, state of one who is greatly
agitated or who has a wild look (appearance); to be wild, scared or
frightened on awakening from a profound sleep and not having had
time enough to collect one's wits. Natipungáwan siá, kay ginpúkaw
sa hinálì ni Fuláno. He was frightened out of his wits when he was
suddenly awakened by N.N. (cf. tapúngaw).

_tipúngkò_, (B) Thickset, stumpy, stocky, stout, having a
short, thick body, having a large circumference in comparison to
height. Natipungkoán akó kariá nga kampanáryo. (Sa ákon panúluk daw
pulúndan iníng kampanáryo). This belfry seems to me to be very stumpy,
stocky. Matipúngkò gid tána. (Pandákà gid siá). She is very thickset,
short and stout. (cf. búdul, pándak, pudól, karibúd).

_típya_, See típia--to transfuse.

_típyok_, See típiok--to join in a group.

_tírà_, To speak well or fluently, know a language well. See tídà,
tátat.

_tirabusón_, (Sp. tirabuzón) Corkscrew.

_tiráda_, (Sp. tirada) A cast, throw (of a stone, etc.); edition, issue
(of a paper, book, etc.); distance, ride, drive (on a vehicle). Ang
báyad sang isá ka tiráda sa kalésa (sa isá ka tiráda sang kalésa)
napúlò ka sentimós (sentábos, dakô). A ride (drive of regular distance)
in a buggy (gig, rig) costs ten centavos.

_tiradór_, (Sp. tirador) A thrower, a good shot, sharp-shooter;
catapult.

_tirána_, (Sp. tirana) A kind of folk-dance with singing.

_tirár_, (Sp. tirar) To throw, cast, shoot, hurl, fling, launch, let
fly, dart, toss, pitch, chuck, fire, discharge, let off. (cf. habúy,
pilák, bálang, lúthang, badíl).

_tirások_, Careless, etc. See tarásak, patarásak.

_tiráy-tíray_, To be kind to, deal gently with, to stroke, touch
gently or softly, particularly applied to stroking an animal in order
to accustom it to the touch of man and make it tame. Tiráytiráyi
ang báboy, kabáyo, karabáw, etc. Stroke the pig, horse, buffalo,
etc. gently (softly). (cf. apóhap, kálot, paayónáyon, dálò).

_tirî_, To become senseless, unconscious, insensible, torpid, stiff and
lifeless (through a sudden blow, shock, etc.). Nagtirî gid lang siá,
kay linampusán ni Fuláno. He fell down stiff and lifeless on being
hit by N.N. Karón patirión ta ikáw, kon índì ka maghípus. I'll knock
the life out of you, unless you keep quiet. (cf. pálak, oróyóroy,
tingâ, uráhab).

_tírik_, (B) To turn round, spin round, revolve quickly. (cf. tílik,
tíog, tíyog, búyung, túyub).


_tirík-tírik_, Dim. and Freq. of tírik. To swing round, sway to and
fro, oscillate, rotate, turn round, whirl round.

_tirík-tirík_, Merry-making; to make merry, to frolic, gambol,
play. (cf. hinúgyaw, kalakatád).

_tirilád_, (B) A scraper, scooper, especially one used for scooping
out the coconut meat from the shell. (cf. tililád id.).

_tiripón-típon_, (B) See tilipón-típon--to gather, assemble.

_tírko_, (Sp. terco) Stubborn, obstinate; clever, tricky, tricksy,
cunning, sly, cheating. (cf. pílyo, sutíl, antígo, sagád, batíd, etc.).

_tírno_, A suit (of clothes). See térno.

_tíro_, A throw, cast, shot, report of a gun, etc. (cf. tiráda, habúy,
lupók, pilák).

_tirón_, (Sp. tirón) Tyro, beginner, novice, apprentice; student,
greenhorn. (cf. bag-óhan, tulún-an).

_tírong_, A throw, cast; a kind of game with sea-shells, stones,
etc. often played by boys; a trifle, a small or worthless object fit to
be thrown away; to throw, pitch, fling, hurl, cast (away). Ginbalígyà
níya ang íya baláy sa tírong. He sold his house for a trifle (for a
song). Ginbílang níya inâ nga isá lang ka tírong. He considered that
worthless (of no value). Nagahámpang silá sang tírong. Nagatírong
silá sang búskay. They are playing with sea-shells. (cf. tídong).

_tirotéo_, (Sp. tiroteo) Sharp-shooting; crossfire;
crackling. (cf. lúthang, lupók; árak, bárak).

_tirúsdak_, Stomach, bread-basket, life, etc. (cf. tinísdak,
hinurángus, ginháwa, kabúhì, solóksolók, gináhab, tinimótimohán,
pangabuhián).

_tísà_, (Sp. tiza, teja) Tile, brick.

_tisíl_, (B) To fly off far, be hit or knocked to a great
distance. Natíslan ang búnga kang dalógdog, hay ginbálang ko kang
bató. (Nakibítan ang búnga sang dalógdog, kay ginhabúy ko sing
bató). The nut of the dalógdog-shrub flew off to a great distance,
when I hit it with a stone. Patísli ang dalógdog. (Pakibíti ang
dalógdog). Knock the dalógdog-nut (fruit) far. (cf. táyog).

_tískug_, Stiffness, unbendableness, rigidity, inflexibility;
to be or become hard, stiff, unbendable, inflexible, not easily
pliable. Nagtískug ang ákon páha nga pánit sa ínit. My leather
belt has become hard in the sun. Nagapatískug siá sang íya
tangkúgò. He is stiffening his neck. Kon may bág-o gánì siá nga
panápton nga sóklà dáyon níya patískug (patolotískug) sang íya
líog. Whenever she wears a new silk dress she stiffens her neck
i.e. she is--stiff,--constrained,--very formal,--giving herself airs,
or the like. (cf. báskug).

_tíslok_, Poke, stab; to poke, stab, prod, prick, stick, jab. Tisloká
ang dalúnggan níya sang ímo túdlò. Itíslok ang túdlò mo sa íya
dalúnggan. Poke your finger into his ear. (cf. túslok, tisók).

_tíso_, (Sp. teso) Taut, straight, tense, drawn tight. (cf. hugút,
taníng, tádlong, tióndò).

_tisók_, Stitch, stab; to stitch, stick, stab, prick, pierce. Tisoká
sang dágum ang íya báyò. Stick the needle into his jacket. Ang isá
ka tisók sa ígò nga tión makábig nga siám. A stitch in time saves
nine. (cf. tíslok, túslok, sibít).

_tístis_, Spite, malice, malignity, ill-will, spitefulness; to
spite, harm another out of envy, do malicious damage; to spoil, ruin,
dishonour, disgrace, seduce and leave in the lurch. Gintistisán níla
ang íya mga tanúm. They maliciously damaged his plants (crop). Likawí
si Fuláno, kay maláin siá sing batásan; básì kon tístisán lang níya
ikáw. Avoid meeting N.N., because he is a bad character and may only
intend to ruin you. (cf. híkaw, hísà, dáut, hálit).

_títeres, titerés_, (Sp. títeres) Puppet, puppet show,
pantomime. (cf. atitirís id.).

_títi_, (B) _títì_, (H) (Sp. teta) Mammary gland, teat, nipple,
dug; to suck the breast. Ang bátà nagatítì. The baby is sucking the
breast. Ambót kon sa diín pa níya titíon (saráng matítì) ang dakô
nga pílak nga ginakinahánglan níya. I don't know where he can scrape
together (Literally: suck) the large amount of money he stands in
need of. (cf. sóso, ulútngan).

_tîtî_, To empty entirely, exhaust, drain completely, drink or drain
to the last drop; to spend to the last farthing. Gintîtî níya ang ápdo
sang kalisúd. He drained the gall of bitter grief (misfortune). Daw
sa matîtî na lang akó sa kabúdlay. I am now getting completely
spent (exhausted) with fatigue. Nagtîtî siá sang tanán níya nga
kalalángan. He has exhausted all his resources. He spent all his
means. (cf. tígis, tíin, úrut, úbus, táyhong).

_tituló, título_, (Sp. título) Title; heading; epithet, claim, right,
warrant. (cf. diplóma, pamúnò, kamunóan, hayô, katarúngan, kalig-onán,
tungúd, bangúd).

_tiwál-tíwal, tiwál-tiwál_, To shake up and down, swing to and fro,
dangle, sway; to project and withdraw quickly again (as the tongue
when making a face or grimace, etc.). Nagatiwáltíwal ang íya tagúb
sa íya háwak. The scabbard dangles (is dangling) at his hip. Indì
ka magpatiwáltíwal sang ímo dílà, kay maláw-ay. Don't put out your
tongue; it is so rude. (cf. diwál, tabúltabúl, tawóltawól).

_tiwálwag_, Hazard, danger, risk, peril, jeopardy, any threatening
evil. May tiwálwag nga íla siá pátyon. There is danger--that they
may kill him,--of his being killed by them. (cf. katalágman).

_tíwid_, The pod of the dápdap tree.

_tiwíd-tíwid_, Dim. of tíwid. A small pod, anything resembling the
pod of the dápdap tree.

_tiwís_, A kind of small bird; snipe, godwit.

_tiwítis_, The bixa orellana. See atiótis, estiwítis id.

_tiyábaw_, To yell, scream, howl, shriek, etc. See tiábaw. (cf. siagít,
tiángak, ngábngab, ngáwngaw).

_tiyahád_, See tiahád--to stumble, reel, totter, etc.

_tiyáhoy_, The setting or frame-work, usually made of stone or cement,
in which a cauldron or kettle is placed, as in sugarmilling; a ring
of metal or stone surmounting the rim of a sugar-boiler preventing
the boiling juice of the sugarcane from escaping or flowing over.

_tiyán_, Uterus, womb; stomach, belly, abdomen. See tián.

_tiyángak_, To whine, etc. See tiángak.

_tiyangáw_, An insect with a very offensive smell. See tanangáw.

_tiyáu, tiyá-u, tiá-o_, (B) An exclamation of surprise and
wonder. Probably a contr. of dílì tíaw. Tiyáu man! Why, this is
too much! That is rather too much! Tiyáu, lakás man ang sinúgid ni
Fuláno! Good gracious! What N.N. said was exaggerated! Tiyáu kabutigón
kaná! (Indì tíaw ang íya kabutigón). He is a rightdown liar. Tiyáu
kahánggud kang baláy nga diá! (Indì tíaw ang kadakô siníng baláy). What
a house! How large it is! (cf. abáw, támà, dúro, lám-ag, etc.).

_tíyò, tíyo_, Uncle; good old man, etc. See tíò.

_tíyog_, To roam or loaf about, be a vagabond. See tíog.

_tíyog_, To turn round, revolve, spin round, etc. See tíog.

_tiyóg-tiyóg_, A loafer, etc. See tiógtióg id.

_tiyóg-tíyog_, Dim. and Freq. of tíyog--to revolve, spin, etc. Síya
nga tiyógtíyog. A swivel chair.

_tódas_, (Sp. todo) A term often used in card-playing and meaning:
to win all the tricks, win all round, win the game or stake. Nagtódas
siá. He made all the tricks. He won the stake. Pilá ka tódas ang
kinahánglan sa pagkúhà sang sapátos nga ínyo ginasugalán? How many
wins are required (how often must one make all the tricks) to get
the boots you are playing for?

_todasán_, The winning card or hand, the card or hand that wins the
stake (in card playing).

_todô_, (B) To point at with the finger, to point the finger at;
the index, fore-finger. (cf. túdlò; tulúdlò, turúdò).

_tódo_, To do well, perform as well as possible, do thoroughly. Todóhi
nínyo ang pagdáro, ang pagtínlò sang balatonán, etc. Plough as well
as possible, clean the reception hall very well, etc.

_todós_, To crush, quash, crack (with the finger-nail, or the like,
as a flea, bug or other insect), to squelch, squash. Tódsa (todosá)
ang kúto. Crack the louse (with your finger-nail). (cf. pusâ, lumâ).

_todó-tódo_, Dim. and Freq. of tódo. To exert oneself, strive,
make great efforts, do one's best, do to the best of one's ability;
thorough, hearty, perfect, complete, entire, consummate, with might
and main. Ngáa nga todótódo ang dalágan mo? Why are you running--so
swiftly,--as quick as the wind,--like mad,--as if it were for your
life? (cf. panikasúg, paningúhà, himúgtoy).

_tódtod_, (B) Till, until. (cf. túbtub, ásta, tóga).

_tódtod_, (B) Fretted, chafed, frayed; to fret, etc. (cf. tingkarág,
sarabusáb, tádtad).

_tódtod_, To do well, perform exactly, do to the best of one's
ability. Todtorá inâ. Do this very well. (cf. tódo).

_tódtod_, To pluck, gather, break off (tobacco-leaves, etc.). Todtodá
(-orá) ang tabákò. Pluck the tobacco-leaves. Todtodí akó sing tátlo ka
dáhon sang tabákò. Break off three tobacco-leaves for me. Tinodtodán
níya iníng isá ka púnò sing limá ka dáhon. He broke five leaves off
this stem. (cf. pópò, ípò, páksì).

_tóga_, (B) Until, till. See túbtub, tódtod, ásta.

_tógdò_, A new shoot or sprout; to shoot or sprout forth; put
forth. (cf. ógbos, salíngsing).

_tóghod_, A kind of fish found in rivers, etc.

_tógma_, To solve, decipher, read secrets, know the meaning of secrets
and riddles, guess, divine, fathom. (túgma id.).

_tógnod_, To dip in; to boil in sugar. See túgnod, tinógnod).

_tógol_, To grasp firmly in the hand, to clutch securely a small fish
or the like. Togóla ang tabiós. Grasp the tabiós firmly.

_tógon_, To nourish, feed young birds, etc. Ginatógon sang ináng ang
íya mga botó. The mother-bird is feeding her young (ones). Togóna
sing kán-on ang píspis. Put some rice into the bird's bill, feed the
bird with rice. (cf. húngit, tíl-og).

_togón_, A mouthful, bit, morsel, small amount of food. (tugún id.).

_tógon_, (H) An order, injunction, commission; to order, commit to,
entrust to, consign to, or put in charge of. Itúgon mo sa íya ang ímo
kinahánglan. Togóni siá sang ímo kinahánglan. Consign your order to
him. Give him your order. (cf. bílin, túlin, sógò).

_togón_, To stop, cease (said of a fluid). Nagtogón na ang dugô. The
blood has now stopped flowing.

_tohóg_, The nose-ring of a buffalo, etc.; a string of meat or fish,
i.e. pieces of meat or fish pierced and strung together.

_tóhog_, To pierce, perforate, make a hole in something for the
purpose of putting a string through, or of fastening a nose-ring,
ear-ring, or the like.

_tohóg-tóhog_, Dim. and Freq. of tóhog.

_tohók_, Hole, aperture, opening, puncture, perforation. (cf. lubút,
luhót, búslot).

_tohók_, (H) _tóhok_, (B), To hole, make a hole, pierce, perforate,
punch a hole. Tohokí (Tohóki) ang láta. Punch a hole in the can.

_tohók-tohók_, Full of holes, in holes, honeycombed, porous. Madámò
ang mga tohóktohók sa ákon báyò. There are many holes in my jacket.

_tohók-tóhok_, Dim. and Freq. of tohók, tóhok--to make a hole, etc.

_tohók-tohókon_, Full of small holes, porous. (cf. tohóktohók).

_tokáb_, To turn up, lift up (on one side), to flap, shake in the wind,
said of a broad or sheet-like object. Ginatokáb sang hángin ang nípà
sa atóp. The wind causes the nípà on the roof to flap. Tokabá ang
sin. Lift the sheet of galvanized iron (on one side). (cf. ukáb--to
turn up (as a stone, etc.); tók-yab--to flap (as a curtain, etc.).

_tokád_, To ascend, go up an incline, scale, climb a hill, etc. Ang
mga bukídnon anád magtokád--or--anád sang tolokádon. Mountaineers
are adepts at climbing.

_tokadór_, (Sp. tocador) Toilet-table, boudoir; mirror. (cf. labadór,
espého).

_tókap_, To cover over with a patch, put a patch on, patch,
mend clothes, shoes, etc. Tokápi ang ákon mga sapátos. Mend my
boots. (cf. lunúb).

_tokáp_, To clap the hands, strike the hands together in applause
and the like. Gintokapán níla sing dakô ang íya ginpúlong. They
applauded his speech with much clapping of hands. They clapped his
speech loudly. (cf. pamalákpak, palákpak).

_tók-ap_, To shake swiftly in the air; to strike, flick, knock,
wipe, brush something off with a towel or the like. Itók-ap ang pányò
nga punô (butâ) sang yáb-ok. Shake the handkerchief that is full of
dust. Tok-apí sang pányò mo ang lamésa, kay madámò ang yáb-ok. Wipe
the table with your handkerchief, for it is covered with dust.

_tokapón_, Mended, patched, full of patches. Naúg nga tokapón. Patched
garments. (cf. tókap, tinokápan).

_tokár_, (Sp. tocar) To play--, perform on--a musical instrument;
to strike (of a clock); to throb, beat (of the pulse, etc.). Maálam
siá magtokár sang biolín, piáno, klarinéte, etc. He knows how to play
the violin, piano, clarinette, etc. Nagatokár pa ang íya púlso? Is
his pulse still beating? Ang relóh nagtokár na sang ikáp-at ka
táknà. The clock has struck four (the fourth hour). (cf. kúskus,
bágting, pamídyà, kubákubá).

_tokáyo_, _--a_, (Sp. tocayo, --a) Namesake, one that has the same
name as another. (cf. sangáy).

_tókbon_, From tokób--to tear with the teeth, pounce upon, etc.

_tokháyaw, tok-háyaw_, To raise one's head, lift up one's eyes, look
up, cast up one's eyes. Nagtokháyaw (tumukháyaw) siá sang íya ólo. She
raised her head. She cast up her eyes. (cf. tukyáhaw, tukháyaw, bayáw,
tangâ, tánglà).

_toklalód_, (B) To bulge or stand out, project, be prominent or
conspicuous, as the bones of a lean person, a mat or piece of cloth
with a stone lying underneath, or the like. Nagatoklalód ang túl-an
na. (Nagaólbo ang íya túl-an). His bones--are standing out,--are
quite prominent. (cf. ólbo, kubúng, bokóng).

_tóklò_, To catch stealthily, approach something softly, unobserved,
unnoticed and then grasp or clutch it with a swift movement. Tokloá
siá. Approach him unobserved and then grasp him firmly. Tinóklò níya
ang píspis. He crept up to the bird and caught it.

_tókmo_, A pigeon. (cf. ladô, púnay, alimókon).

_tokó_, An upright (vertical) prop or support for a floor, a
scaffolding, etc.; to prop up, support. Butangí sing tokó ang baláy
mo. Tókwi (Tokohí) ang salúg sang ímo baláy. Put some props under
the floor of your house. (cf. súlay--a leaning support).

_tokô_, The gecko-lizard, gecko, gecco. (cf. takâ, tikî).

_tokób_, See tukúb--to pounce upon, etc.

_tókod_, To erect, establish, etc. See túkud.

_tokód_, A pillar, column, prop, support. See tukúd. (cf. súlay, tokó).

_tokón_, A long pole, a punt-pole for propelling a boat in shallow
water; to use such a pole for propelling a boat, to pole, punt. Tokoní
ang sakayán. Pole--, Punt--, the boat.

_tokós_, To afford, stand, be willing to pay (a high price, etc.). See
tukús.

_tókoy_, A term used in calling a dog; to call a dog by shouting:
"tókoy". Tokóya ang idô. Call the dog.

_tokóy-tókoy_, Dim. and Freq. of tókoy.

_tóksò_, A question, interrogation, catechizing, inquiry, query,
interpellation; to question, ask a question, catechize, interrogate,
interpellate, inquire, demand. Toksoá siá sa nahanungúd sang íya
pagpangabúdlay. Question him with regard to his work. Ask him about
his work. Toksoón ko ikáw karón kon nakasaoló ka sang mga tóksò
kag sabát. Presently I shall examine you to know whether you have
learned by heart the questions and answers. (cf. pamángkot, pangutána,
pakiána, pakisáyod).

_toksóan_, Question-book; catechism. Toksoá siá sang mga tóksò sa
toksóan. Ask him some questions from the catechism. (cf. tóksò).

_tóktok_, The beak or bill of a bird; to peck, pick up with the beak,
strike with the bill; knock at a door. Matalíwis ang tóktok sang
salaksákan. The kingfisher has a sharp bill. Sín-o ang nagatóktok
(nagapanóktok) sang ganháan? Who is knocking at the door?

_tóktok_, To chop up, mince, hash, cut up small. Toktoká ang
unúd. Cut the meat up small. Chop (hash, mince) the meat. Kárne nga
tinóktok. Chopped meat. Mince-meat.


_tóktok_, Rust, oxidization; to rust, be rusty, become oxidized or
coated with rust. Nagtóktok ang íya binángon. His bolo--rusted,--has
become rusty.

_toktokón_, Rusty, full of rust, covered with rust, oxidized.

_toktoróok_, The crow of a cock; to crow. (cf. pamálò).

_tókwon_, From tokó--to prop up, etc.

_tók-yab, tókyab_, To flap, shake, swing, turn up, lift up,
move to and fro or up and down (said of a curtain, of matting,
or the like). Gintókyab sang hángin ang kúmbung. The wind shook the
curtain. The curtain flapped (moved to and fro) in the wind. (cf. ukáb,
tokáb, paládpad).

_tók-yap_, See tók-yab.

_tóla_, To cook vegetables, boil legumes, prepare vegetable dishes,
boil peas and beans in the pod. Toláha (toláa) ang dágmay, balúnggay,
talóng, etc. Cook the dágmay, balúnggay, eggplant, etc. Tinoláhan
kamí níya sing lángkà kag kadyós. She prepared for us (as a side-dish)
some jack-fruit and kadyós-peas. Ipatóla sa kay Pédro ang mga patánì
kag alugbáti. See to it that Peter boils the patánì-beans and the
alugbáti-shoots. Náno ang áton toláhon (utánon, laswahón)? What
kind of vegetable dishes shall we prepare? N.B. Toláon, toláan,
etc. is often used in (B), toláhon, toláhan, etc. in (H). For boiling
shelled (dry) peas and beans "lâgâ, (H), lágà, (B)" is frequently
employed. (cf. túla, tulánhan, tinúla, útan, láswa).

_toláli_, A kind of pipe or flute made of a small reed, as of bagákay,
bólò, etc.

_toláp-hò, toláphò_, Lard-scrap, etc. See sitsarón, tsitsarón.

_tólda_, (Sp. tolda) Awning; baldaquin; roof or hood of an automobile,
of a kalésa, etc.

_toliháw_, See tuliháw--loriot.

_tolísan_, See tulísan--robber, etc.

_tólo_, (B) Three. (cf. tátlo).

_tólò, tolô_, See túlò, tulô--to drop, trickle; a drop.

_tólog, tológ, tólok_, See túlug, tulúg, túluk.

_tologmáhon_, Riddle, puzzle, problem, mystery, something difficult
of solution or hard to guess. (tógma).

_tolokádon_, Ascent, slope, rise, incline, steep, acclivity,
up-hill. (cf. tokád, takládon, takláron, tolokáron).

_tolokáron_, See tolokádon.

_tolokáron_, A musical instrument; music to be played, a piece of
music, sonata. (cf. tokár, palatúnggon, sonáta).

_toloktokón, toloktókon_, That is to be--chopped up,--minced,--cut
up in small pieces,--hashed. Unúd nga toloktokón. Meat for a
mince-pie. (tóktok).

_toloktokón_, Back, spine, back-bone, shoulder-blade. (cf. talódtod).

_tolón_, See tulún--to swallow, etc.

_tolón-an_, See tulún-an--book, etc.

_toloóhan_, Creed, belief, tenet, dogma, doctrine, teaching, articles
of faith, that is to be believed. (tóo).

_tolotádyaw, tolotadyáw_, A small jar, bottle, vial, phial, medicine
bottle. (tádyaw, -olo-).

_tolotibóklod_, Uneven, hilly, rough, having many mounds or
hillocks. (cf. bóklod, bakólod).

_tóloy_, A kind of fish similar to a sardine and often salted. Binóro
nga tóloy. Salted tóloy-fish. N.B. As the tóloy is quite common, the
term also stands at times for: fashion, vogue, common, vulgar. Ah,
tóloy na inâ! Ah, that is the fashion nowadays! That is now quite
common or vulgar! (cf. sardínas; lunák).

_tóloy, tolóy_, A curse, imprecation; to curse, imprecate, wish evil
to, but the frequentative form panóloy, panolóy is more in use.

_tolóy_, To be caught or jammed in (in such a way as to be unable
either to proceed or to go back). Nagtolóy ang ísdà sa matá sang
sahíd. The fish stuck fast to (was caught or jammed in) one of the
meshes of the net.

_tóltog_, To beat, strike, etc. See túltug.

_toltógan_, A bamboo gong. See tultúgan.

_tóma_, A white louse that breeds in clothes.


_tomáhon_, Pertaining to--, full of--, infested with--, tóma-lice.

_tómo_, (Sp. tomo) Volume, book, tome; bulk, size. (cf. tulún-an;
kadakô, kadák-an). See also túmu--to soak, saturate with, etc.

_tón-an_, From toón--to learn, etc. (tún-an id.).

_toneláda_, (Sp. tonelada) Ton. Toneláda kórta. Short ton. (2000
lbs). Toneláda lárga. Long ton. (2240 lbs.).

_tóno_, (Sp. tono) Tone, tune, key. (cf. túnug, tunúg, tíngug,
límug, púnto).

_tón-og_, Dew, dew-drops; to be or become dewy, full of dew-drops;
to bedew. May tón-og ang íya mga panápton. Naton-ogán ang íya mga
panápton. His clothes were--bedewed,--covered with dew. (tún-ug id.).

_tonsilítis_, (Sp. tonsilitis) Tonsilitis.

_tónto_, (Sp. tonto) Fool, dunce, dolt, noodle, numskull, nincompoop,
ass; foolish, stupid; a wretch, one who is dissolute in morals,
given to vice and dissipation (often said of adulterers);
naughty, mischievous. (cf. búang, kalúndong, tampuháw, kólò,
etc.). (cf. tinónto).

_tónton_, To lower or let down by means of a rope, or the like. Hígti
ang bakág sang kalát kag itónton gíkan sa bintánà. Tie a rope round
the basket and lower it from the window. Tontoní kamí sing duhá ka
plánsa nga sim. Let down (by a rope) two sheets of galvanized iron;
we need them. (túntun id.).

_tóo_, Long ago, long since, past times, former days, bygone, of
yore. (cf. sádto ánay, úna, sinádto, tinóo, minál-am).

_tóo_, To believe, credit, give credit or credence to, accept as
true, assent to. Tinmotóo akó. I believe. "Ang Tinmotóo akó". "The
Creed". Indì ka magtóo sinâ. Don't believe that (it). Toóhan mo gid
ang tanán nga ginapapagtóo sang Sánta Iglésya. Believe everything
what the Church commands to be believed. Buút níla ipatóo (ipapagtóo)
sa áton----. They want us to believe----. Ang pagtóo. Faith. Sa buhî
nga pagtóo. With a strong (living) faith. (cf. páti).

_toó_, The right hand side, right hand, right, dexter,
dextral. "Kinmáyab sa mga lángit kag nagalíngkod sa toó sang Diós
nga Amáy". "He ascended into heaven, sitteth at the right hand of
God the Father". Magpatoó ka, dílì ka magpawalá. Go to the right,
not to the left.

_tóob_, Fumigation, disinfection; to envelop in the smoke of burning
herbs as a cure; to incense, fume, disinfect. (cf. guób, tugúb).

_toób_, Scent, scented smoke, perfume, odour, smell; filled, pervaded
with odours, etc. (cf. tóob).

_tóod, toód_, See túud, tuúd.

_tóog_, A kind of tree growing to a large size and yielding a reddish
timber that is quite valuable, but is very liable to warp.

_tóok_, To rise into the air as smoke does, to soar. (cf. túb-ok,
timbúok).

_toók_, Corner, nook, cranny, out-of-the-way place. (cf. doók, loók,
soók, higád, hilít).

_tóom_, To wrap in leaves (and roast on live coals). Túm-a (Toóma)
ang lígbos, ginamús, ísdà, etc. Wrap up in leaves (and roast) the
mushroom, pickled fish, fish, etc. (cf. baláhos, putús).

_tóon_, Fit, proper, suitable, adapted, appropriate; to fit, adapt,
adjust; to assign, destine, allot. Itóon ang bábà sang bayóng sa
tádyaw kag itayóng ang túbig. Fit the mouth of the bamboo tube into
the water-jar and pour in the water. Tinóon (Natóon) siá sa amó nga
bánwa, kay----. He was assigned to that town, because----. (cf. ígò,
síbò, ángay, sígo).

_toón_, To learn, study, acquire knowledge, acquaint oneself with;
to teach, instruct, impart knowledge. Nagtoón siá dídto sing tátlo
ka túig. He studied (taught) there three years. Magtoón ka sing may
kapísan. Study hard. Mind your books. Tón-i ang leksyón mo. Learn your
lesson. Walâ siá sing tinón-an. He has no learning or education. Táo
nga waláy tinón-an. An illiterate man. A person that lacks polite
breeding. Indì mo pagipatoón ang ímo bátà sa amó nga buluthúan. Don't
send your boy to that school. Pinatón-an siá dídto sang maayo nga
batásan. He was taught good manners there. Patón-a siá sinâ. Make
him learn (study) it. Patón-i siá sinâ. Get someone to teach him
that. Sonô sang magtotóon amó man ang mga gintotón-an. As the master
(is), so the disciples (are). Matámad siá magtoón. He is too lazy to
study. He does not mind his books. Ginatamarán siá sa pagtoón. He
is not in the humour to study (just at present). May tátlo siá ka
bátà nga palatón-an. He has three children--of the legal age for
attending school--whose education should be taken in hand,--who should
be sent to school. (cf. magtotóon, gintotón-an, tinón-an, tulún-an,
manunúon; túdlò).

_toóng_, Stake, post (of a fence, etc.). See búgsok.

_toóng_, Cask, barrel, vat, tank, hogs-head, tun. (cf. baríl).

_tóoy_, (B) To give a strong flavour to, season overmuch, put too much
salt or condiment in food, etc.; to permeate, soak, fill to satiety,
surfeit. Natóoy kang asín ang (Nasalópsop (Natómo) sang asín iníng)
tosíno, hamón, sópas, etc. nga diá. This bacon, ham, soup, etc. is
too salt. Natóoy (tána) kang (Natám-an siá sang) tubâ. He is soaked
with toddy, i.e. he is drunk. (cf. látum, húpug, busúg, salópsop,
salúpsup, támà).

_topáda_, (Sp. topada, topetada) Butting, bumping, fighting head
against head; a round (of a bull-fight or cock-fight).

_tópla_, To spit, etc. See túpla, tópra, dúplà.

_tópo_, To follow suit, do the same thing, be equally able or ready to
perform the same action. Topóhi ang limá ka mángmang nga ákon hálad sa
semináryo. Do as I have done; contribute five pesos for the Seminary
like myself. (cf. túpung, súbung, ihô).

_topók_, See tupók--to fall (on a battlefield).

_topól_, Weakness, pains, exhaustion (consequent on childbirth,
etc.); to be or become weak, etc. Ginatopól siá. She is in a state
of exhaustion (after childbirth).

_topó-tópo_, Dim. and Freq. of tópo. Also: to be about equal, be on
a level, be in the same predicament.

_tópra_, (B) To spit, expectorate, eject spittle. (cf. dúplà, durâ).

_tóptop_, To include all, be sufficient for all, leave out none, take
in all without exception, cover a whole field, fill all positions,
or the like. Natoptopán silá sang (sing) tinápay. They were all
without exception given bread. Kúlang karón ang mga párì nga índì
silá makatóptop sang tanán nga mga parókya. There are too few priests
at present so that they cannot fill all the parishes. Ang malápad
níya nga palangúmhan natoptopán sang tubó. His extensive farmland is
completely covered with sugar cane. Madámò na ang mga dálan nga maáyo,
ápang walâ pa man gihápon sinâ matoptopí ang tanán nga mga bánwa. There
are now many good roads in existence, but still not sufficient yet
to reach all the municipalities. (cf. tápud, tipatíp, kámpod, túptup).

_torák_, (B) The rotten--, maggoty--, worm-eaten--part of a fruit. May
torák (Ginatorák) ang mángga nga diá. (May tamások (Gintamások)
iníng páhò). This mango is maggoty.

_torakón_, (B) Worm-eaten, maggoty, rotten. Torakón nga
mángga. (Tamasókon (Masakitón) nga páhò). A maggoty mango. Báklon ko
ráad diáng mga mángga mo, pay búl-on gid ánay ang mga kímay, hanóg
kag torakón. (Báklon ko kúntà iníng mga páhò mo, ápang kuháon gid
ánay ang mga magágmay, lanóg kag tamasókon). I should like to buy
these mangoes of yours, but all those that are very small, bruised
or worm-eaten (rotten) must be removed first. (cf. tinamások; hanóg,
lanóg--bruised; lanóng, tanóng--rotten-ripe).

_torán_, (B) Perhaps, maybe, perchance, possibly, Who knows? Who can
tell! (cf. áyhan, básì, kabáy, dámlag).

_torawík, toráwik_, A squeak, squeal, scream, shriek, howl, yell; to
squeak, squeal, etc. (cf. talawík, iyágak, tiyábaw, tiyángak, siagít).

_tóre_, (Sp. torre) Tower, turret, steeple, castle, fort; rook, castle
(in chess).

_toréte_, (Sp. torete) A young bull, steer; a calf of from one to
two years of age. (cf. tínday).

_toríl_, (Sp. toril) Cattle-pen, enclosure for cattle. (cf. pasilongán
sang mga háyup).

_toríyo_, (Sp. toreo) Bull-fighting.

_tornáda,--o_, (Sp. tornar) Crazy, having one's mind unsettled,
having one's head turned, not all there, out of one's wits, foolish,
silly. (cf. kulángkuláng, kolôkolô, pungág etc.).

_tornéo_, (Sp. torneo) Tournament, tourney, contest, competitive
games. (cf. paindísíndis, palumbâlúmbà, padagánay).

_tornílyo_, (Sp. tornillo) Screw; screw-propeller. (cf. dirúskas).

_tornílyo_, A pastime. See under kúbung.

_torníyo_, See tornéo, tornílyo.

_tórno_, (Sp. turno) Turn, successive opportunity; to get one's turn,
be in line, have one's chance or opportunity. Akon (ákong, ákon ang)
tórno karón. It's my turn now. (cf. bulús, bulúsbúlus, túka).

_tórno_, (Sp. torno) A lathe; to turn or shape by a lathe; anything
shaped by rotation, as balusters, legs of chairs, etc.

_tóro_, (Sp. toro) Bull, steer.

_torómpo_, A spinning top. See trómpo, kasíng.

_tororokón, tururukón_, (B) Worth while to be seen or looked
at. (cf. tululukón).

_torotagwálo_, (B) One who has no permanent residence, who
constantly changes his place of abode; a traveller, vagabond,
vagrant. (cf. lagáwlágaw, manglalagúyaw; taratagwálo id.).

_toró-tóro_, Dim. of tóro. Also: the hump (hunch) on the neck of a
bull or other animal. Also: to thrash, punish severely, maltreat with
blows and kicks. Kon maábtan konó níla ang nagapangáwat (nagapangawát)
sang búnga sang íla mga tanúm torótoróhon níla sa waláy duhádúha. They
say that, if they can get hold of the person who steals their crops
they'll--drub him,--beat him black and blue--, give him a hiding,--tan
his hide. (cf. tarítári, bakábáka, pákas).

_torótot_, A kind of whistle generally made from the leaves
of the coconut palm. Pahúnya ang torótot mo. Blow your
whistle. Metaphorically: Daw torótot ang bulî níya. He is bending
down low and running very fast. Umámbak siá kag dáyon ang torótot sang
bulî níya sang dalágan pa baláy. He jumped down and at once made off
for home at full speed. (turútut id.).

_tórpe_, (Sp. torpe) Slow, dull, stupid; indecent, infamous, lewd,
obscene, lascivious. (cf. búndul, pungág, kulángkuláng; maláw-ay,
mahígkò, maláut).

_tórsi, torsír_, (Sp. torcer) To twist, twine, wind, give a turn or
two. (cf. lábag, lúbag, lúbid).

_torsído_, (Sp. torcido) Twisted, twined, wound. (cf. labág, linúbid).

_tórso_, (Sp. torso) Trunk of the human body; trunk or body of a
statue. (cf. láwas, halígi).

_tórta_, (Sp. torta) Cake. (cf. mamón).

_tortílya_, (Sp. tortilla) Omelet, pancake.

_tosíno_, (Sp. tocino) Bacon.

_tóslok_, To prod, prick, make a lunge at, to thrust, drive at with
any pointed object, as a stick, tool, weapon, needle, etc. (cf. túslok,
tisók, tíslok).

_tósmog_, See túsmug--to dip in, immerse, etc.

_tóso_, To be or become unreliable, untrustworthy, faithless,
unfaithful, false, cheating, not fulfilling one's contract or
engagement, not keeping one's promise. (cf. matóso).

_tósta_, (Sp. tosta) Toast; to toast, roast. Tostahá ang tinápay. Toast
the bread.

_tóstos_, To knead, rub, compress, massage (the body of a person in
a swoon, or the like). Tostosá siá. Massage him. (cf. hílot, bányos,
bántil, pisî, etc.).

_totál_, (Sp. total) Total, sum, footing, all in all; upshot, outcome,
result, sum and substance, end, conclusion. Ang totál mangintátlo ka
mángmang kag limá ka dakô. The total amounts to three pesos and five
centavos. Ang totál nga índì siá magabút. The sum and substance is
that he will not come. (cf. súma, tingúb; katapúsan).

_tótò_, A little boy, darling boy, small male child, infant-boy,
baby-boy.

_totô_, The vocative of tótò.

_tôtô_, To cut off--, break down--, a branch that is bearing fruit or
flowers, as a fruit-laden branch of the kamúnsil-tree, etc., to beat
or strike down fruit, etc. with a pole or stick. Dílì nínyo pagtôtoón
ang búnga sang dúldul, kóndì dugúson nínyo sing mahínay. Don't strike
down the capsules of the kapok-tree, but gather them gently with
hook and pole. Tôtoón ta na lang ináng dakô nga sangá sang kamúnsil,
kay mabúdlay ang magpaníngit (pagpaníngit, nagapaníngit). Let us
break down that large branch of the kamúnsil-tree, because it is too
tiresome to gather the fruit with pole and hook. (cf. sánggì, bánggì,
útud; pakóg, pamakóg).

_totó_, To beat, strike, punch, pound (as with a pestle). See
bayó. Totohá, tótwa equivalent to bayohá, báyha, báywa.

_totónlan_, Gullet, throat. See tutúnlan.

_totóo, totó-o_, True, real, actual, truthful, reliable, veritable,
sure, certain. (cf. túod, matúod).

_totóy_, Pup, puppy, whelp, young dog. (cf. tiô).

_tótoy_, To call pups together, to call "totóy, totóy!".

_tóytoy_, To support, guide, lead, take hold of another's arm and
show him the way. Toytoyí ang lamón. Lead the blind man. Nangintóytoy
níla siá. He became their support (guide, leader). (cf. agubáy;
for guiding (in general), showing the way, pointing out the road,
etc. túdlò ang gía (Sp. guiar) are more in use).

_tóytoy_, To menace with, threaten with (by exhibiting, or pointing
at, the road, etc.). Náno ang salâ sináng bátà nga ginapaypayán
kag ginatoytoyán sang bilogón?--Naglangóy dídto sa línaw ngga walâ
makalisénsya (nga walâ sing pahanúgut). What has that boy done that
the whip is being threateningly flourished before him?--He has swum
in the pool without permission.

_trabahadór_, (Sp. trabajador) Workman, worker, labourer, navvy;
a good worker, one who works well and diligently. (cf. mamumugón).

_trabáho, trabahár_, (Sp. trabajo, trabajar) Work, toil, employment,
pursuit, business, drudgery, job, task, labour, occupation; to work,
do work, labour, toil, drudge. (cf. pangabúdlay, pamúgon, palamúgnan).

_trabesíya_, (Sp. travesía) Cross-road, zigzag; disadvantage, danger
(as in gambling, speculation, or the like); to zigzag, go--, move--,
advance--in a zigzag; to expose oneself to danger. Nagtrabesíya kamí
sing maláwig dirâ sa bakólod, kay nagtálang kamí sa dálan. We were
zigzagging there on the hill for a long time, for we had missed the
road. Silíng níla, iníng negósyo walâ sing trabesíya. (Sonô sa íla
ang amó nga palatikángan walâ gid sing katalágman). According to them
there is no risk (danger) involved in that business. (cf. rirôrírò).

_trak_, Truck; motorbus, motorlorry, autobus.

_tradisyón_, (Sp. tradición) Tradition. (paalínton).

_traduksyón_, (Sp. traducción) Translation, version,
interpretation. (cf. huád, sáylo, waní (hinuád, sináylo, winaní)).

_traidór_, (Sp. traidor) Traitor, betrayer. (cf. maluíb, mabúdhì).

_trámpas_, Very frank, open, straightforward, outspoken, not mincing
words, calling a spade a spade. (trángkas id.).

_trángkas_, See trámpas.

_transperénsya_, (Sp. transferencia) Transfer, transference, especially
a document for the transfer of registered cattle, etc. (cf. paalínton).

_transpórte_, (Sp. transporte) Transport, transportation,
conveyance. (cf. dalá, hatúd, dúl-ung).

_trapál_, See tarapál--an oil-cloth.

_trápo_, (Sp. trapo) Mop, rag, tatter, swob, swab, duster,
dish-cloth. (cf. lapát).

_trensílyas_, (Sp. trencilla) Braid; to trim with braid.

_trepílya_, (From the Sp. tripa) The small intestines of a pig. The
trepílya are smaller than the tinái. The latter are much used for
the making of sausages, the former not.

_tríbol_, (Sp. trébol) Trefoil, clover, shamrock.

_trígo_, (Sp. trigo) Wheat; corn; quaker oats.

_tríngka_, See taríngka--to tighten, etc.

_trinidád_, (Sp. trinidád) Trinity. Ang Santísima Trinidád. The
Blessed Trinity. (cf. pagkatátlo).

_trínka_, See tríngka.

_trintséra_, (Sp. trinchera) Trench, intrenchment, bulwark, line of
defence. (cf. kalóg, labangán, palalípdan, palamakurán, baluárte).

_trío_, (Sp. trio) Trio, a musical composition to be sung by three
voices; performers or singers of a trio.

_trípa, trípas_, (Sp. tripa) Intestine, gut, bowels,
viscera. (cf. tinái, kasúdlan).

_trisáhyo_, (Sp. trisagio) Trisagion, Tersanctus, a short hymn or
respond in praise of the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity.

_trogmasón_, Cipher, code, secret writing. See progmasón id.

_trompisón_, (Sp. trompis) A blow with the fist. But in Visayan almost
exclusively used in the meaning: to struggle, make frantic efforts
to escape or get free, to kick, make convulsive movements to gain
one's freedom, etc. (cf. rímpwal, kúbyal, hiwasâ, pálak, pólok).

_trompíta_, (Sp. trompeta) Trumpet, bugle; trumpeter, bugler.

_trómpo_, (Sp. trompo) A peg-top, spinning-top, whipping-top; a pawn
in the game of chess. Ang trómpo may puyá ang kasíng walâ. The trómpo
has a sharp (metal) point, the kasíng has not. (cf. kasíng, torómpo).

_tróno_, (Sp. trono) Throne, dais, seat of power, royal
dignity. (cf. pongkóan, lingkóran, lingkoránan nga hariánon).

_trópas_, (Sp. tropa) Troops, soldiers, army. (cf. mangangawáy).

_tróso_, (Sp. trozo) Chunk, chump, piece, bit, fragment, log, block,
a rather short and thick piece of anything. (cf. pidáso, báhin, bílog,
tablón, dúngkul, lipák, biníklan).

_tróte_, (Sp. trote) Trot. (cf. taróti).

_tsá_, (Chinese-Spanish: cha) Tea.

_tsakéta_, (Sp. chaqueta) Coat, especially a black coat. (cf. sáko,
amerikána).

_tsaréra_, Tea-pot, tea-kettle. (cf. tsa, tetéra).

_tsaról_, (Sp. charol) Patent leather; Japanese varnish.

_tsaskíro_, (From the Sp. chasco) A jester, joker, clown,
buffoon. (cf. uslitán, lahóglahogán, payáso, társo, alakáyo).

_tsásko_, (Sp. chasco) Joke, fun; trick. (cf. uslít, íntò, lahóg).

_tséke_, (Sp. cheque) Check, sight draft, order on a bank for money.

_tsíko_, (Sp. chico) Sapodilla, naseberry, both the tree and its
fruit that is highly esteemed on account of its delicious sweetness;
chico. Chicle gum is obtained from the tree.

_tsintsóro_, Seine, fishing net. See sinsóro.

_tsitsarón_, Lard scrap, crackling. See sitsarón. (cf. toláphò).

_tsóper_, Chauffeur, auto--or truck--driver. (cf. sapyór).

_tsótso_, (Sp. chocho) Childish, silly, trifling. (cf. ulianón,
ayopáka, urumánon).

_tsúri_, A term of contempt or of anger: Fie upon you! What a
mess! Such nonsense! What folly! etc. Tsúri mo magsilíng sinâ. You are
a fool to say so. Tsúri mo mangahás ka sa pagsilíng nga mapapílì ka
sa pagkapangúlo-puód, singgái walâ ka sing namasngaán. What folly and
audacity to say, that you will be a candidate for Provincial Governor,
when you have no capacity whatsoever. (cf. hitsúra, súri).

_túad_, See túwad--to gallop.

_tuád_, To bow down very low, bend one's back; to obey, follow, do
what another tells; to turn one's back upon; acknowledge one's guilt
or fault, confess, own to. (cf. tuwád id.; konpesár; páti, túman).

_túak_, To have a long fight, fight it out, fight to a finish, said
especially of cocks. Patuáka lang iníng duhá ka (manók) sulúg. Just
let the two cocks fight it out. (cf. úwak).

_tuák-túak_, Dim. and Freq. of túak. (cf. uwákúwak).

_tuálya_, (Sp. toalla) Towel, wiper, wiping cloth,
bath-towel. (cf. síbin).

_tuáng_, Partner, companion, mate, helper, assistant; second godparent
(godfather, godmother) at baptism; to be or become a partner, etc.; to
bear or lend a hand, take a hand in, help, assist, aid, second. Sín-o
ang tuáng mo? Who is your--companion?--assistant?--mate?--helper? May
tuáng balá? Will there be (Has there been) a second godparent? Tuangí
akó siníng tabungós nga nasúdlan sang lâgaón, kay dál-on ko sa
sulúd. Lend me a hand to lift this basketful of beans, for I want
to carry it inside. Kon walâ siá matuangí sang amó nga kabúg-at nga
sáko, walâ níya madalá sa ibábaw sang baláy. If no one had helped
him--, Without help--, he could not have carried that heavy sack
upstairs. Ipatuáng ko sa íya si Hosé. I'll get Joseph--, I'll send
for Joseph--, to help him. Pangitáan ko ikáw sing tuáng. I'll find
you an assistant. (cf. tímbang, búlig, tábang, sáang, kaluyó).

_tuáng-túang_, To carry on a pole across the shoulder, balance on a
pole. Tuángtuángan mo iníng duhá ka bakág. Carry these two baskets
on a pole across your shoulder. (cf. tuáng; yáyong; pás-an).

_tuáng-tuangán_, A carrying (carrier's) pole, usually a strong piece
of split bamboo. It is slightly curved, broadest in the middle and
tapering towards the two notched or (and) pegged ends. (cf. píngga,
tinggáhan).

_tuás_, To tip up or over; to teeter, see-saw. Indì ka magpúngkò dirâ,
kay básì matuás ang tápì. Don't sit (down) there, for the board might
tip up, (perhaps the board will tip up).

_tuás-tuás_, Dim. and Freq. of tuás. A see-saw, teeter-board; to
see-saw, teeter.

_tuátog_, (Probably from Chinese) Tall, high, large. (cf. matáas,
lántyog).

_túaw, tuáw_, To cry out (aloud), shout, to speak loudly (in a loud
voice), raise one's voice. Itúaw (Ituáw) ang tíngug mo. Raise your
voice. Shout. (cf. sínggit, turayáw, pugaás).

_tuáw_, To appear suddenly, show unexpectedly. (cf. tuháw, ólhot).

_tuáy_, Clam; clam-shell.

_tuáy-túay_, The knee-cap, patella. (tuwáytúway id.).

_tubâ_, Palm-wine, toddy, the (fermented) sap that trickles
from the lopped fruit-stalk of the coconut palm. Tubâ nga agahán
(haponán). Toddy collected in the morning (afternoon). Ibutáng mo
lang ang íya sinâ nga hámbal sa tubâ. Put his words down to the toddy
i.e. excuse him, because he was drunk when he said it.

_tubâ_, To fell, cut down, cut (i.e. sever and take away, as a
bunch of) bananas, etc. Túb-on mo ang ságing (sáb-a). Cut down the
banana-tree. Túb-i akó sing isá ka búlig. Cut down for me one bunch
of bananas. Tinúb-an níya akó sing anonóo (sáb-a) nga gúlang. He cut
down some ripe anonóo bananas for me. (cf. tapás, púkan, pulúd).

_tubá_, (B) To cross a river or brook, to ford, go over to the other
side of a valley, canal, etc. Sa igtubá. On the other (further) side,
across the river or valley. (cf. tabók).

_túba_, To catch fish by vitiating the water, to put poisonous leaves,
herbs, shrubs, etc, in the water in order to benumb the fish or to kill
them; to use explosives (dynamite) in fishing. (cf. lágtang, panúba).

_túba_, To fuddle, befuddle, make dizzy or drunk. Natúba (Nagkatúba)
siá sang bíno. He is (was) befuddled with wine. Ang lakás nga paginúm
nagtúba sa íya. Too much drink made him dizzy. (cf. hubúg, balúng,
língin, lingín, tóoy).

_tubáan_, Having--, yielding--, abounding in (with)--tubâ (palm-wine),
producing much toddy.

_túbal_, To fill to repletion, to surfeit, sate, glut, cloy. Natúbal
ang íya ginháwa sang káon sang ísdà. He was in a state of repletion
from eating fish. (cf. tíbal, busúg, túba).

_tubalíng_, The form patubalíng is mostly used, which see.

_tubás_, The time after the harvest, the season following the
rice-harvest, harvest-home, when the harvest has been homed; harvested,
gathered, homed. Bayáran ko ikáw sa tubás. I shall pay you after the
rice-harvest. Tubás na ang áni. The rice-harvest is over. The rice
crop has been homed (gathered). (cf. patubás).

_túbas_, To separate from the ears, cause to fall out, spoil
(said of cereals). Natúbas (Nagkatúbas) ang humáy sa uháy, kay
nalapákan sang kabáyo. The rice was spoilt, because it was trampled
by horses. Ang bágyo nagtúbas (nagpatúbas) sang humáy. The hurricane
spoilt the rice-crop (by shaking (separating) the ripe grain from
the ear). Natúbas ang humáy siníng talámnan, kay walâ pagánya sang
tagíya. (Natúbas ang páray sa tarámnan nga diá, hay warâ nagánya
kang tagíya). The rice was spoiled (spoilt) in this field, because
the owner did not harvest it in time.

_túb-as_, To abandon, neglect, expose to the elements, to dangers,
etc. Ang íla baláy natúb-as (nagkatúb-as) lang. Their house was
abandoned. Natúb-as lang ang báka sa latagón. The cow was left out
in the open exposed to the elements. Nagpalatúb-as silá sa ulán. They
were out in the rain. Matúb-as gid lang ang baláy nga walâ pagapuy-i
sang táo. An uninhabited house will collapse through neglect. A house
where nobody lives will be at the mercy of the weather.

_tubáy_, (B) To attend on (upon), to look after, wait upon (visitors,
etc.); to attend to, pay (give) attention (heed) to, to heed, mind,
be attentive to, be mindful or heedful of. Tubayá sánda. (Tatápa
silá). Attend (Wait) on them. Look after them. Warâ (tána) magtubáy
kang hinámbal ko. (Walâ siá magsapák sang ákon nga hinámbal). He paid
no attention to what I said. (cf. sapák, sahót, tátap, ripára, dipára).

_túbdan_, From tubúd--to trickle, flow, etc.

_tubéro_, (From tubâ and the Sp. suffix -ero) A seller or vender
of--, a dealer in--, palmwine (toddy). (cf. mananggíti--a collector
or gatherer of palmwine).

_túbhan_, For tubuhán, tubohán from tubó--to grow sugar cane, etc.

_túbì_, Water, etc. See túbig.

_túbig_, Water, watery liquid; to be or become watery, to melt,
dissolve, liquefy (of salt, sugar, ice, etc.); to water, irrigate,
mix with--, add--, put in--, water. Túbig nga ilímnon. Drinking
water. Nagtúbig na ang tanán nga yélo. All the ice--is gone,--has
melted. Amligí gid ang asín, agúd índì magtúbig sa tingúlan. Take
good care of the salt or it will dissolve (liquefy) during) the rainy
season. Tubígi ang kólon. Put some water in the rice-kettle. Pamulákan
nga tinubigan. An irrigated garden. Pinatubígan ang íya talámnan. He
irrigated his rice land. Gintubígan ko ang sópas, kay támà kaínit. I
added some water to the soup, because it was so hot. (cf. tinubígan
tinubigán, tubígtúbig, búnyag, túnaw).

_tubígon_, Watery, pertaining to water; flooded, marshy, boggy, fenny,
morassy, swampy; slushy, miry. (cf. túbig).

_tubíg-túbig_, Dim. and Freq. of túbig. Also: a kind of game identical
with tinubigán, which see. Nagahámpang silá sang tubígtúbig. They
are playing the "water"-game.

_tubí-túbi_, To abuse, treat ill, mistreat, scorn, despise. (cf. támay,
ahígahíg, pígos, limólimó).

_túbkan_, From tubók--to pin, etc.

_túblag_, Disturbance, disorder, confusion, trouble; to disturb,
molest, disorder, confuse, derange, disarrange, discompose. Indì mo
kamí pagtublagón dirí. Don't disturb us here.

_túblok_, To prick, prod, sting. See tíslok, tisók, túslok, tubók.

_tublók-láwi, tublokláwi_, One who excites, urges on, sets on,
stimulates, animates, encourages, enrages others, so that they
may quarrel, fight, or the like; inciter, instigator, setter-on,
stirrer-up, promoter; a gossip, scandal-monger, tale-bearer, telltale,
long-tongue, cackler; a happy-go-lucky, thoughtless fellow. Indì ka
magpáti sa íya, kay--daw si Tublokláwi,--tublokláwi inâ siá. Don't
believe him, because he is--a stirrer-up of strife,--a great gossip
or scandal-monger,--a good-for-nothing fellow. (cf. túblok--to prick;
láwi--the long curved tail-feathers of a cock; dusô-bútong; súgyot,
sótsot).

_túblon_, Costive, liable or subject to constipation. Also the future
passive voice of tubúl--to constipate.

_túbo_, (Sp. tubo) Tube, pipe, hollow cylinder; lamp chimney.

_tubó_, Sugar cane; to grow or plant sugar cane. Maáyo karón ang
pagtúbò sang tubó. The sugar cane is growing well at present. Iníng
dútà pagatubuhán (pagatúbhan) ko sa madasón nga túig. Next year
I shall plant sugar cane in this field. Yanáng umá dílì maáyo nga
matúbhan, kóndì támnan lang sang ibán nga mga talamnúnon. That land
is no good for sugar cane planting, but shall be planted with other
crops. (cf. katúbhan, katulúbhan).

_túbò_, A small plate or mat made of woven bamboo splints. Rice and
other eatables are often served on such a plate. (cf. simát).

_tubô_, Being of equal age, existing from the same time, coeval,
contemporary. (cf. katúbò id.).

_túbò_, Growth, increase, augmentation, development; interest,
premium paid for the use of money, etc.; to grow, increase, augment,
become larger or stronger or more advanced, to extend, wax. Nagtúbò
siá sing maáyo kag nagbáskug. He grew up healthy and strong. Ang isá
ka pamulákan nga walâ pagatatápa sing maáyo matubóan sing madalî sang
madámò nga hilamón. A garden that is not well taken care of will soon
be overgrown with weeds. Iníng bátà walâ pa pagtubói sing buút. This
child has not yet come to the use of reason. Maáyo ang pagtúbò siníng
tubó. This sugar cane is growing well. Ang bág-ong túbò. The fresh,
new growth. The new or young generation. Pilá ang ibáyad mo nga túbò
sa pílak nga ginhulám mo sa íya? How much interest do you pay on
the money you borrowed from him? (cf. natubóan, tinúbò, kinatúbò,
patúbò, pasákà).

_túb-ok_, To shoot up, to blaze, flame up, flare up, rise high, roar
(of flames). Ang kaláyo nagatúb-ok sa lángit. The fire is shooting up
to the sky. Patub-oká ang kaláyo. Cause the fire to burn brightly. Make
the fire blaze. (cf. tóok, tíb-ok, timbúok, íbwal).

_tubók_, To submit, yield, surrender, give way, but mostly used with
pa- prefixed and in a negative sentence. Indì siá magpatubók. He
won't give in. He will not back down. (cf. pasúpil, padaúg, paubág,
patubalíng).

_tubók_, (B) A pin, peg, bolt, small piece of metal, bamboo,
wood, etc. used for fastening together separate articles; to pin
(up). Túbki (Tubokí) ang báyò na. (Síbti ang íya báyò). Pin up her
dress. (cf. sibít, tisók, túslok, etc.).

_túbsan, túbson_, From tubús--to redeem; from tubás--harvest, etc.

_túbtub_, Until, till, up to, to, unto, as far as. Kútub sang----túbtub
sa----. From----until (till, to)----. Túbtub karón walâ pa siá
magabút. Up to this time he has not come yet. (cf. tódtod, ásta).

_túbtub_, Even, quite, to such an extent, in such a degree. Mabáskug
gid ang bágyo nga túbtub ang ibán nga mga dalágkò nga baláy
nagkalapúkan. The storm was so fierce that even some of the large
houses were blown down.

_tubúd_, To distil, trickle, ooze out, drop, drip, dribble, flow
in drops. Nagatubúd ang (túbig sa) alhíbi. The water-tank is leaky
(leaking). The water is trickling from the tank. (cf. túlò).

_tubudán_, (B) Spring, source, origin. See tuburán id.

_tubúg_, (B) Throat, swallow, gullet. Warâ (tána) makalimóg, hay naígò
sa tubúg. (Walâ siá makasabát, kay naígò sa ugát (tutúnlan)). He
could say nothing, for he was hit in the throat i.e. he could not
give a satisfactory answer. (cf. tutúnlan, líog).

_tubúg_, To wallow, welter, bathe, lie sprawling, roll over, toss
to and fro, as a buffalo in a mudhole, etc. Ang karabáw nagatubúg
sa tulúgban. The buffalo is bathing in the wallow. The buffalo is
wallowing in the mudhole. (cf. tulúgban--a buffalo-wallow).

_túbuk_, To shoot up, rise, etc. See túb-ok, timbúok, alintabó,
síbwal, etc.

_tubúl_, Costiveness, constipation, a hard stool; to harden, cause
constipation. Ginatubúl siá. He is suffering from costiveness. He is
constipated. Tinubúl siá. He became constipated or costive. Túblon
nga táo. A person that is often subject to constipation. Indì ka
magkáon sinâ kay básì túblon ikáw. Don't eat that, because it may
give you constipation.

_tubún-ak_, See tabón-ak--a kind of reed.

_tubúng_, A farmer's weather-rule, weather forecast, peasant's
maxim. Many believe that the weather during the first twelve days of
January somehow forecasts the weather for the whole year. The second
day of January is called the "tubúng" of February, the third the
"tubúng" of March, the fourth the "tubúng" of April and so on. Kon
magulán sa ikápat ka ádlaw sang Enéro magaulán man sa búlan sa Abril,
kay naulanán man ang íya sinâ nga tubúng. If it rains on the fourth
day of January there will be rain in April, because it rained on the
day that forecasts the weather for April.

_tubúng_, Probably the same as the foregoing tubúng, as there is
usually much less rain during the tubúng than during the months
corresponding to the tubúng. The phrase "Walâ siá bisán lámang sa
tubúng ni Fuláno, etc." means: "He is not fit to hold a candle to
N.N.". (cf. halídhid).

_tubúng_, (B) To dig, hoe (with a dibble, spade or shovel, etc.), to
till the soil. Anó ang óbra na?--Tubúng. (Náno ang íya pangítà?--Bákhay
sang dútà). What is his occupation?--Digging i.e. farming. (cf. bákhay,
sadól, pangúma).

_tubúng, túbung_, To throw in for luck, give a "baker's dozen",
etc. (See óbong, áman, támba, támban).

_túbung_, To take to market, etc. See túgbong.

_túbung_, Betting, wagering; to bet, make a bet, wager, lay a wager,
back (a person, horse, etc.), particularly applied to private
(unrecorded) bettings at a race, in the cockpit, at a gambling
table, etc. Sín-o ang gintubúngan (tinubúngan) mo? Whom did you
back? Nagtubungáy silá. They have made a bet. (cf. pústa, patád).

_tuburán_, (H) Source, spring, beginning, origin,
fountain. (cf. tubúd).

_tubús_, To redeem, ransom, atone for, liberate, set free, reclaim,
regain, recover, rescue. Gintubús kitá ni Hesukrísto. We were
redeemed by Jesus Christ. Ang mga tinubús sang hamílì nga dugô ni
Hesukrísto. Those redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ. Túbsa
(Tubusá) sia. Redeem him. Set him free (by paying his debt, fine,
etc.). Rescue him. (cf. luás, báwì).

_tubús-túbus_, Dim. and Freq. of tubús--to redeem, etc.

_tubús-túbus_, To do something very leisurely or by slow degrees, as
emptying a glass by taking a drink from time to time, finishing a meal
at one's leisure, take one's time ending a job, etc. (cf. urútúrut,
ubúsúbus).

_túdà_, To venture abroad, see to a thing oneself, do a thing oneself,
execute in person, do something personally and not through a servant
or friend. (cf. gúnaw, kúdaw, súdsud).

_túdag_, To step in, put one's foot in, walk over, trample down,
stumble into, get involved or mixed up with (carelessly, thoughtlessly,
by chance, fortuitously). (cf. tádag, tásak, etc.).

_túd-an_, From túod (matúod). Namatúd-an na ang amó nga balítà,
ang íya salâ etc. That report has now been--verified,--shown to be
true,--found to be Correct, his guilt (fault, crime) has been proved,
etc. Kon mamatúd-an inâ----. If that--can be proved (shown to be
true),--is the case,--is correct----. In that case (eventuality)----.

_tudâ-túdà_, Dim. and Freq. of túdà. Also: to perform, execute,
bring about, procure. (cf. pahítò, patigáyon, patúga).

_túdhon_, Having a large knee; having a sore knee. (cf. túhud).

_túdkan_, From tudúk, turúk--to penetrate, enter deep.

_túdlak_, The first seed or seedling; to plant (the first seed),
begin (start, commence) planting. (cf. tídlak, panúdlak).

_túdlan, tudlánay_, From tulúd--to push, etc.

_túdling_, The second ploughing of a corn-field; to plough between
the rows of growing corn, or the like. Tudlingá ang maís. Loosen up
the earth by ploughing between the rows of growing corn.

_túdlò_, Finger, digit, toe; teaching, instruction, injunction;
to point out, indicate, show, direct; to teach, inform, impart
knowledge or information, educate, instruct, correct another's
conduct. Ang mga túdlò sang kamót. The fingers. Ang mga túdlò sang
tiíl. The toes. Iní túdlò gid sang Diós. This, indeed, is the finger
of God. Tudloí siá. Teach him. Instruct him. Tudloí akó sang dálan
pakádto sa----. Itúdlò sa ákon ang dálan pakádto sa----. Tell me the
way to----. Point out to me the way or road to----. Walâ níya pagitúdlò
sa íya mga anák ang maáyo nga batásan. He did not teach his children
good behaviour (manners and right conduct). May saráng ikáw matúdlò
sa ákon nga mga táo nga makahibaló magbúhat sinâ? Can you show me
some men that know how to do it (that)? Walâ siá matudloí sing maáyo,
kay walâ sing nagtúdlò sa íya. He was not well instructed, because no
one had taught him. Itúdlò ko kuntánì sa íya ang takús níya buháton,
ápang índì siá magpatúdlò. I would gladly point out to him what he
should do, but he is averse to being taught. Kon índì ka magpatúdlò sa
ákon pagaipatúdlò ko ikáw sa kay tátay. If you don't want to be taught
by me, I'll hand you over to father for instruction. Tinúdlò níya sa
ákon si Fuláno kag sumilíng: "----. He pointed out to me N.N. and
said "----. Maálam na siá; walâ na akó sing ikatúdlò sa íya. He is
well instructed now; I cannot teach him any more. (cf. tudô, todô,
tulúdlò, manunúdlò, panúdlò).

_túdlò sang dalága_, A kind of banana.


_tudlotdarága_, (B) See túdlò sang dalága.

_tudô_, (B) See todô id. (cf. túdlò).

_tudós_, See todós id.

_túdtud_, Until; fretted; to perform well; to pluck, etc. See tódtod.

_tudúk_, (B) Deep, penetrating, innermost; to enter deep, penetrate,
sink deep into. Nagtudúk sa íya tagiposóon ang hinámbal sang íya
ilóy. The words of his mother sank deep into his heart. Tudúk sa
tagiposóon. Piercing the heart, penetrating deep into the heart,
transfixing the heart. (cf. turúk id.).

_túga_, To make, create, bring about, produce. Gintúga sang Diós ang
lángit kag dútà. God created heaven and earth. (cf. búhat, hímò).

_túga_, (B) Until, etc. See tóga, tódtod, túbtub.

_tugâ_, (B) To promise, vow, declare. (cf. túg-an).

_tugábang_, See tagábang--a vegetable plant.

_tugádlum_, See tigádlum.

_tugadlúman_, One who possesses or wears the charm (amulet, talisman)
called tigádlum, by virtue of which he can make himself invisible,
(tigadlúman id.).

_tugák_, Loose, slack, remiss, shaky, not tight or taut; to loosen,
be or become loose, to slacken. Tugakí sing diótay ang písì, dílì mo
paghúgton sing támà. Loosen the string a little, don't make it too
tight. Kabáy (pa) nga índì magtugák ang íla mga paningúhà. May they
not slacken their efforts. Tugák na lang ang íya pagláum nga----. He
is not in great hopes any longer of----. He has almost given up all
hope of----. (cf. hugák, halúg).

_tugálbò_, (H) To change, alter, adapt, transform (garments so as to
make them fit another person, etc.). Tugalboá ang báyò ko kag ipabáyò
sa bátà. Change my jacket and make it fit the boy. (cf. hólwà).

_tugálpò_, Fizzle; to detonate with a weak report, to fizz out, fizzle
(out), emit a dull boom; weak; dull, not loud or far-reaching, (of the
report of a gun, etc.). Sa tátlo níla ka lupók duhá lámang ang matúnug,
isá ang tugálpò. Of their three shots only two detonated properly,
one merely fizzed out. (cf. búlhot búrhot, sungáw, dîmatúnug).

_túg-an_, Promise, declaration, undertaking, word, pledge,
engagement; to promise, undertake to, engage to, bind--, pledge--,
commit--, oneself to, give--, pass--, pledge--, plight--,
one's--word,--honour,--credit. Gintug-anán akó níya sinâ. He has
promised me that. Kon anó ang ímo natúg-an tumánon mo. What you have
promised you should perform, fulfil. Itúg-an mo sa ákon nga----. Give
me your word of honour that----. (cf. tugâ; sáad).

_tugás_, The heart-wood, the hard part of a tree, wood thoroughly
mature (ripe) and seasoned. (cf. bákal--alburnum, sap-wood, the soft
or outer part of a tree, often also different in colour from the hard
or inner part of wood).

_tugásan_, Having heart-wood, well matured or seasoned, said of wood;
strong, robust, powerful, solid, firm, mighty (of persons, families,
nations, etc.).

_tugáw_, See tugák, hugák.

_tugáw_, To lose colour, become brittle, said of hemp-fibre,
etc. (cf. tapúk).

_tugáwhà_, To fall down head foremost, lose one's balance and fall down
prone. Indì ka maggáwa sa bintánà, kay básì makatugáwhà ikáw. Don't
look out of the window, for you might fall out. (cf. tibusók).

_túgban, túgbon_, From tubúg--to wallow and from tugúb--to fill, etc.

_túgbong_, To enter, fill (with water, etc.). Natúgbong sang túbig
ang íya dalúnggan. His ears were filled with water.

_túgbong_, To deal (sell, buy) at market, take to market, put
up for sale in a market, to market, go marketing. Itúgbong mo
lang sa Ogtóng ang ímo dágmay. Take your dágmay to the market at
Oton. Market your dágmay at Oton. Ang ámon tiénda ginatugbongán sa
gihápon sing madámò nga balalígyà. A large variety of merchandise is
sent to our market. Many goods are disposed of (sold, bought) at our
market. Matúgbong man ikáw? Are you too going to market? (túbung id.).

_túgbong_, To buy in the open market, especially said of fresh
fish. The form panúgbong is mostly used: to go in search of fresh fish,
etc. Kahápon nanúgbung kamí, ápang walâ kamí makabakál sing ísdà,
kay diótay kaáyo ang sóhot. Yesterday we went out to buy fresh fish,
but we couldn't get any, as the catch had been so very small. Manúgbung
(magapanúgbung) kitá buás sa ága pa gid, agúd básì pa lang kon makaayô
kitá sing diótay nga ísdà gíkan sa párte sang mga bóso. Early tomorrow
morning we shall go in search of fresh fish; we hope to obtain some
by entreaty from the divers' share.

_túgdà_, To add to the length of, to lengthen, prolong, continue,
tie or fasten to by knotting, etc.; to step in, put in a word, take
part in a conversation, join in. Tugdaí ang kalát. Add another piece
to the rope. Lengthen the rope. Itúgdà iníng isá ka písì sa kalát. Add
this cord (string) to the rope. Tumúgdà na man si Fuláno sa pagsilíng:
"----. N.N. now stepped forward saying: "----. (cf. súgpon, salígbat).

_túgdang_, To cause to sink, sink, immerse, submerge, commit to
the deep, throw overboard, jettison; to sink (down), sink (go)
to the bottom, become engulfed, be swallowed up, be submerged in,
plunge in; to greatly surpass, outdo, worst, vanquish. Gintúgdang
níla ang tanán nga mga lúlan nga mabúg-at, kay ginkatahápan níla
nga matúgdang (magkatúgdang) ang sakayán. They threw all the heavy
luggage overboard, because they were afraid that the boat might sink
(founder). Kag sang nagakatúgdang siá nagsínggit siá sa pagsilíng:
"Ginóo, luasá akó". And when he began to sink, he cried out, saying:
"Lord, save me". Maghanáshánas ka gid, agúd makatúgdang ka sa íya
(matúgdang mo siá). Train yourself well so that you may be able to
worst him. Sa natugdangán sang sakayán----. On the spot where the
boat had sunk--. (cf. lúgdang, tágbong; lútus, daúg).

_túgdò_, See tógdò--shoot, sprout, etc.

_túgduk_, See tígduk--to drive in, plant.

_túghan_, For tugáhan from túga--to create, make.

_tughapón_, Eve, vigil, day before a feast or celebration of any
kind; to leave in the afternoon for a feast, etc. that is going to
be celebrated next day. Kon mamiésta kamó sa íla pándut maáyo nga
magtughapón kamó kag índì magpamúka (magbúgtaw). If you wish to be
present at their feast it would be better for you to (you had better)
leave here the afternoon before and not early in the morning of the
day itself. (cf. hápon, bísperas).

_túghod_, See tóghod--a kind of fish.

_túghung_, To pour in, put in liquids, infuse, fill with. Tughungí
ang sugâ sing agás. Fill the lamp with kerosene. Pour some oil in
the lamp. Itúghung sa ákon báso yanáng bíno. Pour that wine into
my glass. Tughungá ang linágà nga unúd sang túbig. Add water to the
boiling (boiled) meat. Natughungán na ang paligosán sing túbig. The
bath-tub is now full of water. (cf. bôbô, tígis, tayón, áhog, sulúd).

_túgian_, To commit to, entrust to, confide to the care of, leave
in another's hands, commit to--a person's charge,--the hands of,
deliver in trust, assign, consign to, deposit with, commend to; to
counsel, advise, recommend. Itúgian mo sa íya inâ. Tugianán mo siá
sinâ. Confide that to his care. Entrust him with that. Sang buút na
siá magsakáy pa Manílà gintúgian níya ang íya bátà sa kay Pédro nga
útud níya. When he was about to embark for Manila he left his child in
the hands of Peter, his brother. Náno ang íya ginatúgian? What does
he recommend? What is his advice? Tinugianán ko siá sa pagtúnghol sa
ímo sang amó nga sulát. I entrusted him with that letter, confident
that he would deliver it into your hands, (cf. panúgyan, bílin, tógon).

_túgkay_, To stick the handle of a ladle, fork or spoon, a piece of
bamboo, or the like, into rice or other food fresh from the pot, so
that the steam may escape more freely. Tugkayá sang tenedór ang kán-on
sa kólon. Stick the fork in the rice in the kettle. Itúgkay ang luág sa
tiníg-ang. Stand the ladle in the freshly cooked rice. (cf. kalíkad).

_túgma_, To solve riddles, etc. See tógma.

_túgmaw_, Immersion, submersion; to immerse, submerge, dip in, put
in water, soak, drench, sop, plunge into a liquid. Itúgmaw sa tíntà
ang ímo plúma. Dip your pen in the ink. (cf. túsmug, túgnod, túm-oy,
lúnud; lúgdang, túgdang).

_túgmok_, To press down (upon), to stamp, impress with a mark,
pinch. Itúgmok ang kamomóo mo dirí sa papél. Imprint your thumb-mark--,
Press your thumb--, here on the paper. (cf. túmbok, túm-ok).

_túgmoy_, To immerse, dip in, soak, drench, etc. See túgmaw.

_túgnan_, For tugónan from túgon, tógon--to order, etc.

_túgnaw_, (H) Cold, freshness, coolness, frigidity, chilliness,
chill, keenness, rawness; to be or become cool, cold, fresh, frigid,
chill, bleak, raw, biting, nipping, piercing, pinching. Nagtúgnaw
na ang tsá. The tea has become cold now (by this). Patugnawá ang
túbig. Let the water cool. Natugnawán akó kagáb-i. Last night I felt
cold. (cf. búgnaw, ramíg).

_túgnod_, To dip in, immerse, plunge in (into) a liquid; to boil in
sugar (bananas or other fruit). Itúgnod ang ságing sa lasáw. Boil
the bananas in the molasses. (cf. tógnod, tinógnod; túgmaw, túsmug).

_túgnos_, See tugnóstúgnos which is mostly used.

_tugnós-túgnos_, (B) To succeed--, follow--, one another, to arrive--,
go away or leave--, sit down to a meal--, rise from the table--, make
one's appearance--, disappear--, one after another. Nagturugnóstúgnos
sánda sa pagabút. (Nagtalagínus silá sa pagabút). They arrived one
after another. Nagturugnóstúgnos sánda sa paghalín. (Nagtalagínus
silá sa paghalín). They disappeared one by one. They left one after
another. Indì kamó magtugnóstúgnos (magtinugnóstugnósay) sa pagígmà,
kóndì magdurúngan kamó. (Dílì kamó magtalagínus sa pagpanyága,
kóndì magdulungán kamó). Don't take your dinner one after another,
but take it all together. (cf. sunúd, tagínus, talagínus).

_túgon_, Commission, charge; to charge with, order, etc. See tógon.

_tugón_, A mouthful, etc. See togón.

_túgpa_, A pursuing squad, a troop of men or soldiers going in
pursuit of brigands, etc.; band, body, batch, troop; to go in
pursuit of, to pursue, chase, round up; to go to--, gather at--, a
scene of action. Tugpahí silá. Pursue them. Go after them and round
them up. Gintugpahán námon ang mga buyóng kag ginbáwì námon sa íla
kamót ang mga biníhag níla. We pursued the robbers and rescued their
prisoners. Sang pagkabatî níla nga may súnug sa dálan X. tumúgpa silá
dídto sa gilayón. When they heard that there was a fire in X-street,
they went there at once. (cf. lagás; dúgok, dúbok).

_túgpay_, To placate, etc. See lúgpay.

_túgpò_, Push, pushing, launching; to push, push over to, throw at
(on, upon), urge upon, launch, put forth, put up (as candidate
for an office, or the like). Itúgpò ang ímo manók sa ákon manók,
agúd magsámpok silá. Throw your cock at mine so that they may
fight. Itúgpò siá sa káy Fuláno. Push him against N.N. Gintugpoán
níya ang idô sang kuríng. He threw the cat on the dog. Ang palapilián
nga íla ginatúgpò----. The candidate whom they are putting up for
office----. (cf. tulúd, súlpò).

_túgpò_, To challenge, provoke, defy, brave; to crow (of
cocks). (cf. panúgpò, súlung, ákyat, pamálò).

_túgpo_, Land-breeze, wind or breeze coming from the mountains and
blowing towards the sea.

_túgpon_, To add to, prolong, etc. See súgpon.

_túgrò_, (B) To give, donate, present with, hand over to, etc. Itúgrò
kaná diá. (Ihátag mo sa íya iní). Give him this. (cf. hátag, taó).

_túgtan_, For tugútan from túgut--to permit, etc.

_túgtug_, A grallatorial bird, larger than the tulábong and smaller
than the dógwak; a kind of large rail, mudhen, marshhen.

_túgtug_, To beat or strike a drum, or the like. Tugtugá ang
bómbo. Beat the drum. (cf. bágtol, túltug, patík).

_tugúb_, Full, replete, filled; to fill, flood, brim, fill to
overflowing; make overflow. Natugúb (Nagkatugúb, tugúb) ang íya
tagiposóon sang kalípay. His heart is overflowing with joy. Ginatugúb
siá sang kasubô. He is filled with sorrow. (cf. punô, butâ).

_tugúb_, (B) To do something thoroughly, to finish, complete,
exhaust. Gintúgban ko kang lágaw ang mga búkid nga diá (diáng mga
búkid). (Ginúbus ko sang lágaw iníng mga búkid). I have rambled
(walked, ranged) through all these mountains. (cf. úbus, úrut).

_tugúd_, The socket or hole into which a handle or shaft is fitted
(of a knife, chisel, lance, etc.); foundation, groundwork, basis,
base, bed-rock; the principal or capital of a business, or the
like. (cf. palasarán, palatúkdan).

_tugún_, A bit, mouthful, morsel, dose (of medicine, food,
etc.). (togón id.).

_túgut_, Permission, permit, license, leave, sanction, authorization,
dispensation, concession; to permit, give permission, allow, concede,
let, license, sanction, authorize, give leave to, grant license
to. Itúgut mo sa íya inâ. Tugúti (Túgti) siá sinâ. Allow him to do
it. Give him permission for doing it. Ginadilían ang pagsulúd dirí sang
(sing) waláy túgut. No admittance without permission. Indì ko pagitúgut
inâ. I shall not allow it. I shall make no such concession. Walâ
níya kamí pagtugúti (pagtúgti) sa pagtámbong sa síni. He did not
give us leave to go to the moving pictures (movies). Kon magtúgut
ka sinâ----. If you allow such a thing----. (cf. pahanúgut, sugút,
tándò, hángdò).

_túgyan_, See túgian--to entrust, confide to, etc.

_tugyánan_, One in charge, manager, etc. See tulugyánan.

_túhà_, Multicoloured, many-coloured, many-hued, speckled
(yarn, cloth); to colour, steep--, dye--, in colour,
variegate. (cf. tinuháan).

_túhad_, The Dim. tuhádtúhad is generally used in the meaning of
patókpátok--to make up, invent a story, make-belief.

_túhak_, The Dim. tuháktuhák is generally used in the meaning of: to
dare, be bold, reckless, audacious, etc. (See káhas, ahás, dahákdahák,
taháktahák).

_tuháng_, An interstice, crevice, chink, gap (in a floor, in
wickerwork, in a weave, or the like); open, uncovered; to leave
open or uncovered a part of the floor, etc. either intentionally,
through an oversight or through lack of materials. Iníng salúg may
tuháng pa. This floor--is not yet quite covered,--has a part still
uncovered. Indì mo pagtuhangán ang salúg. Don't leave (make) gaps in
the floor. (cf. búhang, buhangán; taháng--a gap in the teeth).

_tuháw_, Sudden, unexpected, without preparation or previous
warning. Tuháw nga ulán. A sudden downpour. An unexpected shower of
rain. (cf. kuyús, hinálì).

_tuháw_, To emerge or appear suddenly, unexpectedly, to pop
up. Nagatuháw gid lang ang mga mamaláybay, lígbos, etc. Poets,
mushrooms, etc. are appearing (popping up) everywhere. (cf. ólhot,
ólbo, tuáw).

_tuháw_, To cry out aloud, etc. See túaw.

_túhay_, Different, unlike, dissimilar, disparate, unequal, not
the same; to be different, differ in form, quality, nature, etc.,
to be unlike to. Túhay (nagakatúhay) gid ang íla mga batásan. Their
habits are quite different. Akó ákon túhay sing panghunâhúnà. I am of
a different opinion (mind). I think otherwise, differently. Nagtúhay
na ang dágway sang íya baláy, kay ginpintahán níya nga matahúm na
tulúkon. The exterior aspect of his house is quite different now,
for he has painted it in a way pleasant to look upon. (cf. laín).

_tuháy-túhay_, Dim. and Freq. of túhay. Ang ámon pamulákan madámò
gid sing mga búlak nga nagakatuháytúhay ang íla sinâ nga duág. In our
garden are very many flowers of all sorts of colours. (cf. laínláin,
sarîsárì).

_túhil_, To insist on payment, etc. See túkbil. Tuhíla--tukbilá.

_túhoy_, Preference, choice, predilection; intention, determination,
decision, plan, desire, wish; direction, address; to prefer, have a
predilection for, choose, decide for one thing with the exclusion of
others; to intend, determine, decide, come to the decision that, have
a mind to, plan, wish, desire; to direct towards (against), point at,
address to; to specify, limit. Ang túhoy sang íya tagiposóon. The
desire of his heart. His heart's aspiration. Sinulát níya inâ
nga túhoy sa kay Fuláno. He wrote it--for the address of,--as a
reminder for,--directed against, N.N. Ginatúhoy níla si Fuláno sa
amó nga palangakóan. They have a mind (They wish, desire, plan) to
appoint N.N. to that office. Tuhóya ang pagpadalá mo sa ímo anák sa
Manílà. Make up your mind (Decide) to send your son to Manila. Gintúhoy
níya ang paghágad, ang pagpílì, ang pagbásol, etc. kay Fuláno. He
has decided (come to the decision) that N.N. should be invited,
chosen, reprimanded, etc. (cf. túyò, buút, hungúd, tapát, pasahî,
pát-od, látid).

_tuhóy_, Curse, imprecation; to curse; imprecate evil, swear, wish
evil to, intend to harm or even to kill another. (cf. tóloy, tolóy,
tuyô, túhoy, panghimaláut).


_túhud_, The knee. Malúya siá sing túhud. He is weak-kneed. He is
lacking will power or resolution. (cf. túdhon, luhúd).

_tuhúg_, See tohóg--the nose-ring of a buffalo, etc.

_túid_, The menstrual discharge, menstruation, monthly
flow. (cf. régla, pamulanón).

_túig_, The year; time. Also used as verb. Sa túig nga iní. Sa nián
(karón) nga túig nga nagalakát. This (present, current) year. Sang
túig nga tinalíkdan (naglígad). Last year. Sang tátlo ka túig. Three
years ago. Walâ gid matuígi ang íya paglúntad dídto. His stay there
did not last a full year. Sa mga túig sang katuigán. For ever and
ever. (cf. tinúig, tuíg-túig, dág-on).

_tuíg-túig_, Yearly, every year, annually, annual.

_tuíp_, To learn by experience or practice, to acquire knowledge of a
trade or profession by trying one's hand at it; to observe, notice,
come in contact with. Mabuipán níya ang maáyo nga pangúma. He will
learn by experience how to be a good farmer. (cf. taíp).

_túka_, (Sp. tocar) Turn, opportunity. (cf. tórno).

_túka_, (Sp. toca) Bonnet, hood, coif, headdress. (cf. kálò, takuróng).

_tukâ_, To peck, pick up with the beak (bill), said of birds.

_túk-an_, From tukâ--to peck, etc. Ang humáy nga nabulád sa ínit
gintúk-an sang mga manók. The chickens picked up some of the rice
that was spread to dry in the sun.

_tukás_, To raise, lift, elevate, take up, heave, hold up, turn up (a
mask, veil, curtain, etc.); to doff, take off, raise, lift (one's hat,
or the like). Gintukás sang hángin ang íya mantelyína. The wind lifted
(up) her veil. Tukasá (Itukás) ang kálò mo. Take off your hat. Tukasí
siá sang ímo kálò. Raise (lift, doff) your hat out of respect for
him. Give him your hat. Take off your hat to him. (cf. tokáb, tukî,
sukáb, sukíb).

_túkaw_, To venture abroad, go--, see--, investigate--, look after--,
in person. (cf. kúdaw, súdsud, dúkaw, tudâtúdà, tán-aw, sulúng).

_túkbil_, To insist on payment; importune, press, dun, urge repeatedly
(that a debt should be paid, an account squared, a contract fulfilled,
or the like). Tukbilá siá sang íya útang. Insist on his paying his
debt. Gintúkbil níya akó sang tulún-an nga ákon ginhulám sa íya. He
kept asking me to give him back the book I had borrowed from him. Indì
ka magtúkbil sa íya. Don't press him. (cf. túhil, sákò).

_túkbol_, To push, thrust, prick, jab, lunge, make a pass
(upwards). Tukbolá siá sang tokón (bagát). Make an upward pass at
him with the pole. (cf. dúgdug, hárog).

_túkbon_, From tukúb--to pounce upon, tear to pieces.

_túkdan, túkdon_, From túkud--to erect, etc.

_tukháyaw_, To raise--, lift up--one's head, the eyes, etc. (tokháyaw
id.).

_túki_, (Sp. toque; tocar); Stroke, hit, tap, rap, touch, knock, kiss
(at billards); to touch, come in contact with, hit, rap, tap, knock,
strike, kiss (at billards). (cf. tándog, salapáy, tokár).

_tukî_, To uncover--, open--, lift up--, a little in order to peep
into, peer in, discover. (cf. tukíb).

_tukíb_, To open a little or partially a book, curtain, package,
the mouth, etc. so as to be able to see what is inside or behind
the cover; to disclose, discover, invent. Tukibá ang pinutús, agúd
makítà ko kon anó ang sulúd. Open the parcel a little so that I may
see what is inside. Ipitá (Ligpitá) ang atóp agúd índì matukíb sang
hángin. Fasten the roof down so that the wind may not be able to lift
it. Basáha iníng sulát, ápang tukibón mo gid lámang, agúd nga índì
mabása sang ibán. Read this letter, but open it only a little so that
the others may not be able to read it. Makatitingála ang mga natukibán
(tinukibán) sang bág-o nga kinaálam. The discoveries or inventions of
modern science are marvellous. Dílì náton masáyran kon anó pa balá ang
matukibán sang mga manginalámon kunína. We do not know what scientists
may discover yet in the future. (cf. sukíb, sukáb, tokáb, tukís, ukáb).

_tukís_, To open partially a book, curtain, box, etc. See tukíb,
sukíb, tokáb, ukáb.

_túkis_, (English: talkies). A talking film, talking pictures,
a cinematographic exhibition mechanically accompanied by talking
and music.

_túklò_, To make a dash for, snatch, catch suddenly. See tóklò.

_túklud_, To push, etc. See tíklod.

_túknul_, To show signs of life by motion, to stir, move. (cf. bíknol,
tíknol).

_túkrì_, To touch, take hold of, catch, seize. (cf. tándog, kapút,
túki, dakúp, túklò).

_túktuk_ See tóktok--bill (of birds), etc.

_tukturúuk_, To crow (of a cock). See toktoróok.

_tukúb_, Seizure, dismemberment, devourment; to bite, dig one's
teeth in, tear to pieces (with one's teeth, fangs, tusks, or the
like), to snatch, snap, pounce upon, swoop down upon, dismember and
devour, fall upon living things with intent to kill or destroy. Ang
kuríng nagatukúb sang ilagâ The cat pounces on the rat. Gintukúb
sang mga lóbo ang mga karnéro. The wolves tore the sheep in pieces
(and devoured them). Tinukúb siá sang idô. The dog bit him. Dinakúp
sang haló ang pisô kag íya túkbon (gintukúb). The iguana caught
the chicken and devoured it. (cf. kagát, úkub, dágit, káon, láglag,
gús-ab; manunúkub, tulúkbon).

_túkud_, To erect, establish, set up, found, promote, build, make,
create, form. Sín-o ang nagtúkud sináng kumbuyahán? Who promoted
(formed) that company? Ang Sánta Iglésya tinúkud ni Hesukrísto. The
Church was founded by Jesus Christ. Ang ámon bánwa natúkdan (natukúran)
na man sing sangá sang amó nga palatikángan. A branch of that business
firm has been established also in our town. (cf. pátok, pásad, hímò,
búhat, túga, palatúkdan, palatukurán).

_túkud_, To support, prop (up), as small young trees, vines,
etc. Tukúra ang tanúm, kay nagtúnglì sa lakás nga ulán. Prop up the
plant, for it is bowed down (bending low) on account of the heavy rain.

_tukúd_, A column, prop, pillar, support, post, shaft, any upright
or leaning prop of wood, iron, bamboo, etc. that supports a
superstructure. (cf. tokó, súlay, halígi).

_tukúd_, (B) To endure, stand, can, be able to, brook, suffer,
tolerate. Indì (tána) katukúd (makatukúd) magpánaw tódtod sa Gímbal,
hay bág-o pa lang nagayád (magayád). (Indì siá saráng makalakát túbtub
sa Gímbal, kay bág-o pa lang siá nagáyo (magáyo)). He is unable to
go on foot as far as Guimbal, because he has only lately recovered
from his illness. (cf. saráng, batás, ántus, íro).

_túkung_, To lift or raise the head (said of snakes, or the like).

_túkung_, Bobtailed, docked, having the tail cut short; to be or
become bobtailed. (cf. putúl).

_tukús_, To not consider the price of, insist on buying a thing even
if the price is dear, to pay dearly, be ready to pay a fancy price,
go the limit, pay a high (stiff, long) price for a thing. Gintúksan
ko lang ang bilí siníng ísdà. I paid a high price for this fish. Indì
ka magtukús sinâ, kay támà kamahál. Don't insist on buying it; it
is too dear. Daw sa walâ na sing makatukús sinâ, kay támà katáas
ang bilí. Scarcely anybody will be able to afford that, as it is so
exorbitantly expensive.

_tukyáhaw, tuk-yáhaw_, To hold up one's head, lift one's eyes (or head
from a drooping or dejected position). Nagtukyáhaw siá sang íya ólo. He
raised his head. He looked up. Itukyáhaw mo ang ímo nawóng. Lift up
(Raise) your head. Tilt up your chin. Look up. (cf. tukháyaw).

_túla_, To cook (boil) vegetables, etc. See tóla, tinóla.

_tulaán_, A vegetable dish; a pan or kettle for cooking vegetables in;
plate or dish for serving food; dinner-plate. (cf. pínggan, tulahán,
tulánhan).

_tulabón_, A stretcher, hammock, litter. (cf. talabón; urimón--a
sedan chair).

_tulábong_, A grallatorial bird, a sort of white heron. It may be
seen standing on the back of a buffalo and hence it is also called
the carabao-egret. The tulábong is smaller than either the túgtug or
the dógwak.

_tulábyog_, To swing, rock, sway to and fro. (cf. hábyog).

_túlad, tulád_, (B) Like, as; to be like, similar to. Tulád kadiá. At
once. Immediately. Without delay. (cf. súbung, subúng siní).

_tulágsik_, To jump aside, start, give a start, move with a
jerk. Nagtulágsik siá sa dakô nga kakibút kag kúlbà. He started in
surprise and fear. (cf. líksi, líktin).

_tulágsik_, To chirp, squeak, utter a shrill cry, move arms and legs
and utter indistinct sounds as a baby when trying to speak. (cf. úgyak,
údyak).

_tulahán_, See tulaán--a vegetable dish, etc. (tulánhan id.).

_túlak_, To throw, pitch, fling, push (away), launch, put off, put
to sea. Gintúlak níya akó. He pushed me aside (away). Itúlak ang
sakayán. Launch the boat. Put (bear, push) off. (cf. tulúd, habóy,
pilák, tíklod, síkway).

_túlak_, To sow, put in the first seed or seedling, to plant, set up,
establish, erect, commence building a house by setting up the first
post, or the like. (cf. túdlak, panúdlak).

_tulákdong_, A cover for the head; to cover the head; to
loosen the outer skirt and pull it over the head as is often
done by Philippine women as a protection against the sun or
rain. Itulákdong (Tulakdongá) ang patádyong mo. Pull your skirt over
your head. Tulakdongí ang bátà. Cover the child's head (with a skirt
or blanket). (cf. talákdong).

_tulakóp_, A trap, especially one for catching monkeys.

_tulálay_, Music; melody, tune, piece of music, musical entertainment;
to play music, be a musician. (találay id.).

_tulámhok_, A wig, false hair, artificial hair, periwig,
peruke. (cf. pilúka).

_tulám-os_, To wet, moisten, dampen, bedew, make moist or damp;
to rain a little, rain just sufficient to make the soil a little
wet or damp. Nagatulutulám-os gid lámang ang ulán. Very little rain
is falling. Básì matulám-os ka sang (sa) ulán. You may get wet in
the rain. Nagtulám-os ang íya mga matá. Her eyes were wet. She shed
tears. (cf. lám-os, turám-os, talíthi, apókapók, dabódabó, paniríngan).

_túl-an_, Bone; skeleton. (cf. hinúl-an, hanúl-an).

_tulánhan_, See tulaán--a vegetable dish, etc. (tulahán id.).

_tulán-os_, To wet, etc. See tulám-os.

_tulápok_, Squall, a passing shower of rain, gust of wind; to be
squally or gusty. Nagatulápok ang amíhan. A squally northwind is
blowing. (cf. turapók id.).

_tuláy_, Bridge. (cf. táytay).

_túlì_, To circumcise. Ang mga tinúlì. The circumcised. Ang
pagtúlì. Circumcision. Ang mga dîtinúlì. The uncircumcised.

_túl-id_, Exactness, precision, accuracy, diligence, thoroughness;
to be or become exact, precise, etc.; to do something thoroughly,
carefully, well. Tul-irá (-idá) ang ímo pagtoón, pagpangusísà,
etc. Study diligently, investigate thoroughly, etc. Natul-irán akó
siníng manunúdlò. This teacher seems to me to be very exact (punctual
and painstaking). (cf. íd-id, písan).

_tuliháw_, A kind of bird, the loriot, golden oriole.

_túlin_, Order, command, injunction, direction, commission; to order,
command, direct, enjoin, lay upon, entrust, confide to. Gintúlin
níya sa ákon ang pagbántay sang baláy. He ordered me to guard the
house. Pagatulínan ikáw dirâ sang gihápon nga mga hilikotón sang mga
sologoón sa sulúd sang baláy. You will be directed to perform there the
ordinary duties of a servant in the house. Tinúlin níya sa íya ang íya
anák sang buút na siá mamatáy. When he was about to die he entrusted
him with (committed to him) the care of his child. (cf. túgian,
túgyan, bílin, tógon, sógò).

_túlin_, To be or become quiet, calm, steady, settled, still. Sang
tápus na ang bágyo nagtúlin ang sakayán. After the storm the boat
became steady. Nagatúlin na ang íla pagpuyô dídto. They are now quite
settled there. (cf. linóng, táwhay, tahímik, tím-os).

_túlin_, Swiftness, celerity, velocity, fleetness, a steady straight
course (of boats, birds, or the like); to cleave a path or way
through, fly straight and swiftly, cut through the water with great
velocity. (cf. dásig, dalágan, tádlong).

_tulíng, túling_, (H) The very ripe (black and sweet) lúmboy-fruit.


_tulíngan_, (H) A kind of fish.

_tulísan, tulisán, tulisánes_, Brigand, bandit, highway-man, criminal,
gangster; vagabond, vagrant, rover. Hárì nga tulísan. Vagabond
King. (tolísan id.).

_tulísan_, A kind of fish.

_tulô_, Drop, bead (of perspiration, tears, blood, rain, etc.). Tátlo
ka tulô nga bulúng sa isá ka kutsaríta nga túbig. Three drops
of medicine to a teaspoonful of water. Tulúka ang mga dalágkò nga
mga tulô nga bálhas sa íya nga ágtang. Look at the large beads of
perspiration on his forehead. (tolô id.).

_túlò_, To drip, drop, flow in drops, trickle, distil, dribble; to
leak, let escape in drops. Nagatúlò ang atóp, ang alhíbi, ang grípo
sang baríl, etc. The roof, the water-tank, the tap of the barrel,
etc. is leaking. Natulóan akó sing tátlo ka tulô. Three drops trickled
down on me. Mahalín kitá dirí, kay ginatulóan sang ulán. Let us remove
to another place, for here the rain is dripping on us. (cf. tólò
id.; tubúd).

_tulón_, To swallow, gulp down, gorge, imbibe, absorb, bolt
(down). Túnla ang kán-on. Swallow the rice. Natulón mo ang líso sang
lúmboy? Have you swallowed the stone of the lúmboy-fruit? Nakatulón
ka na sang píldoras (pildorás)? Have you swallowed the pills? Buút
níya ipatulón sa áton nga--. He wants us to swallow i.e. he wants us
to believe that----.

_tulôtúlò_, Dim. and Freq. of tulô, túlò.

_tulô-tulô_, A dole, limited portion, small amount, very little,
drop by drop; to dole out, deal out scantily or grudgingly, give
sparingly. (cf. tilôtilô).

_túltug_, To strike or beat a drum, bamboo-bell, etc. Tultugá ang
tultúgan. Strike the bamboo-bell. (cf. túgtug, bágtol, patík, bágting).

_tultúgan_, A tubular bell consisting of a joint of bamboo with a
slot cut into it. Such bells are much used both for calling people
together as well as for signalling. (cf. bágting, linggánay).

_túltul_, To know or find one's way; to trace, look for (a lost animal,
etc.). Makatúltul ka sang dálan pakádto sa----? Do you know the road
to----? Matultulán mo balá ang ímo nga ginakadtoán? Do you know the
way to your destination?

_túltul_, Hardened pieces of salt or sugar, lump, compact mass (of
sugar, salt, etc.).

_tulubalíngon_, (H) What is to--, should--, be conceded or yielded;
proper, fit, suitable, meet, due to. (cf. tubalíng).

_tulúbdan_, (H) Place where liquids flow or trickle from, source,
spring; pore, foramen, orifice. Ang mga tulúbdan sang pánit. The
pores of the skin. (cf. tubúd, tuburán, buhôbúhò).

_tulúbhan_, (H) See tulubúhan.

_tulúblok_, Prick, pin; fork, table-fork. (cf. tulúslok, itulúbuk,
sibít, tenedór).

_tulubuánan_, Sprouting, growing, giving off new shoots; to sprout,
start growing, give off new shoots (said of sugar cane, coconuts,
etc.). (cf. túbò).

_tulubúhan_, (H) Suitable or well adapted for growing sugar cane. Dútà
nga tulubúhan. Land good for growing sugar cane. (cf. tubó).

_tulúbwan_, See tulubúhan.

_tulúd_, To push--, shove--, impel--, forward (forwards), to move or
slide by pushing, to thrust--, set--, put--, aside with a jerk or push;
to incite, instigate, urge, animate, induce. Tulúd kamó sang káro. Push
(Shove) the cart. Itulúd mo ang látok dídto. Push (Move) the table
over there. Gintulúd níya akó. He pushed me--forward,--aside. Ginatulúd
siá sang íya mga sumulúnud. His followers are--urging him on,--pushing
him to the front,--backing him up. Indì kamó magtudlánay. Don't jostle
(push) each other. (cf. bútong--to pull).

_tulúdlò_, Fore-finger, index-finger, index. Also plural form of
túdlò. (cf. turúdò).

_tulúg_, (H) To sleep, slumber, be asleep. Ang bátà nagakatulúg. The
baby is sleeping (asleep). Sang íya pagkatulúg nagdámgo siá
nga----. When he was asleep--, In his sleep--When he slept--, he
dreamed (dreamt) that----.

_túlug_, Sleep, sleeping; to go to bed, retire for the night, go to
sleep, lie down to sleep. Matúlug na akó. I am going to bed. Kagáb-i
sang ikapúlò ka táknà nagtúlug kamí nga tanán, ápang akó sing ákon
walâ makatulúg sing bisán isá lámang ka pisók. Last night we all
went to bed at ten o'clock, but I could not sleep (did not sleep)
a wink. (cf. tulúg, katulúgon, tulugán).

_tulugán_, Matulugán and natulugán are used in the meaning of: to
fall asleep. Natulugán siá. He fell asleep. Ang masakít nga bátà índì
makatulúg, ápang básì matulugán siá; magtingúhà kamó sa paghípus,
agúd índì mahúkaw ang íya túlug (katulúgon). The sick child does not
sleep, but let us hope it may fall asleep; be very quiet so as not
to disturb its slumber. (cf. túlug).

_tulugán_, Bed, sleeping room, place to sleep, etc. (See tululugán,
higdáan).

_tulúgban_, A place to which an animal comes to wallow, water-hole,
pool, puddle, buffalo wallow. (cf. tubúg).

_tulughúngan_, Opening, valve, aperture, mouth, inlet, orifice (for
pouring in a liquid, etc.). (cf. túghung).

_tulugmáhon_, (H) Riddle, puzzle, enigma, fable, parable; something
that is--to be solved,--difficult of solution,--hard to guess or to
understand. (cf. túgma).

_tulúgtan_, What is to--, should--, can--, be granted or permitted;
permissible, allowable, not objectionable. (cf. túgut).

_tulúg-túlug, tulúg-tulúg_, Dim. and Freq. of túlug, tulúg--to sleep,
etc. To doze, nap, drowse, snooze.

_tulugyánan_, Manager, care-taker, administrator, commissioner,
in charge, in authority; representative, member of
parliament. (cf. túgian).

_túluk_, (H) Gaze, look; to look, see, direct one's eyes towards, fix
one's eyes upon, to eye, gaze at, behold, regard, view, scan. Túluk
ka dirí. Look here. Behold. Tulúka iní. Look at this. See. Indì ka
magtúluk sinâ. Indì mo pagtulúkon inâ. Don't look at that. Gintúluk
(Tinúluk) níya akó sing matalúm. He looked hard at me. He gave me a
sharp look. He regarded me intently. Patulúka siá sinâ. Let him have
a look at it. (cf. tán-aw, bilíd, sulúng, mútad, mulálong).

_tulúk-an_, Place where pickings can be had (got). (cf. tulúk-on).

_tulúkbon_, That is to be--bitten, etc.; victim, prey. (cf. tukúb).

_tulúk-on_, What is to be--, can be--, picked up (with the bill of
a bird, etc.); grain, particle of food, mouthful, morsel; pickings,
gleanings, profit, gain. (cf. tukâ, tulúk-an).

_tuluktukón_, Spine, etc. See toloktokón, talódtod; balískog,
talimáskog).

_tulukurón_, What is to be--, should be--, can
be--, erected, set up, built, established; worthy to
be--established,--enacted,--ordained,--built, etc. (cf. túkud,
palatúkdan, palatukurán).

_tululágay_, To flow profusely, stream (of tears, perspiration,
etc.). (cf. ágay, túlò, talabirís, táktak, ílig).

_tululámos_, To flow copiously, etc. See tululágay, talabirís.

_tululán-on_, Vegetables. See turulán-on, ulutanón, útan, láswa.

_tulul-íron_, What is to be or should be--done
well,--improved,--brought to perfection,--performed with
precision. (cf. túl-id).

_tululugán_, (H) A bedroom, sleeping apartment,
dormitory. (cf. tulugán).

_tululukón_, (H) Scene, sight, view, spectacle; worth while seeing,
that is to be or should be--seen,--looked at. (tururukón id.).

_tululusán_, Anything that is to be faced,--confronted,--done,--gone
through,--performed; work, job, occupation, test; end,
goal. (cf. túlus).

_tulumánon, tulumanón_, That is to be (should be)--complied
with,--fulfilled,--done,--executed,--performed; duty,
obligation, precept, commandment, order, law, injunction, rules,
regulations. (cf. túman, kasogoán, buluhatón, katungdánan).

_tulumbánan_, What is to be stepped or trodden upon; foundation,
base, floor. (cf. túmban).

_tulumpíhon_, What is to be piled or stacked, as rice,
etc. (cf. túmpi).

_tulum-úkan_, Anything that is to be pressed, as a telephone button,
piano key, a paper to be stamped or sealed, or the like. (túm-ok).

_tulún_, To swallow, etc. See tulón.

_tulún-an_, Book, volume, tome; doctrine, instruction; one to be
taught, student, pupil, apprentice; that is to be tamed or broken in
(of animals). (cf. toón).

_túlung_, The top-leaves of a plant, especially of a tobacco-plant.

_tulúng-an_, (H) A measure of one half, particularly of half a bushel
of rice. (cf. tungâ).

_tulúnggon_, (H) What is to be--sounded,--played; a piece of music,
melody, air, tune, sonata. (cf. túnug, tunúg).

_tulungkáron_, Fathomable; conceivable. (cf. túngkad, salalumón).

_tulungtúngan_, Table, shelf, ledge, pedestal, anything used for
putting an object upon. (cf. túngtung, lamésa, látok, bulutángan).

_tulupáan_, (H) Place where an object comes to rest or alights
on. (cf. tupâ).

_túlus_, See bólas, túros.

_túlus_, To approach, go near, come to, face, confront, interview;
to enter, go into, travel across, to traverse, cross. Párì, matúlus
akó kuntánì. Father, I would like to have an interview with you,
i.e. Father hear my confession. Gintúlus níya ang kadagátan. He
entered--crossed--, traversed--, the high seas (the open ocean). Tulúsa
lang inâ. Just face it, risk it, undertake it. (cf. atúbang, palapít,
padulóng, sulúd, latás, dóksol).

_tulúslok_, (H) Prick, thorn, spine, spike, prickle; fork. (cf. túslok;
tenedór).

_tulus-ónon_, (H) Anything that is to be suffered, borne with, put up
with, supported, carried, undertaken, shouldered, as a load, burden,
expenses, responsibility, an office, etc. (cf. tús-on).

_tulústus_, (H) To rub, knead, massage the body of a person in a swoon,
or the like. Walâ siá maumpawí kon walâ pagtulustusá sang mga umalági
dídto. He would not have regained consciousness, if he had not been
massaged (rubbed) by the passers-by. (cf. tóstos, hílot).

_tulútug_, A strong fence, stockade, palisade, etc., especially a
double fence filled in with thorny branches, etc., as often seen in
mountain villages. It is a protection against thieves and bands of
robbers. (cf. talútug).

_tuluyó, tulúyò_, Plural forms of tuyó, túyo.

_tuluyoón, tulúy-on_, That is to be--intended,--striven after; aim,
goal, aspiration, plan, scheme. (cf. túyò).

_túma_, Louse, clothes-louse. (cf. tóma, kúto, botól, kayúmad, lusâ).

_túmà_, Lye; brine, pickle; to put in brine, pickle. (cf. lihía;
gamús, patís, lílang).

_tumágsak_, Seldom, rarely. Tumágsak gid lámang ang íya pagabút
dirí. He very seldom comes here. (cf. tumalágsa).

_tumágsak_, Wide apart, far away from others, thinly scattered,
not near together. (cf. malakâ, pitápitá, atákaták).

_tumalágsa_, Seldom, rare, scarce; seldom, rarely, scarcely ever,
now and then, off and on, not very often. Tumalágsa gid lámang. Once
in a lifetime, extremely seldom. (cf. talágsa, tumágsak).

_tumalán-aw_, An onlooker, spectator, bystander. (cf. tán-aw).

_tumalángway_, A customer, guest, one who buys a drink,
etc. (cf. tángway).

_tumalánum_, A planter, farmer. (cf. tanúm).

_tumalánum-tubó_, _--lánot_, _--tabákò_, etc. A sugar-planter,
a hemp-producer, a tobacco-grower, etc.

_tumalápnà_, One or that which stops, puts an end to, hinders,
impedes, obstructs something. Tumalápnà-kaláyo. A fire-man,
fire-extinguisher. (cf. tápnà).

_tumalapô, tumalápò_, Associate, partner, co-partner, member (of a
society or company); share-holder, stockholder. (cf. tápò).

_tumalatáp_, Care-taker, administrator, director, chief. (cf. tátap).

_túman_, Enough, sufficient, satisfactory, considerable; very, rather
much, rather many. Túman na. That's enough. That'll do! That'll
serve! That is sufficient. Dílì pa túman----kóndì nga----. It is
not yet sufficient that----, but----. Túman kadámò nga mga táo ang
nagtalámbong. Very many people assisted. A good crowd of people were
present. Túman na balá ang túbig ukón dugángan ko pa? Is that water
enough (Is there a sufficient amount of water now) or shall I add
more yet? (cf. ígò, ángay, bágay, hústo, bastánte; támà, lakás, dúro,
lám-ag, súkò).

_túman_, To obey, fulfill, carry out, execute, perform, comply with,
effect, achieve, accomplish. Walâ níya pagtumána ang sinógò ko sa
íya. He did not comply with the order I gave him. Magtúman ka kon
sogóon ikáw. Do what you are told. Obey when you are ordered. Gintúman
gid níya ang íya tinúg-an sádto. He actually accomplished what he
had promised to do. Buút níla ipatúman sa áton yanáng mabúg-at
ngga mga tulumanón. They want us to carry out those difficult
orders. (cf. búhat, hímò, dayón, tarús; páti which in (B) often has
the meaning of: to obey).

_túm-an_, From tóom--to wrap in leaves, etc.

_túm-an_, To wrap a thing in leaves and warm--, heat--, cook--,
it by burying it under hot ashes, over live coals, etc. Tum-aní ang
talámbal. Heat the poultice (plaster). Tum-anán mo lang ang lígbos, ang
binóro nga bilóngbilóng, etc. Wrap leaves round the lígbos-mushroom,
the pickled bilóngbilóng-fish, etc. and cook it in hot ashes. Ang
artamísa nga tinóktok íla tinum-anán (gintum-anán) kag itámbal
(gintámbal) sa lamutî sang ákon túdlò. They made a fomentation
(stupe) of chopped up wormwood and put it on the blister of my
finger. (cf. tóom, tinum-anán).

_tumándok_, A native, one born in the place, indigene, indigenous,
autochthonous, not exotic or foreign. (cf. míthì; dumolóong--foreign).

_tumáo, tumáwo_, A ghost, a fairy, elf, goblin, gnome; a ghost supposed
to haunt large trees and forests. (cf. tamáo, tamáwo).

_tumarámpok_, A serf, vassal, who in the olden times occupied a
position between the timáwà and the ulípon. The class of the tumarámpok
consisted chiefly of farmers, skilled workmen, merchants, etc. and
made up the bulk of the population. (cf. kasimánwa, banwahánon).

_túmba_, (Sp. tumbar) To fall, tumble over (down), turn a somersault,
to upset, turn upside down, roll head over heels, topple over; to
empty a glass, etc. (at one draught, stretch, pull, dash). Natúmba
siá. He tumbled over. Andam ka agúd índì matúmba (magkatúmba) ang
káro. Look out or the cart may topple over. Tumbahá na lang iníng isá
ka báso nga tubâ. Just empty this glass of toddy. (cf. húlug, kulúb,
sulî, dágpà, etc.).

_túmba_, (Sp. tumba) Tomb, grave, catafalque, vault, sepulchral
monument, hearse; a bench or table for resting a coffin on during a
funeral service. (cf. lulúbngan).

_tumbága_, Tombac, tombak, pinchbeck, bronce, an alloy of copper and
zinc; sham gold.

_túmbak_, A harpoon, barbed spear or javelin, prong,
fork. (cf. bángkaw--lance).

_tumbák-túmbak_, Dragon fly, damsel fly.

_tumbálay, tumbaláy_, To roll down head over heels, fall down a
steep incline, etc.; to struggle, wriggle, writhe, move restlessly,
tumble about (as one suffering great pain, or the like). (cf. túmba;
rímpwal, hiwasâ, kubyál, etc.).

_tumbalík_, To turn, return, go back, retrace one's
steps. (cf. panumbalík, bálik, paúlì).

_túmban_, (H) To step on, place (plant) one's foot upon, set the
foot on the ground. Nakatúmban na siá sa dútà kag nagsákà liwán sa
hágdan. He had already put his foot on the ground and then went back
again up the ladder. Bantayí ang ímo ginatumbanán. Mind your steps. Be
on your guard where you set your foot. Itúmban ang tiíl mo sa siní
nga bató kag maglúmpat ka sa pihák sang kalóg. Step on this stone
and jump across the ditch. (cf. lápak, tápak, patóng).

_túmbas_, Payment in full, complete satisfaction; to pay off, pay
in full, square, settle (up), satisfy completely, give adequate
satisfaction, make full amends for. Walâ pa siá magtúmbas sang íya
nga útang. He has not yet paid off his debt. Nakabáyad na siá sing
túmbas. Gintúmbas na níya ang báyad. He has now paid in full. He
has squared his account. Walâ akó sing ikatúmbas sang madámò nga mga
kaayohán nga ímo ginhímò sa ákon. I am unable to (I cannot) make you
a full return for the many benefits you have bestowed on me. Tumbasí
siá sang ímo útang. Pay him your debt in full. Gintúmbas gid níya
ang íya nga sayúp. He made full amends for his mistake. (cf. ímpas,
kábis, bálus, báwì, tímpos).

_tumbá-túmba_, Dim. and Freq. of túmba. Also: rocking, jolting,
swaying to and fro; to rock, jolt. Síya nga tumbátúmba. A rocking
chair. Ang káro nagatumbátúmba. The cart is jolting. (cf. lumpálúmpa).

_tumbáya_, To swing, shake, sway, rock, roll, move to and
fro. (cf. hábiog, humbíya, sumpíya, tumbátúmba).

_tumbiláng, tumbílang_, To turn over and over in falling down from a
considerable height, tumble down head over heels. Nakatumbiláng siá
sa káhoy. He fell from high up the tree. (cf. tambiláng, húlug).

_túmbò_, To bound, rebound, bounce, jump up straight. Tumboá ang áto
sang kalát, agúd ímo malámbut. Make a jump for the end of the rope
that you may be able to reach it. Túmbò ka sa lamésa. Jump on the
table. (cf. lúkso, lúmpat--to jump (in general); ámbak--to jump down).

_túmbog_, See túmbok.

_túmbok_, To stamp, puncture, dot, trace a line or mark, press upon,
to press--, push--, knock--, with something blunt; to cut (out)
by pressure applied to the cutting tool. Tumbokí sang tímbre ang
sílyo. Bring the seal down on the stamp. Itúmbok ang ímo kamomóo
dirí. Press your thumb here. Leave your thumb-mark here. Gintúmbok
níla ang íya likód sang kuláta. They knocked him on the back with
the butt-end of their rifles. Ang bóla sa bílyar (bilyár) ginatúmbok
sang tulúmbok. The billard ball is knocked by the cue. Nagatulúmbok
silá sing mga pórmas (óstyas). They are cutting hosts. Itúmbok mo
ang talarík sa tungâ gid sang bóla. Try to hit the ball exactly in
the middle with your cue. (cf. túm-ok).

_tumbô-túmbò_, Dim. and Freq. of túmbò. To jump up and down; to throb,
thump, palpitate. Mabáskug ang tumbô-túmbò sang íya tagiposóon. His
heart is beating violently. His heart is thumping. Ang kángga
nagatumbôtúmbò sa dálan nga batohón. The cart is jolting over the
stony road. (cf. tumbátúmba).

_túmboy_, Remonstration, expostulation, lecture; to give a lecture,
to remonstrate, expostulate with, find fault with, criticize one's
past, complain of ingratitude, reproach, rebuke, throw in one's
teeth. Daláyon gid lang ang íla tumbóyay. They are constantly finding
fault with each other. Indì mo pagitúmboy sa íya ang sinádto. Don't
reproach him with what is past. Don't harp on his past. (cf. bóyboy,
pamóyboy).

_tumilímbang_, Balancing, poising, keeping the balance or equilibrium;
pertaining to the opposition, opposing, opponent. Ang búnghay nga
tumilímbang. The opposition party. (cf. tímbang).

_tumóg_, Wet, damp, etc. See humóg.

_tumóg_, To trickle, drip, drop, flow out in drops; to ooze (out),
as matter or pus from an ulcer, etc. (cf. tubúd, túlò, ágay).

_túm-ok_, To press down, etc. See túmbok. Itúm-ok ang ímo kamomóo sa
pítyong-kilás. Push the electric button with your thumb.

_túm-oy_, To dip (in), immerse, etc. See túgmaw, túsmug.

_túmpi_, Stack, heap, pile of grain in the sheath, sheaf, bundle of
grain or straw; to stack, pile, sheaf, make a heap (of grain in the
sheath). Nagatúmpi (Nagatulúmpi) silá sang íla nga ginálab. They
are stacking what they have cut with the sickle (what they have
reaped). Tumpihón nínyo ang humáy. Stack the rice. Koralán nínyo
ang tinumpihán sang humáy, agúd índì maábtan sang mga háyup. Build a
fence around the rice stack so that the animals (cattle) cannot get
at it. (cf. túmpok, kamáda, aníb).

_tumpilák_, Gambol, frisk, frolic, running and jumping with
clapping of hands, or the like; to frolic, gambol, frisk, run and
jump and clap one's hands, make violent gesticulations; to make
convulsive movements, start, startle, struggle, wriggle, writhe, get a
shock. Iníng bátà daw pírme gid lang nagatumpilák. This boy is--never
at rest,--always up to something,--always running and jumping and
making a noise. (cf. rímpwal, pólok, pálak, kubyál, hinúgyaw).

_tumpilás_, Not straight, not at right angles with, deviating
from a straight course; to deviate from a straight course,
etc. (cf. tampirás).

_túmpok_, A pile, heap, stack, mound, barrow, cairn, clump, mass (of
wood, earth, stones, etc.); to pile, stack, amass, heap together, heap
(up), make a heap of. Tumpoká ang mga bató. Put the stones together in
a heap. Pile up--, Make a heap of--, the stones. Tinumpokán níla sang
mga páhò ang látok. They put the mangoes in a heap on the table. Sa
gihápon may mga tinúmpok nga ságing nga ginabalígyà sa tiénda. There
are always piles of bananas for sale at the market. Ipatúmpok sa táo
yanáng mga káhoy nga nalápta dirâ. Get someone to gather together in
a heap the pieces of wood lying about over there. (cf. kamáda, túmpi).

_túmtum_, To aim at, etc. See patúmtum, túmud.

_túmu_, To soak, drench, saturate, steep in, fill with. Ang íya
tagiposóon natúmo sang katám-is sang paghigúgma. His heart was full
with the pleasant feeling of love. Ang ságbot, labí na gid kon matúmu
sing túbig, támà kabáhò. Rubbish, particularly when thoroughly wet
with water, emits a very vile (offensive) odour. (cf. húpug, húmug,
basâ, lúgum, tóoy, salúpsup).

_túmud_, To point at, aim at, try to hit, direct towards or
against. Tumúda (-úra) ang bató. Try to hit the stone. Tinúmud níya si
Fuláno sang amó nga paitínítin. Those insinuations of his were aimed
at N.N. Itúmud sa íya ang pusíl. Point the rifle at him. (cf. túmtum,
patúmtum).

_tumulóo_, Believer, faithful, one who has the faith. (cf. tóo).

_tumulukíb, tumulúkib_, An inventor, originator, pioneer. (cf. tukíb).

_tumulúkud_, Founder, originator, one who starts a thing or lays the
foundation; builder, maker. (cf. túkud).

_túmuy_, The point, end, key (of a thread, string, etc.); to connect,
bind together (broken threads, etc.); to add to, prolong. (cf. súgpon).

_túnà_, To give rise to, be the origin of, bring about, create. Anó
balá ang ginatunáan siníng gamó, tinagâ, etc.? What is the origin--of
this row,--of this term (expression), etc.? (cf. túga, pátok, túkud,
súgud).

_tún-an, tón-an_, From toón--to learn, etc.

_túnaw_, To melt, fuse, flux, dissolve, liquefy, smelt; to digest. Walâ
pa gánì matúnaw ang ímo kináon kag malakát ka na? Your food is not yet
digested and you wish to be off? Gintúnaw níya ang tímgà, tálo, etc. He
melted the lead, the candle-grease, etc. Ang dîmatunáwan (sang íya
nga kináon). One suffering from indigestion (dyspepsia). (cf. hinunáw).

_tunáw-túnaw_, Dim. and Freq. of túnaw. Also: to change imperceptibly,
to vanish--, dissolve--, disappear--, by degrees, to shade off into
another colour. (cf. dulâdúlà).

_túnay_, Pure, undefiled, unadulterated, uncontaminated, unalloyed,
unmixed; sincere, honest, coming from the heart; perfect, complete,
unconditional. Túnay nga gúgma. Pure, honest, sincere love or
affection. Túnay nga kaluásan kag gilayón, dílì pakuláhaw kag
saliagúm. Complete and immediate independence, not a sham or indefinite
(independence). (cf. lúnsay, lubús, lúgus, búg-os).

_túndà_, Announcement, news, information, declaration, message;
to announce, declare, make known, let one know, tell, give one to
understand, bring a message, herald, proclaim, promulgate. Ang
mga manugbántay sang mga háyup gintundaán sang isá ka ánhel
(anhél). The shepherds received the message of an angel. Itúndà sa íya
ngag----. Make known to him that----. May nabáton nga túndà nga----. A
message has been received to the effect that----. (cf. balítà,
pahibaló).

_túndal_, A kind of banana. (cf. térna, kúndal).

_túndog_, To take food to someone who is in the fields; to
take after, to follow, imitate, copy. Itúndog ang panyága sa kay
tátay. Tundogí si tátay sang panyága. Take the dinner to father (in
the fields). (cf. ábat, ápas, sunúd, panúndug; ílog, súbung, tulád).

_tungá_, (B) To rise from a meal, leave the table, finish a repast,
finish taking a bath or partaking of food, etc. Bág-o pa lang
(lámang) kamí makatungá (makaúndang). We have only just risen from
the table. (cf. úndang).

_tungâ_, Half, moiety; middle, midst, centre; to halve, bisect, cut or
divide into two equal parts. Tungâ sa táknà. Half an hour. Sa tungâ
sang----. In the midst (middle, centre) of----. Halfway (Midway)
between----. Sa tungâ sang madámò níya nga buluhatón----. In the
midst of his many duties or tasks to be performed----. Túng-a (Tungaá)
iní. Divide this into two equal parts. Halve it. (cf. pihák, píhak).

_túngab_, To light, set fire to, ignite; to light one cigar with
another, or the like. Tungábi ang tabákò ko sang kaláyo sang ímo
tabákò. Itúngab ang kaláyo sang ímo tabákò sa ákon tabákò. Light
my cigar with yours. Patungába akó. Let me light my cigar with
yours. (cf. dábok, dáig, súnug, tútud, síndi).

_túngal_, A kind of ant; an insect.

_tungâ-túngà_, Dim. and Freq. of tungâ--half, midst, etc.

_tungá-túnga_, The slip-knot by which a rope is fastened to a buffalo's
nose-ring (tohóg) including a short length of rope (pitík, lawíg);
handle, haft, helve; power, authority, management, direction, lead,
influence, pull. (cf. uluyatán, kaláptan).

_tungáw_, A kind of crab-louse. It is a minute whitish insect that
turns red when it has sucked blood.

_túngdan_, From tungúd--right, reason, motive, etc.

_tunggarô_, To stand--on end,--erect,--straight. See tinggarô,
paníndog.

_túnggaw_, To stand up straight, erect, said of hair, rice-ears,
etc. (cf. tunggarô, tíndog, tanús).

_túnggol_, Vulva. (cf. putáy).

_túnghol_, To hand over, give to, deliver, hand, press into
the hand of, transfer to, give up to, give into the possession
of another. Itúnghol (mo) sa íya iníng sulát. Hand him this
letter. Gintungholán (Tinungholán) akó níya sing limá ka
mángmang. He pressed five pesos into my hand. Gintungholán ko siá
sang páyong nga íya nalipatán. I put in his hand the umbrella he had
forgotten. (cf. dóhol, entregár, hátag, taó, túgrò).

_túngil_, To nurse, tend the sick, attend on the sick, look after one
ill in bed, take care of the bed-ridden. Tungíla ang masakít. Attend
on (Wait on) the sick person. (cf. sagúd, tátap, sapópo, batití,
hamíl-ay).

_tungkáaw_, To raise--, lift--, one's head, etc. after holding it
bent or low. (cf. tukháyaw, tangâ, tánglà, bayáw; ánghaw).

_túngkad_, To fathom--, plumb--, measure--, sound--, the depth
of, to take soundings, heave the lead; to find out, comprehend,
understand thoroughly, get at the bottom of. Tungkará (-adá) kon anó
ang kadalumón sang túbig. Measure (with a plummet) the depth of the
water. Plumb the depth of the water. Walâ siá makatúngkad sang íya
sinâ nga kahulúgan. He could not fathom (understand, comprehend) the
meaning of that (its meaning). Ipatúngkad lang sa íya inâ. Let him
guess it (find it out). (cf. takús, sókol; hangúp, sáyod, usísà, etc.).

_túngkò_, White spots on the forehead of a cow, etc.; the red spots
and the fat of river-shrimps, etc.

_tungkóan_, White spotted, having white spots (of cattle, etc.);
red spotted, fat (of shrimps, lobsters, etc.).

_túngkud_, A small fishing net worked by two men.

_túnglì_, To bend down, incline, bow down, as the tops of trees,
full ears of grain, etc. Nagatúnglì ang humáy, kay matínggas. The
rice is bowed down, for the ears are full. (cf. dúnglay, dukô, dungúk).

_túng-on_, From tungâ--to halve, etc.

_túngtung_, To place--, put--, sit--, be--, rest--, upon. Itúngtung
iní sa látok. Tungtungí siní ang látok. Put this on the
table. (cf. butáng).

_túngtung_, The second or after (latter) crop of kadiós-peas,
etc. (cf. talóngtong).

_túngtung_, What is thrown in free of charge as an addition to what
is sold to a customer, etc. See áman, támba, óbong, túbung.

_tungúd_, Right, reason, motive, interest, relation or connection with,
reference, regard. May tungúd siá kag bangúd sa pagbúhat sinâ. In
acting thus he has (had) right and reason on his side. Anó ang tungúd
mo sinâ? What is your interest in that matter (affair)? What have
you got to do with it? Sa tungúd siní gánì----. Just on account of
this----. Precisely for this reason----. N.B. Besides as noun "tungúd"
is also very widely used as:
1) Verb: to concern, refer to, belong to, have a relation or connection
with, e.g. iníng báhin sang humáy natungúd sa kay Fuláno. This part
of the rice belongs (pertains) to N.N. Ipanáysay mo inâ sa mga punoán
nga natúngdan. Explain that to the authorities that are concerned in
the matter (----to the proper, corresponding authorities). Patungúd,
pahanungúd--to attribute to, offer up--for,--in behalf of,--in behoof
of, to do for the--sake of,--good of, to do to the advantage of,
apply to, bestow upon, consider as belonging to, impute, etc. Iníng
indulhénsya saráng mapahanungúd sa mga kalág sa purgatóryo. This
indulgence can be applied to the souls in Purgatory. Dílì mo
pagipatungúd sa ibán ang ímo mga sayúp. Don't impute your own faults
to someone else.
2) Conjunctive particle: Because, since, seeing that, for, on the
ground that, in as much as, e.g. Naakígan siá sang íya agálon
tungúd nga nagsabát siá. He roused (incurred) the anger of his
master, because he answered back. Walâ siá makatámbong, tungúd kay
nagmasakít siá. He could not put in an appearance, because he--was
taken ill,--had been taken ill,--took ill. Tungúd kay (Tungúd nga)
ginbúhat mo inâ pangabagáha na man ang salábton. On the ground that
you have done it you must also shoulder the responsibility.
3) Preposition: a. About, concerning, touching, as to, as for,
respecting, as respects, with respect to, regarding, as regards,
with regard to, referring to, with reference to, in connection with,
pertaining to, appertaining to, bearing upon, relating to, with
relation to, etc. Namángkot siá (sa) tungúd sang bilí sang kawáyan. He
asked about the price of bamboo. Sa tungúd sang íya pagpalágyo walâ
akó kabatî (makabatî) sing bisán kon anó. As to his flight, I have
heard nothing whatever about it.
b. Because of, owing to, for the reason that, on the ground that,
on account of, etc. Nasáyran ko na tungúd sang ímo pagsáysay. I know
now because of your explanation. Ginbalúsan siá níla tungúd sang íya
kaísug kag tungúd sang íya pagpatigáyon sing búlig. They rewarded him
for his courage and because he brought up help. Walâ silá makabáyad
tungúd sang íla piérde (kapierdéhan) sa bágyo. They could not pay
on account of the losses they had sustained in the bágyo. Tungúd sa
anó? Why? Wherefore? For what reason? Tungúd siní. Therefore. For
this reason.
c. For the good of, for the sake of, for the benefit (advantage)
of, for, in behalf (behoof) of. "Indì kamó maghibî tungúd sa ákon,
kóndì tungúd sa ínyo kag sa ínyo mga anák". Don't weep over me,
but weep for yourselves and for your children".
d. Through, through the agency of, by, by means of, by the help of,
etc. Tungúd kay Hesukrísto nga Aton Ginóo. Through Jesus Christ,
Our Lord. Nakadángat siá sa pagpatábà sang íya umá sa maáyo nga bilí
tungúd kay Pédro. He managed to sell his field at a fair price by
the help (through the--influence,--intervention,--good offices) of
Peter. (cf. bangúd, kay, hay, nahanungúd, nahatungúd, pahanúngdan,
katungdánan, palahanúngdan).

_tungúg_, A kind of mangrove and its bark. The latter is often ground
to powder and put into toddy (tubâ) to promote fermentation.

_túngup_, See tópo--to follow suit, etc.

_túnlon_, From tulón--to swallow, etc.

_túntun_, To lower, let down (by means of a rope, etc.). (tónton id.).

_tunúd_, Sunk, set, gone down (of the sun, etc.; cf. túnud).

_túnud_, To disappear, sink, go down, set. Nagakatúnud na ang
ádlaw. The sun is setting. (cf. katúndan--the west).

_tún-ug_, Dew. (tón-og id.).

_tunúg_, Sound, resonance, tone, strain, peal, blast, din,
noise. Nabatián ko ang mabáskug nga tunúg sang lupók. I heard the
loud detonation of the shot. Ang tunúg sang budyóng. The blast of a
trumpet. Ang tunúg sang linggánay. The sound of a bell.

_túnug_, To sound, resound, peal, swell. (cf. tunúg, matúnug).

_tunúk_, (H) A thorn, prick, prickle, spine, barb, spike; to
prick. Natunúk akó. I was pricked by a thorn. (cf. dúgi, dalíngag,
úngon, tulúslok).

_tunukón_, (H) Pertaining to thorns, of thorns, thorny, prickly,
spiny, spinous, spiky, spiked, barbed. Alámbre nga tunukón. Barbed
wire. Ang purúngpúrung nga tunukón. The crown of thorns. (cf. dogíhon).

_tunúng_, A pin, bolt, nail; to hold a bar, etc. in place; to pin,
put in a pin or bolt. Tunungí ang ganháan. Bolt the door. (cf. pálpal,
paláy, balángbaláng).

_túnung_, To stop, calm, quiet, impede. (cf. tínong).


_tunyági_, To rail at, scoff, mock, curse and swear at. Hinúgay ka
sang pálak kag índì ka magtunyági sang yárà sa idálum. Calm your
(angry) excitement and don't rail at (upbraid, speak insolently to)
those below you. (cf. pamuyáyaw, pamúlag, támay, yagutâ, ulígyat).

_túob, tuób_, See tóob, toób--to fill with odours, etc. (cf. guób,
tugúb).

_túod_, To be true, etc. See túud.

_tuódtúod, tuódtod_, Dim. and Freq. of túod. Kon tuódtuóron inâ----. If
that is true----. If that can be verified----. If it should prove to
be true----. (cf. himatúod, kamatuóran, matúod).

_tupâ_, To alight--, fall--, drop--, come to rest--, on. Natúp-an
(Natupaán) ang botílya sang bulutángan sang abó kag nabúung
(nagkabúung). The ash-tray fell on the bottle and it (the bottle)
was smashed.

_tupád_, Side, nearness, closeness, proximity, propinquity, vicinity,
juxtaposition, immediate neighbourhood. Sa tupád sang ámon baláy. Close
by--, near--, at the side of--, adjoining--, our house. Near us. In
our immediate neighbourhood. (cf. luyó, kílid, lapít; tamparán,
atubángan--front).

_túpad_, (_seldom tupád_) To be at the side of, close by, near at hand,
at one's elbow, in the immediate neighbourhood, be next neighbour
to, to adjoin, be adjacent; to sit or stand side by side. Túpad ka
sa íya. Tupári (-ádi) siá. Go (stand, sit) near him, close by him,
at his side (elbow). Take your place close by him. Nagatuparáy
(-páray) ang íla mga baláy. Their houses are next to (adjoining)
each other. Ang tiénda kag ang ámon baláy nagatúpad. Ang tiénda
(ámon baláy) nagatúpad sa ámon baláy (sa tiénda). Our house is near
(adjoining, at the side of) the market place. Patúpad--to put or place
side by side, etc.; to compare. Kon ipatúpad mo ang íya katarúngan
sa íya ni Fuláno----. If you compare his argument (reasoning) with
the argument put forth by N.N.----. (cf. íping, kílid, luyó, lapít,
támbi; atúbang, támpad--to confront).

_túpak_, To pound or stamp something soft in a mortar (as boiled
bananas, bayébáye, etc.). Láktan mo sing kalámay ang ságing nga tinanók
kag tupákon. Mix the boiled bananas with sugar and pound them in the
mortar. (cf. lúbak, bayô, totô).

_túp-an_, From tupâ--to alight on, etc.

_túpla_, To spit; to treat with contempt, despise. (cf. dúplà, durâ,
tópra; támay).

_túplay_, To bend down, incline, weaken, soften. (cf. dúplay, dúnglay).

_túpling_, Swaying, faltering, swerving, inclination; to incline
sideways, sway, swerve, deviate from the straight path, yield,
budge. Sa waláy tolotópling (tulutúpling)----. Unflinchingly,
unswervingly, unfalteringly, without wavering, without flinching or
budging. (cf. patúpling, lisá, sipák, talingíg, etc.).

_túpo_, See tópo--to follow suit, etc.

_tupók_, To fall, be wounded or killed in war, die in battle, or
the like. Ang mga nagkalatupók kag nagkalapatáy sa latagón sang
pagawáyan. Those that fell and died on the field of battle. Naígò
siá sang lisó kag natupók (nagkatupók). The bullet hit him and he
fell to the ground. (cf. túmba).

_tupók_, See tapúk--to be fragile, brittle, etc.

_tupók-túpok, tupók-tupók_, Dim. and Freq. of tupók--to fall, die
in battle.

_tupó-túpo_, Dim. and Freq. of túpo--to follow suit, do the same thing.

_túptup_, To include all, etc. See tóptop, tápud, kámpod, tipatíp.

_túpul_, To agree, conspire, meet, come together. (cf. hitúpul).

_túpung_, To be equal to, to equal, to be neither superior
nor inferior. Nagatúpung silá sa kataasón. They are equal in
height. Nagatúpung gid ang íla nga palangakóan. Their authority or
office is the same. They are equal in authority or office. Ang íya
pagkamangin-alámon matupúngan áyhan, ápang daw sa índì malabawán. His
learnedness can perhaps be matched, but scarcely surpassed.

_tupúng_, Equal (of size, capacity, wealth, colour, strength,
etc.). Tupúng gid ang íla nga duhá nga panuigón. They are both of the
same age. Dílì tupúng iní sa isá. This is not equal to that other one.

_tupús_, (B) To suffer, stand, bear, have to, put up with, have to
be content or satisfied with. Nagatupús lang kamí kang ginamús,
hay warâ kamí ti ibakál kang ísdà nga láb-as. (Nagaagwánta lang
kamí sang ginamús, kay walâ kamí sing ibakál sang láb-as (maáyo)
nga ísdà). We have to eat salt fish, as we have no money to buy fresh
fish. (cf. agwánta, batás, ántus, íro).

_turá_, (B) The remains or remnants of a meal, scraps of food, what
is left on the table after a meal. (cf. salín, bíhag, bilín).

_túrà_, To shake to and fro, excite by shaking (a cock, etc.). The
form turâtúrà is mostly employed.

_túrag, turág_, To trample down, step over, walk over, put one's foot
in, etc. See túdag, tádag, tárag, tásag, ládag. Tumurág lang siá sa
hulumáyan. He just cut across the rice-field.

_turágsik_, (B) See tulágsik--to chirp, etc.

_turám-os_, See turán-os, rám-os, tulám-os.

_turán-os_, (B) See talám-os. Nagaturán-os (Nagaturuturán-os) ang
urán. (Nagatampútámpu ang ulán). It is raining--at intervals,--in
little showers.

_turapók_, (B) A passing shower of rain, a squall, a fit, jerk,
start; at intervals, with interruptions, now and again, off and
on, by fits and starts; to do with interruptions, by fits and
starts. Urán nga turapók. (Ulán nga tulápok). A shower of rain. A
squall of very short duration. Turapók nga pangabúdlay. Work done by
fits and starts. Desultory, interrupted, not steady or continuous
work. Riá nga táo turapók sa bisán anó nga orobráhon. (Inâ nga táo
matalák-on sa bisán náno nga olobráhon. Ang olobráhon níya sinâ nga
táo dugáydugáy níya ginabiyáan). Whatever this man does he does by
fits and starts. This man--never works long at any job,--gets soon
tired of any kind of work. (cf. tulápok).

_turáray_, See tulálay. Also: Criticism, fault-finding; to criticize,
disparage, find fault with. Natilawán na níya ang turáray ni Fuláno. He
has drawn down upon himself the censure (criticism) of Mr. N.N.

_turások_, To take a short cut through fields, over grass, etc.; to
pass, go over or enter without ceremony, interview, call to account,
tax with, burst upon, "go for". Ginturások lang námon ang talámnan,
tunúk (dúgi), etc. We simply cut across the field, tramped over the
thorny shrubs, etc. Indì mo pagturasókon ang pagsulúd sa ákon kwárto,
kóndì manóktok ka gid ánay. Don't enter my room unceremoniously, but
knock first. Sang pagkabatî níya siní dáyon gid lang íya ginturások
si Fuláno. As soon as he heard this, he at once "went for" (had an
interview with, expostulated or remonstrated with) N.N. (cf. túrag,
tásak, ládag, láktud, kurágmang).

_turâ-túrà_, To shake (swing) to and fro, excite by shaking. Ang manók
ginaturâtúrà túbtub nga magsámpok. The cock is shaken to and fro till
it fights or gets up a fighting spirit. Ginturâturáan níya akó sang
íyang kamót. He shook his hand at me. Ginturâtúrà níya sa ákon ang
páhò, ápang walâ man níya pag ihátag. He waved the mango before me,
but did not give it to me.

_turáwik, turawík_, A squeal, squeak, shrill cry or sound; to squeal,
squeak, etc. (cf. talawík, torawík, iwík, iyágak, tiángak, tiábaw,
siagít).

_túray_, To prattle, prate, talk about, censure, find fault with,
criticize, harp on, cavil at. (cf. múlay, híkay, búrà, turáray).

_turayáw_, (B) To shout, rail at, speak in a loud voice, vociferate
(in anger or passion). Indì mo tána pagturayawón. (Indì mo siá
pagsinggitán). Don't shout at him. Bisán magturayáw kaw man dián índì
man tákon magsahót kanímo. (Bisán magsinggítan ka man dirâ índì (man)
akó magsapák sa ímo). You may get angry and shout as much as you like,
but I won't listen to you. (cf. sínggit, pugaás, pamúyas, etc.).

_túring, turíng_, (B) See tulíng--the very ripe lúmboy-fruit.

_turíngan_, See tulíngan--a kind of fish.

_turírok_, (B) To apply oneself with zeal, be diligent, be assiduous,
go at with a will. Turiróki ang mga buruhatón mo. (Pisáni (Ukúri)
ang ímo mga buluháton). Be diligent in the performance of your work
(duties). Throw yourself into your work. Turiróka ang (Pisáni ang)
pagpanahî, pagsulát, etc. Sew, study, etc. diligently (assiduously,
with application). (cf. turírop, písan, úkud, túl-id, íd-id).

_turírop_, (B) See turírok.

_turón_, (Sp. turron) Nougat, almond paste, a sweetmeat mixed with
pistachio nuts, etc.

_turóng_, To upturn, turn up (one's eyes); to shut (close) the eyes
in death. (cf. dorós, sulíp).

_túrong_, To turn round, revolve, whirl, pirouette, spin round, rotate,
gyrate, twirl. Sa daláyon nga pagtúrong sang mga tinúig----. In the
ever turning wheel of Fortune----. In the course of years----. As
the years keep (kept) coming round----. (cf. túyub, búyung).

_túros_, See bólas.

_turós_, To sip, suck, imbibe, absorb, drink in small draughts,
draw in with the mouth. Turosá lang ang ítlog sa olokabá. Just suck
the egg from its shell. Sín-o ang nagturós sang sabáw? Who has been
sipping the sauce? (cf. hígop, sópsop, súyup, yúpyup, lótgot, sóso).

_túrsi_, (Sp. torcer) To turn, twist, swing round,
deviate. (cf. wárik).

_turúbok_, (B) A pin. (cf. tubók, sibít, alpilír, kiríkol).

_turúdò_, (B) Fore-finger, index. (cf. tulúdlò).

_túruk_, (B) To see, etc. See túluk. (cf. tororokón).

_túruk_, To enter, penetrate the ground (said of roots, or the like);
to form roots, take root.

_turúk_, (H) Deep, penetrating, etc. See tudúk.

_turukádon_, (B) Ascent, uphill. See tolokáron, takládon.

_turúksò_, To interview, call to account, expostulate with,
investigate, ask for an explanation. Turuksuá siá. Call him to
account. Ask him for an explanation. (cf. tóksò).

_turúk-túruk_, (B) Dim. and Freq. of túruk--to look, see.

_turúk-turúk_, (B) Full of small holes or indentations, said
of worm-eaten wood, of fruit, of a pitted or pock-marked skin,
etc. (cf. tohóktohók, hatókhatók).

_turulán-on_, (B) Vegetables, etc. See ulutanón, útan, láswa,
lalaswáhon; laswáhon, tóla, túla).

_turútud_, A toy-whistle. See torótot, bantútut.

_turútuk_, Hammer, knocker. (cf. tutúk).

_turútuk_, A toy-whistle. See turútud).

_turútut_, See torótot, turútud, bantútut.

_túryal, turyál_, (Perhaps from the Sp. trillar or torear) To beat,
thrash, punish severely, drub, chastise thoroughly. (cf. tarítári,
torótóro, bakábáka, labá, lámpus, hánot, etc.).

_túsà_, See patúsà--to insist, be insistent.

_tús-an_, From túus--to mark, etc.

_túsay_, Wild gesticulation, spar; to make a spar at, gesticulate
wildly, move the hands wildly, saw the air with one's hands, swing the
arms, etc. preparatory to a fight, to get ready for a fight. Ang mga
manogdumúg nagatúsay (nagatulúsay, nagatinusayáy) na. The wrestlers
are getting ready for the fight. (cf. hanâ, labáy-lábay, barumbáda).

_tusík_, The beak--, bill--, of a bird; to peck (at), bite; to eat
very little. Daw nagtusík gid lang siá. He ate very little. He scarcely
touched the food. (cf. tóktok, tukâ).

_túslok_, To thrust at, poke at, make a lunge at, jab, prod, prick,
stab. Indì mo pagitúslok ang ímo túdlò sa íya matá. Don't poke your
finger at his eye. (cf. tíslok, tisók).

_túsmug_, To dip (in), immerse, plunge into--, put into--, a liquid;
to boil bananas, etc. in sugar. Itúsmug ang túdlò mo sa túbig nga
bendíta. Dip your finger in the holy water. Iúlà na lang yanáng túbig
nga tinusmugán níya sang íya mahígkò nga báyò. Pour out the water in
which he has dipped his dirty jacket. Mga ságing nga tinúsmug (sa
kalámay). Candied (Sugared) bananas. (cf. túgmaw, túm-oy, tógnod,
túgmoy).

_túsngaw_, To speak aloud, make audible, raise one's voice so as to
be audible, intelligible, distinct, clear. Malúya na gid siá nga
índì na gánì makatúsngaw sang íya tíngug. He is very weak now; he
cannot speak audibly (intelligibly) any longer. Indì na siá katúsngaw
(makatúsngaw). He is too far gone to utter a word. He can no longer
make his voice heard. (cf. hámbal, púlong, bungát, tikáb).


_tús-on_, To put a support underneath, to put or place under, to hold,
uphold, sustain, support, shoulder. (cf. lús-on).

_túsop_, To bite off a piece, eat by snaps and snatches, gnaw, nibble,
pick (a bone, etc.). (cf. áp-ap, kíbkib, kítkit).

_túsu_, See tóso--to be unreliable, etc.

_tútdan_, From tútud--to set fire to, etc.

_túte, túti_, (Sp. tute) A game at cards.

_tútò, tutô_, See tótò, totô--a darling (boy), etc.

_tutór_, (Sp. tutor) Tutor, guardian; instructor,
teacher. (cf. manugbántay, manunúon).

_tutóy_, A young dog, puppy. See totóy, tiô, tyô.

_tutú_, To pound, etc. See totó.

_tútò, tútu_, To be or become active, diligent, assiduous, working
with zeal or application; be a good boy. (cf. tótò, tútum, písan,
úkud, patútò, panútò).

_tútub_, A cover; a turban or any similar head-dress. (cf. tutúb;
púlus, pudóng).

_tutúb_, To cover a bottle, jar, pot, basket, etc. with a piece of
paper, cloth, or the like and fasten with a string tied round the
neck of the vessel (receptacle). Tutubá (Tutubí) ang pasók nga may
sulúd nga báboy (nga unúd sang báboy). Cover and close the neck of
the bamboo tube containing pork. May ginamús nga natutúb. There is
some salt fish wrapped up somewhere i.e. There is some secret behind
it. There is something that shuns the light, that should be hidden
or kept out of view. (cf. súngsung, putús, baláhos, tábon).

_tútud, tutúd_, To set fire to, burn, destroy (consume) by fire,
make fire of, burn to ashes. Tipóna kag tútdi ang mga ságbot
(rámò). Collect (Gather) the rubbish and burn it. Tinútdan níla ang
sinapiyo (sinipíyo). They burned (burnt) the shavings. (cf. súnug).

_tutúk_, To knock at a door, or the like; to hammer. Sínò na man ang
nagatutuk? Who is knocking again? Tutuká ang ganháan. Knock at the
door. (cf. tóktok, panóktok, papák pápà).

_tútum_, Reliability, trustworthiness, faithfulness; to be or become
reliable trustworthy, brave, trusty, valiant, faithful to one's duty
(under difficulties), etc. (cf. ísug, písan, únung, matútum).

_tutúnlan_, Throat, gullet, swallow, oesophagus. (cf. tulún).

_tutús_, The form patutús is mostly used in the meaning of: to yield,
give way, back down, submit. Indì gid siá magpatutús. He will not
yield. He won't give in. He will not relent (relax). (cf. patubúk,
paubág, patubalíng; ísol).

_túud_, True, veracious; to be or become true. Kon magtúud
(tuúron, matúd-an, mamatúd-an) inâ----. If that should (would)
be--true,--correct,--the case,----. In that event (case, supposition,
eventuality)----. (cf. túd-an, matúod, kamatuóran, himatúod; pamatúud,
tuódtúod; túod, tóod id.).

_tuúd_, A stake, post, pillar, column, support; stud, stanchion;
the stump (of a tree, bamboo, etc.). (cf. pagtúod, tokó, halígi).

_túus_, To mark, sign, label (particularly said of fruit, marked by
the owner, so that no one of his household may pluck it). Natús-an
iníng lángkà, kay palutóon gid sang tagíya. This jack-fruit is marked,
because the owner wants it to ripen well.

_tuwád_, See tuád--to bend one's back, etc.

_túwad_, To gallop, race, run very swiftly. Ang kabáyo nagatúwad. The
horse is galloping. Patuwáda (-ára) ang kabáyo. Gallop the horse.

_túwak_, See túak--to fight to a finish. (cf. úwak).

_túwak_, To leap, jump, plunge, spring, bound, rush; to pitch (of
a boat). Sang pagkakítà níya nga nagapalapít ang tagíya tumúwak siá
kag lumúmpat sa bintánà. When he saw that the owner was coming near
he made a rush for the window and jumped (down). (cf. lúkso, lúmpat,
líktin, ámbak, túmbò).

_tuwáy_, See tuáy--clam.

_tuwáy-túway_, The patella, kneecap. See tuáy-túay id.

_túya_, (B) There, over there. (cf. dídto, dirâ, rúgto).

_túyan_, To buffet, pursue, wreak one's vengeance upon. (cf. paupúk).

_túyang_, To waste, wear out, take it easy, let things take their
course. Daw sa dílì na makitáan sing bulúng yádtong láwas níya nga
natuyángan sang mga kalakasán sang maláut níya nga kaduyugán. It seems
that his body, wasted by the excesses of his evil habits, is past cure
(recovery). (cf. patúyang).

_tuyán-túyan_, Dim. and Freq. of túyan. Tinuyántúyan siá sang maláut
níya nga kapaláran súbung sang lúluk nga nagautáwútaw sa nagabahâ
nga subâ. Bad luck pursued (and buffeted) him like driftwood in a
flooded river. (cf. paupúk).

_tuyá-túya_, To ridicule, tease, mock, scoff at. (cf. tiáwtíaw,
uligâ, ulígyat).

_túyaw_, To weaken, tire, get exhausted. Natúyaw siá. He got
tired. (cf. lúya, lúyà, kápoy, pául, búdlay).

_tuyô_, To plot, vow vengeance, intend to wreak one's vengeance upon,
plan to kill or harm. (cf. panuy-ó, manunúyò, manunuyô).

_túyò_, Thought, idea, plan, intention, proposal, purpose, project,
design, scheme; to intend, think, propose, purpose, have in mind,
have in view, mean to do, contemplate, divise, scheme, plan. Anó balá
ang íya túyò? What then is his intention or plan? What does he intend
to do? Sín-o ang íya túyò? Whom is he thinking about? Whom does he
want? Sín-o ang íya ginatúyò? Whom is he courting? Whom does he intend
to marry? Gintúyò gid níya inâ. He intended it. He did it on purpose,
deliberately. (cf. hungúd, tinutúyò, katuyoán).

_túyo_, A kind of plant.

_tuyó_, Sleepiness, drowsiness; to make sleepy or drowsy, cause
sleep. Ginatuyó akó. I am sleepy. (cf. katutúyhon, katutúyhan).

_túyub_, (B) To turn, revolve or spin round on an axle or
pivot. Nagatúyub ron ang aríring. (Nagatíyog na ang alíling). The wheel
is turning round. Patuyúba ang aríring. (Patíyoga ang alíling). Make
the wheel turn round. (cf. búyung, túrong, tílik, tírik, tíog, tíyog).

_tuyúk-tuyukán_, Top, point, pinnacle, highest part, summit, apex,
peak, climax, acme. (cf. putokputokán, alipukpukán, pilewpilewán,
tuyúngtúyung).

_túyum_, Strength; to be or become strong, said of smells, tastes,
drinks, etc. (cf. dalísay, ísug, purús).

_tuyúng-túyung_, The tip, top of the highest branches of a tree,
the crown of a tree. (cf. tuyúktuyukán--the tip of a bamboo, etc.).

_twad_, See túad, tuád.

_twad-balískad_, Topsy-turvy, inverted, upside down, putting the cart
before the horse; to take the wrong course, invert the order of things,
go the wrong way. (cf. sulî).

_twak, twálya_, etc. See túak, tuálya, etc.

_tyô_, A young dog, pup, puppy. See totóy, tiô.

_tyóg-tyóg_, A loafer, vagabond, etc. See tiógtióg.




U


_u_, For the pronunciation and use of the vowel "u" in Visayan see
remarks made upon the vowel "o". (cf. remarks on letter "w").

_úba_, Unclothed, stripped, undressed, nude, naked, divested of;
to strip, undress, take off clothes, divest of, uncloth, doff,
bare, make bare, denude. Ubáha ang báyò mo. Take off your jacket or
outer dress. Ubáhi siá sang íya báyò. Take off his coat or outer
garment. Inubáhan (Ginubáhan) siá sang mga buyóng (sang íya mga
panápton). The robbers stripped him. Ubáhi ang íya abága kag usisáon
mo ang íya pilás. Bare his shoulder and examine his wound. Tungúd kay
alángálang ang pagúba sang báyò sang pilasón gingúnting na lang sang
manugbúlung. As it was difficult to divest the wounded man of his coat
the doctor removed it by cutting with a pair of scissors. (cf. hubô,
húblas).

_úbad_, The soft core or pith of a banana plant. (cf. úbud--the soft,
edible core of the upper part of a burí-palm or coconut-palm).

_ubág_, Only the form paubág is in general use in the meaning of: to
yield, give way, back down, give in, submit. Indì siá magpaubág. He
does not want to--yield,--give way,--submit. Walâ silá magpaubág sa
íla nga tindógan. They did not--, would not--, surrender. They held
their ground (position). (cf. pasúpil, patubúk, patubalíng).

_ubálhang_, (B) Loose, unfastened, open, not well secured, untidily
arranged, said especially of a woman's skirt when it is carelessly
arranged around the waist; to be or become loose, etc. Nagaubálhang
gid lang ang patádyong na (níya). Her skirt is quite loose (nearly
falling down). (cf. buyâ; lógho--to drop, fall down).

_ubán_, Gray (grey) hair, white or silvery hair.

_úban_, To become (turn, grow) gray (grey) or white, said of
hair. Nagúban na ang íya bohók. His hair has turned white. His hair
has--whitened,--grown white,--greyed,--turned (grown) grey. (cf. bukáy,
putî).

_ubánon_, Gray-haired, grey, white-haired, covered with white hairs;
old, aged. (cf. bukáy, putî; tigúlang; úban, ubán).

_ubás_, Very young, immature rice prepared as food. The ubás is
still more immature than the rice used for making límbok. When
still in the ear this immature rice is called ulubáson and lubkánon
respectively. (cf. marô, múging--rice-flower; alányon--mature rice
ready for reaping).

_úbas_, (Sp. uva, uvas) Grapes, a bunch or cluster of grapes.

_ubáy_, To accompany, go along with, be with, assist, help, guide,
support. Indì ka mahádluk, kay ubayán ikáw níya. Don't be afraid,
because he will--accompany you,--be with you,--help (assist) you. Ang
Sánta Iglésya índì gid makatálang, kay ginaubayán sa gihápon sang
Diós nga Espíritu Sánto. The Church cannot fall into error, because
she is always guided by the Holy Ghost. (cf. kaúbay; búylog, tóytoy,
búlig, tábang).

_úbhon_, From ubó--to cough. (cf. olóbhon, oróbwon).

_úbi_, Uvi yam, yam, ubi, an edible tuber belonging to the dioscorea
family and growing at times to a large size. There are many varieties:
the "kinarabáw, kinárbaw" is of great size and whitish; the "tapól"
has a bluish meat; the "tám-is" is sweetish; the "búl-og" grows down
deep in the ground; the "likô" is a sort of twisted úbi; the "bagunáw"
grows upwards from the ground; the "hilós" is tap-rooted and strikes
deep into the soil; the "tayabá" is a kind of small úbi. (cf. banáyan,
buhayán, kamóti).

_ubít_, The fastening or tucking-in of a Filipino skirt (patádyong)
at the waist; to fasten, secure or tuck in at the waist the loose end
of a patádyong. Walá (Toó) siá sing ubít (pangubít). She is accustomed
to secure her patádyong by tucking it in at the left (right) side
of the waist. (cf. ulubítan, alubáksan; when a patádyong is secured
carelessly or untidily it is called "buyâ, ubálhang").

_ubó_, Cough, coughing; to cough. See obó.

_úbre_, (Sp. ubre) The udder, dug. Makaúyon ka sang úbre? Do you like
to eat the udder (of a cow)? (cf. sóso).

_úbud_, The soft, edible core or pith of the upper part of a burí--palm
or coconut-palm. (cf. úbad--the soft core of a banana-stem).

_ubúd-ubúd_, Soft bone, gristle, cartilage; scalp. (cf. ubúduburán).


_ubúd-ubudán_, See ubúd-uburán.

_ubúd-uburán_, The hair together with the skin of the (human) head,
the scalp; soft bone. (cf. ubúdubúd).

_úbung_, Moon-ring, halo. See óbong.

_úbus_, To finish, end, use up, wear out, swallow up, consume,
spend all, exhaust, make an and of. Ubúsa lang iníng tinápay. Just
finish this bread (eat it all). Naúbus na ang bíno. The wine is all
gone now. Ginúbus níya ang isá ka gatús ka mángmang nga ginhátag ko
sa íya. He spent to the last farthing the hundred pesos I had given
him. Daw sa índì maúbus iníng heneró sa isá ka delárgo. This cloth will
probably not be used up in the making of a pair of trousers. Ubúson
mo sang káon iníng tátlo ka páhò. Consume (eat up) these three
mangoes. Indì níla maúbus sang inúm iníng tubâ. They cannot finish
all this toddy. (cf. úrut, tápus, sáid, tîtî).

_ubús_, The lower part of a town or village, the part near the coast,
near a river bed, lower down a slope or hill, the lower reaches of a
stream, etc. Sa ubús sang báryo. At the lower end of the village. Sa
ubús sang----. Lower down, at the bottom (of a room, church, theatre,
etc.). Dúlhug ka sa ubús sang bakólod. Go down the hill. Descend to
the base of the hill. Also used as a verb. Sa naubusán sang dálan,
sang subâ, etc. At the end of the street, at the lower reaches (near
the mouth) of the river, etc. (cf. tákas).

_ubús_, After, subsequently, having finished, immediately afterwards
(after). This "ubús" is usually preceded by "sa" or "sang" and
followed by potential verbal forms ma--, maka--, etc. e.g. Sang
ubús na matápus ang íya hámbal----. After his speech----. Having had
his say----. Sang ubús na siá makasulát tumíndog siá gilayón. Having
finished his writing he stood up at once. Sa ubús mo makúhà ang koríyo
kadtoí si Fuláno. First fetch the mail and then go over to N.N. Sa
ubús ka mamáhaw magság-ub ka. After breakfast you shall fetch some
water. (cf. tápus).

_ubús-úbus_, Dim. and Freq. of úbus. To come near the end of, be
nearly or almost finished, etc. (cf. urútúrut, tubústúbus).

_ubús-ubús_, Dim. and Freq. of ubús. Sa ubúsubús sang ámon baláy may
línaw nga lalangúyan. A little below our house there is a swimming
pool.

_ubús----ubús_, Now----and then. One moment--, at the next
moment----. (At) one time----, (at) another time----. Alternately,
by turns, off and on. Ubús siá makabátyag sing dakô nga dumút, ubús
man makabátyag sing gúgma. Now he would feel a great hatred and then
he would feel love. Ubús siá malíngkod, ubús man siá matíndog. One
moment he would sit down and the next moment he would stand up. By
turns he would sit down and stand up again. (cf. bulúsbúlus).

_udág_, A kind of dágmay. The proverbial saying: "Pánit sang udág ang
ímo" (The skin of the udág belongs to you) means: There is nothing
left for you. Late come, late served.

_udágan_, Place where udág grows; full of--, covered with--, udág.

_udagán_, Restless, lively, etc. See harásharás, hulagán, dingkalogán,
darándarán.

_údak_, To do as one pleases, as much as one likes, to one's heart's
content or desire, to eat one's fill, or the like. Ginaudákan lang
níla ang pagkáon. They are eating to their heart's content. Inudákan
siá níla sang yagutâ, sang tapúngol, etc. They mocked him, beat
him, etc.--till they had enough of it,--till they were completely
satisfied,--to their heart's desire. (cf. pagusá, patúyang, pasamíyang,
kánkan).

_údal_, To abate, diminish, slacken, languish, flag, dwindle,
decrease, have the edge taken off, to blunt, dull. Walâ pa pagúdal
ang pamaligyáon sa tínda (tiénda). Selling at the market is quite
brisk still (has not slackened, grown dull, fallen off). Walâ pagúdal
ang íya pamatásan. His habits are firmly rooted, difficult to reform
or to eradicate. Indì mo pagudálon ang binángon. Don't blunt the
bolo. (cf. búhin; hábul, hídal, hádal).

_udáygon_, See udáyhon.

_udáyhon_, Companion, friend, associate, intimate; close,
familiar. (cf. ábyan, kahírup, kahámbal, upúd).

_údhà_, Waste, profligacy, prodigality; to waste (money, etc.), be a
spendthrift, be prodigal, profligate, extravagant, lavish. (cf. buhahâ,
úsik, uyáng.)

_údkan_, From úkud--to be diligent, etc.


_údlon_, Wormy, worm-eaten, infested with worms, maggoty. (cf. ulúron).

_udók_, A young pig, piglet. (cf. urók, idík).

_udót-udót_, Flattery, fooling; to flatter, trick, wheedle, cajole,
etc. See odót, odótodót, unís, utís.

_úd-ud_, To gnaw, nibble, bite, eat. (cf. úl-ul, ól-ol).

_úd-ud_, To sit, squat, etc. See ód-od.

_údyak_, Delight, exultation, pleasure, (noisy) merriment, mirth,
glee; to be merry, exult, show pleasure, rejoice, delight in, be
delighted, break out in bursts of joy or gladness, frolic, gambol,
jump and dance with joy; to smile and wriggle and writhe with pleasure,
said of babies that are not yet able to speak. (cf. úgyak, hinúgyaw,
sángya, sádya, dinágyang, hámpang).

_údyong_, A sharp point, prick, prickle, thorn, splinter; sting,
pain (as caused by the prick of anything sharp-pointed). (cf. úngon,
dalíngag, súyak, tunúk, báslay, dúgi).

_údyong_, See ódyong--trumpet, bugle. (cf. búdyong).

_udyúykuy_, See agoyókoy--a kind of small crab.

_ugá_, Dry, dried, exsiccated; seasoned (of timber); sun-dried fish,
rice, etc.; to dry, become or make dry, to exsiccate. Nagaugá na
ang maís. The corn is getting dry now. Iníng mga tápì ugá na. These
boards are seasoned (dry). Nagaugá (Nagapaugá) siá sing maís. He is
drying corn. Ugahá ang humáy. Dry the rice. Spread the rice in the
sun to dry. May ugá kamó? Have you got any dry (dried) fish (rice,
etc.)? (cf. malá, kigás, tápa, bulád).

_úga_, Listener, hearkener, eavesdropper. Pangóga, pangúga--to listen,
eavesdrop (of women). (cf. úgo; hangálhangál, tingádtingád).

_ugád-úgad_, To reiterate, repeat, go over again, keep on doing or
saying the same thing, practise often, rehearse. Ugádugáron (-ádon)
mo inâ túbtub nga masaoló mo. Go over it again till you may know it
by heart. (cf. sulítsúlit, liwánlíwan, liwátlíwat).

_ugái_, Yet, but, all the same, in spite of, whereas, though. (cf. gái,
ibágo, ugáling, gáring).

_ugálì_, Manner, way, method, custom, nature, property; proper,
pertaining to, natural; to be or become natural, etc. (cf. kinaugálì,
kinatúbò, unáy, batásan, kinabatásan, etc.).

_ugáling_, Yet, but, still, etc. See ogáling. Mapanyága na kamó.--Karón
ugáling. Take your dinner now.--Not just now, but after a little
while. (cf. gáring, gái).

_ugám_, A disease of the tongue manifesting itself in inflammation
and painful cracks. It makes speaking and eating difficult and not
unfrequently ends in death; glossitis, glossophytia, black-tongue,
sordes (of the tongue).

_ugámid_, To comprise, include, take in, embrace, implicate,
involve. Naugámid galî akó sa íya nga sayúp. Strange to say,--I
became involved in his fault (offence),--I was considered to have
had something to do with his offence. (cf. daláhig, úmid, abáy, dáplì).

_ugángan_, Parent-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law,
(cf. umágad--son-in-law; manúgang--daughter-in-law).

_ugánot_, Small vein, artery; fibre, thread, filament. (cf. ugát,
sagún-ot, nahót).

_ugásip_, (H) The pulp of coconut meat after the oil (lána) has
been pressed out. (cf. gatâ--the juice expressed from the coconut
meat; lána--coconut oil; latík--the dregs or sediment left after
the gatâ has been boiled and converted into the finished product of
lána. (cf. urásip).

_ugát_, Vein, artery, bloodvessel; fibre, thread, tendon,
muscle. (cf. ugánot, nahót, kaugatán).

_ugáy_, To ask, implore, petition, request, importune. (cf. ámpò,
ahâ, pangáyò, pangabáy, pakiló-oy, híngyò).

_úgay_, To cherish, delight in; to fondle, caress, treat with great
affection. (cf. tígay, dálò, ánggà, wíli, lúyag).

_ugayóng_, A moan, groan, sigh; to moan, groan, sigh, whimper,
utter plaintive cries, complain, groan with pain (as sick people
do). Dáyon gid lang siá nagaugayóng sa íya higdáan. He is constantly
moaning in his bed. Inugayongán níya akó. He greeted me with groans
of pain. Walâ siá paghámbal, kóndì nagaugayóng gid lámang. He does
not say a word, but just keeps on sighing. Nahúkaw ang ákon katulúgon
sang íya mga ugayóng. His groans disturbed my sleep. (cf. aguyóng,
hágung, pangaragóy, panghákroy).

_úgbo_, A pastime. See ógbo under kúbung.

_úgdang_, Modesty, decency, delicacy, decorum; to be or become modest,
etc. (cf. lígdong, maúgdang, kaúgdang).

_ugdángan_, Modest, tactful, delicate, self-respecting. (cf. maúgdang,
malígdong).

_ugdáng-úgdang_, Dim. and Freq. of úgdang. Also: giving oneself
airs, walking about in grand style or in a dignified way. The form
paugdángúgdang is mostly used as verb. Nagapaugdángúgdang siá kay
may bág-o siá nga sáya nga sóklà. She is giving herself airs, because
she has a new silk skirt. (cf. timôtímò).

_úgdaw_, To calm down, become calm or quiet, subside, die down,
abate, quell. Nagúgdaw na ang kaláyo, ang íya kaákig, etc. The fire
has subsided now, his anger has calmed down, etc. Paugdawá ang íya
dumút. Quell his hatred. Induce him to quell his hatred. (cf. lúgpay,
táwhay, linóng, hagánhágan).

_úgduk_, A kind of eel. See ógdok.

_úgduk_, To set, drive in, plant, establish. (cf. tígduk, túgduk,
búgsok, tanúm).

_úghad_, To hawk, clear the throat preparatory to spitting. Indì ka
magúghad (mangúghad, magpangúghad) kon may nagakáon. Don't hawk and
spit while others are eating. (cf. kúghad).

_úghay_, Thrum, thrumb, the end of a weaver's warp threads. (óghay
id.).

_úghoy_, To shout, hollo, hallo, raise one's voice, yell, call aloud
for somebody. Ughoyí siá. Call for him in a loud voice. Iúghoy ang
tíngug mo. Raise your voice to a shout. (cf. sínggit, turayáw).

_ugís_, To discolour, lose colour, fade (of colour). (cf. lús-aw).

_ugís_, Partly bald, lacking hair or feathers, showing spots bare
of hair or feathers; to become thin or fall out (of hair); to rumple
one's hair with the tip of the thumb, or the like. Ugisá siá. Rumple
his hair. (cf. bungád, upáw).

_úgkan, ugkánan_, See ógkan, ogkánan--to be tranquil, at ease, etc.

_úgmud_, To enter deep, penetrate, go down, push or press down, sink,
descend; to impoverish, go bankrupt. (cf. úsmud).

_úgnud_, See úgmud.

_úgo_, Listener, eavesdropper (of males). See úga. The verb is pangúgo,
pangógo. (cf. singádsingád, tingádtingád, hangálhangál).

_úgoy_, A song, lullaby; to sing or play softly, to lull. Ginaugóyan
níya ang bátà. She is lulling the baby to sleep. Ang amó nga ambahánon
ginaúgoy sa bisán diín nga hilít sang kalibútan. That song is sung
everywhere. (cf. láylay, lánglang, yáyay).

_ugóy-úgoy_, Dim. and Freq. of úgoy. Ugóyugóyi si tótò sa dúyan. Sing
softly to baby boy in the hammock. Lull the darling to sleep in the
hammock. (cf. ogóyógoy).

_úgpong_, A bunch, bundle, cluster, parcel, package; to tie
together, make a bundle or package of, bind together (a posy, parcel,
etc.). Ugpongá ang lánot, ang káhoy, etc. Make the hemp, the wood,
etc. up in bundles. Inúgpong nga mga búlak. A nosegay, posy, bunch
of flowers. (cf. púngpung, pulóngpong, húgpung).

_úgpot_, To appear, arrive, come back, return, come, near,
approach. Dúgay na nga walâ gid siá magúgpot dirí. For a long time
he has not been here at all. Matióntión umúgpot man si Fuláno kag
ginpamunóan námon ang sinápul. After a short while N.N. arrived
and we opened the meeting. Ugpotí siá. Approach him. Go back to
him. Present yourself before him. (cf. abút, sapút, sámput, túlus,
bálik, palapít, ógpot).

_úgsad_, To step on the first or lowest rung of a ladder or on the
first stair of a staircase; full-moon; to be full-moon i.e. applied
to the moon: it makes its first step in its ascent towards the zenith
(the horizon on which the full-moon rises being considered its first
step. (cf. paugsarón; himatayón; latî).

_úgsang_, To fall down on one's back with some force as a person that
in sitting down has his (her) chair suddenly removed. (cf. lumpa-ód,
tingkáyà, úsdang).


_ugsarán_, (H) The first stair of a staircase, the first round or
rung of a ladder. (cf. úgsad).

_úgsod_, To begin, start, commence. (cf. súgud).

_úgsod_, (B) To utter, say, pass a remark, mention, tell, enjoin;
to prompt, teach (by word of mouth). Nagúgsod tána (siá) nga
mapailóngílong harúm-an (sa buás). He mentioned that he was going
to Iloilo tomorrow. Walâ siá magbúthò, kóndì nagtoón gid lang siá sa
úgsod sang íya ilóy. He did not go to school, but was taught by his
mother (at home). (cf. móno; búkò; bungát).

_úgsod_, To push or put into (as a piece of wood into the fire);
to launch, go forth, go out (as a boat into the water). Iúgsud ang
káhoy sa kaláyo. Put the wood into the fire. (cf. súgnud, dápung).

_úgtak_, To cackle. Kon sín-o ang nagaúgtak amó man ang nagítlog. The
one that cackles has laid the egg. (cf. kuták).

_úgtas_, To be impatient, irritable, nettled, vexed, angry,
exasperated, enraged, fretting and chafing. Indì ka magúgtas. Don't
be so impatient. Yanáng magtotóon daláyon gid lang nagaúgtas sa mga
bátà. That teacher has no patience with the children, is always angry
or exasperated. Ginugtasán níya kamí. He was very impatient with
us, was in a bad mood or humour. Ginapaúgtas níya si nánay níya. She
tries the patience of her mother to the breaking point. She is vexing,
nettling, exasperating her mother. (cf. ákig, ókdom, úgtom).

_úgtom_, To press the lips and teeth together, to clench one's teeth;
to control, check, brook, repress, suppress, keep in check. Nagaúgtom
siá. He is clenching his teeth. Ginaúgtom lang níya ang íya kaákig
kag kahuyâ. He (with difficulty) is keeping in check his anger and
shame. (cf. ókdom).

_úgtus_, See úgtas--to be impatient, etc. Also: to bear,
stand. (cf. batás, íro).

_ugút_, Anger, exasperation, excitement, choler, rage; to rage, be
angry, be in a passion, be wrought up (into a passion), be furious,
to fume. Indì ka magugút (magpaugút) tungúd sang diótay lang nga
butáng. Don't get angry over a trifle. Tiníklod ko siá sa hágdan,
kay inúgtan akó. I pushed him down the stairs, for I was exasperated
(wrought up into a passion). Indì ka magpaugút sa íya. Don't enrage
(exasperate) him. (cf. ákig, sáklaw, paugút).

_ugút_, To inherit (a trait, quality, features, etc.), to be like,
take after in colour, figure, expression, etc. Iníng bátà nakaugút
gid sa íya ilóy, dílì sa íya amáy. This child takes after its mother,
not after its father. (cf. paugút, súblì, panúblì, sunúd).

_úgyak_, A yell, shrill cry, loud outburst (of joy, playfulness,
etc.); a squeal, squeak; to emit a shrill sound or cry, to yell,
shout, vociferate, squeak, squeal, to frolic, make merry. (cf. údyak,
húgyaw, síyak, turágsik).

_úgyon_, To agree, concur, be of one accord, be united, to
cooperate, pull together, assist each other, collaborate. Magúgyon
kamó. Be of one accord. Come to an agreement (understanding). Pull
together. Ginugyonán níla ang pagbúhat sing dálan. They agreed to
build a road. (cf. binuligáy, hiúgyon, hilitóhog, hisáhò, hitúpul).

_úhaw_, Thirst, drought, drouth; to cause thirst, make
thirsty. Ginaúhaw akó. I thirst. I am thirsty. Inúm, kay kon dílì ka
maginúm karón uháwon ka gid sa dálan. Drink, for if you don't drink
now you will certainly get thirsty on the road. (cf. gútum--hunger).

_uháw_, Thirsty, droughty, drouthy, parched, dry. (cf. úhaw).

_uháy_, An ear of grain (with the grain). Isá ka uháy nga humáy
(sang humáy). An ear of rice. (cf. óhot--an empty ear of grain).

_úho, uhó_, (Probably from the Sp. ojo) An exclamation to attract
attention. Lo! See! Look here! Behold! Uhó, tan-awá iní! Lo and
behold! (cf. hoy).

_uísit_, Lucky, fortunate, happy, blessed. (cf. buísit--unlucky).

_ukáb_, To turn up (a stone, etc.), to be--, get--, come--, loose,
flap up and down, scale off, come off in scales. Ukabá ang bató. Turn
up the stone. Ginukáb níya ang ápog sa díngding. He scraped the lime
off the wall. Ang pínta naukáb (nagkaukáb). The paint scaled off
(came off in scales). Ang atóp ginaukáb sang hángin. The roof (of
nípà) is flapping in the wind. Ginukáb níya ang sílyo sa sóbre. He
peeled the stamp off the envelope. (cf. tokáb, tók-yab, óklab).


_úkad_, Swelling, expanding; to swell, expand, spread. Ang laón nga
humáy maúkad kon tig-angón. Old rice swells when cooked. Ang mga
lásgà (subáy) maulúkad kon tandogón. The lásgà-ants, if disturbed,
will spread themselves in all directions. (cf. hubág, banóg, bálhong;
lápta, aláplag, surumbálì).

_úkag_, Boasting, bragging, pride, ostentation; to be or become proud,
etc. (cf. bugál; wákal, hádak, hákal, hámbog, agrót, etc.).

_ukagán_, A boaster, braggart. (cf. wakalán, etc.).

_ukáng-úkang_, To limp, halt (as one with a splinter in his foot,
etc.). (cf. ikángíkang).

_ukát-úkat_, To repeat, do again, iterate, reiterate;
repetition. Ginukátúkat níya ang sinilíng ni Fuláno. He repeated N.N.'s
words over and over again. (cf. liwánlíwan, liwátlíwat, sulítsúlit).

_úkay_, To even out, level, spread. Ukáya ang balás. Even out (Level)
the sand. Ginúkay ko ang humáy sa amákan. I spread the rice evenly
over the mat. (cf. sáma, saláma, tápan).

_úkay_, To tousle, rumple, disturb, upset, rouse, shake up. Indì
mo pagukáyon ang mga lásgà. Don't disturb the (red) ants. Ginúkay
níya ang íla bohók. He tousled their hair. Inúkay níya ang íla mga
úlo. He roused them (their heads, brains). He disturbed (stirred)
them. (cf. kosôkósò, labúgay, púkaw).

_úkbaw_, To lift one's head a little, peep, look out stealthily,
etc. See íkbaw.

_úkbo_, To bound, jump, rise. (cf. túmbò, lúkso, lúmpat).

_úkbo_, A game and pastime. See ógbo under "kúbung".

_úkbong_, End, top, tip, point, extreme part. (cf. ótbong).

_úkdan_, From úkud--to be diligent. (cf. údkan).

_úklò, uklô-úklò_, To hide one's head, etc. See óklò.

_úkol_, See ókol--to fondle, etc.

_ukón_, For ó kon--or. Ukón----ukón--. Either----or. Ambót kon amó
iní ukón inâ. I don't know whether it is this or that. Isá sa duhá:
ukón magtúman ka sinâ ukón silótan ikáw. One of the two: either you
obey or bear the punishment.

_úkub_, To dig one's teeth in (into), fasten one's teeth (fangs)
in, to grip with the teeth, to bite. Andam ka, kay básì ukúban ka
sang idô. Take care that the dog does not--bite you,--dig (bury)
its teeth in your flesh. (cf. kagát, tukúb).

_ukúb-úkub_, Dim. and Freq. of úkub.

_ukúb-ukúb_, (B) To like very much, be attached to, very fond of,
be passionately addicted to, be infatuated with. Ginaukúbukubán
akó kadyá nga bátà. (Daw kágton (kaúnon) ko iní nga bátà). I am
infatuated with--, I am very fond of--, this child. I like (love)
this child very much.

_úkud_, Diligence, assiduousness, assiduity; to be diligent, apply
oneself with zeal, do with application, do one's best. Ukúri (ukúdi,
úkdi, údki) ang ímo mga buluháton. Be diligent in the performance of
your duties. Ginukúran gid níya ang íya pagtoón. He applied himself
with zeal to his books. He studied assiduously. (cf. písan, túl-id,
íd-id, turírok).

_úk-uk_, To enter deep, pierce penetrate. See ók-ok.

_úkut_, Foolish, silly, etc. See ókot.

_ukút_, To repeat, reiterate, etc. See okót.

_úkut_, To crease, wrinkle, etc. See yókò.

_ukút_, Wrinkled, creased, etc. See yokô.

_úlà_, To pour out liquids, empty a vessel, discharge, spill, pour
away. Iúlà (Uláa) ang túbig. Pour out the water. Ginúlà níya sa bintánà
ang túbig nga sa labadór. He poured the water in the wash-basin out of
the window. Nauláan akó sing túbig sang paglígad (paglubás) ko sa íla
baláy. As I passed their house some water was poured over me. Ginúlà
níya ang sópas. He spilled the soup. Natúmba ang báso kag ang íya
panápton nauláan sing pilá ka tolô nga bíno. The glass tumbled over
and a few drops of wine were spilt on her dress. (cf. básia, básya,
tíbiong, táyhong, tayón, tígis, tágay).

_ulaán_, Place where water, etc. is poured out; gutter-hole, sink-hole,
kitchen-sink, channel, sewer, drain. (cf. úlà, lamawán).

_uláb_, See uráb--to gnaw, nibble, eat (fruit, etc.).

_úlag_, (H) Lewdness, lust, unchastity, incontinence, impurity,
lasciviousness; to be or become lewd, etc. (cf. órag, hígkò, láw-ay;
bígà)

_ulágon_, (H) Lewd, lustful, impure, wanton, unchaste, lascivious,
loose, dissolute, libidinous. (cf. úlag, órag, orágon, mahígkò,
maláw-ay, kalibutánon, bigáon, maúlag, maulágon).

_uláhi_, (Sp. olaje) Surge, surf, breakers, seething (succession)
of waves. (cf. balúd).

_ulalóng_, To weave cloth (particularly for skirts called patádyong);
to spin cotton or wool in a primitive way by hand without a
spindle. Ulalongá ang búrak kang búrak (búlak sang búlak). Spin the
cotton wool by hand. (cf. habúl, pamúlung, pamúrung).

_ulalóng_, Rough, botched, bungled, careless, coarse, not well done,
applied to all kinds of work. Ulalóng (Inulalóng) nga trabáho. Rough
or careless work. A task that has been badly performed. (cf. bástos,
manól, patarásak)

_ulalóng_, January. Probably because January was formerly the month
for cotton-spinning.

_ulán_, (H) Rain, shower of rain, downpour; to rain. May ulán. There
is (was) rain. Nagaulán. It is raining. Nagulán kahápon sing
madámol. Yesterday it rained heavily. Naulanán kamí sa dálan. We
had rain on the road. Dalágan kamó, kay kon dílì maulanán kamó. Run
or--the rain will overtake you,--you will be caught in the rain. Ang
Diós nagapasubáng sang íya ádlaw sa mga maáyo kag sa mga maláut
kag nagapaulán sa mga matárung kag sa mga dîmatárung. God "maketh
his sun to rise upon the good and bad, and raineth upon the just
and the unjust". Maulían gid man iníng mga tanúm sa madalî kon
maulanán lang. These plants will recover (pick up) soon--after a
shower of rain,--if they have (receive) some rain. Daw sa maulán
(magaulán). It looks as if it were coming on to rain. (urán id.;
cf. talíthi, apókapók, tampú-támpu, dúngdung, búnok, etc.).

_ulánan_, Rain, time of rain, rainy weather. Sa ulánan kag sa
inítan----. In rain and fair weather----. "Rain or shine"----.

_úlang_, Grandfather, grandmother. (cf. úyang, úyong, bayí, lakí,
etc.).

_úlang_, To twist, thread, string together. Inúlang nga bunáng. Several
strands of yarn twisted together.

_uláng_, (H) A kind of small shrimp, prawn. (uráng id.).

_uláng_, To hinder, detain, keep back, hold up, impede, prevent,
restrain. Ulangá siá sang sugilánon, agúd índì siá makalakát. Prevent
him from going away by keeping--up a conversation with him,--him
in conversation. Ginuláng kamí sang bahâ. We were held up by the
flood. (cf. pugúng, sagáng, puút, tápnà, etc.).

_ularóy_, To cry from pain, to cry woefully, to moan and
groan. (cf. aragóy).

_ulás_, Band, belt, particularly a transmission belt used in
machinery. Ulás sang galingán. The transmission belt of a mill.

_ulasón_, Old, worn out, useless, torn (of clothes, etc.). (cf. gubát).

_úlaw_, To stop, cease (of rain, etc.). (cf. húlaw, húraw, puút).

_uláwa_, To risk, venture, hazard, act or speak with some diffidence
as to the outcome.

_úlay_, Pure, virginal, virgin, uncontaminated, unpolluted, clean,
chaste, maidenly; to purify, cleanse. Uláya ang ímo tagiposóon. Cleanse
(purify) your heart. (cf. pútlì, tínlò, matínlò, maúgdang).

_uláyhon_, To take--, carry--, along with, do at the same time,
combine, unite, join with. Iuláyhon mo akó sang ákon maléta kon
magpaúlì ikáw. Kindly take along my handbag, when you go home. Kon
magdalá ka sinâ dídto ulayhonón mo pagdalá siníng mga ságing. When
you take that over there take with you also these bananas. Naguláyhon
lang silá dáyon pagpamiésta. At the same time they also assisted at
the Feast. (cf. sagibín).

_uláynon_, Virginal, pure, undefiled. (cf. úlay).

_úli_, (Sp. hule) Oil-cloth. Pútson mo sa úli ang (ákon) mga panápton
nga iílis ko. Wrap up my change of clothes in a piece of oil-cloth.

_úli, ulí_, To wipe a baby's bottom; to use toilet paper. Magúli ka
sa bátà. Ulyi (Ulihí) ang bátà. Wipe the baby's bottom.

_ulí_, Toilet paper or anything used instead of it; to use toilet
paper. (cf. ululí, urulí).

_úlì_, To return, give back, render, restore, make restitution, Iúlì
sa íya ang tulún-an. Give him back the book. Labáw na sa pilô ang
naúlì. More than double has been returned. Básì pa lang nga maulían
pa siá sing maáyo nga láwas. Let us hope that he will--be restored
to health,--regain his health,--recover. Ginúlì na sang makáwat ang
íya mga kináwat. The thief has given back the stolen goods. Naulían
na siá sang íya dungúg. His honour is restored.

_ulî_, To buy at cost-price, obtain without gain to the seller. Kon
magbakál ka sing páyong duhaón mo, kay ulián ko ang isá. When you
buy an umbrella, buy two, for I shall buy one from you at the price
you pay for it. (cf. paulî--to sell at cost-price).

_úlì, ulî_, (B) To live, stay, reside, have one's home, go home. Diín
ikáw nagaulî? (Diín (Sa diín) ka nagapaúlì)? Where do you live? Diín
ang ginaulían (ginaulián) mo? (Diín (Sa diín) ang ímo ginapaulían
(ginaestarán)? Where is your home. (cf. paúlì, puyô, estár, buhî,
lúntad, amoyóng).

_ulî_, Again, a second time. Nagpakasál na man siá ulî sa kay
Fulána. He married again; this time he married N.N. The second time
he married (having been married before) Miss N.N. Nagbúhat siá sinâ
ulî. He did it again. (cf. liwán, liwát).

_ulianón_, One who is in his second childhood. (cf. ulumánon, ayopáka).

_ulíbay_, To carry on the shoulder by means of a sling or hook. Ulibáya
lang ang ímo pinutús, baláon, etc. Carry your parcel, basket, etc. over
your shoulder. Sling your parcel, basket, etc. over your shoulder
(uríbay id.).

_ulíbhay_, (B) A neck-cloth, shawl, covering for the neck and
shoulders; to put around one's neck and shoulders (a cloth, towel,
blanket, etc.). Iulíbhay (Ulibhayá) ang kápay. (Ikúnop ang hábul). Just
put the blanket round your neck. (cf. kúnop, panimúlon, panimúron,
ulímpay).

_uligâ, ulígà_, Ridicule, mockery, sarcasm; to ridicule, mock,
scoff at. Ginpasipaláhan níya siá kag ginuligâ sang maláut nga mga
púlong. He insulted him and mocked him with vile language. Indì mo
siá paguligaón. Don't scoff at him. Don't make him the butt of your
sarcastic remarks. (cf. ulígyat, támay, tíaw).

_ulígyat_, Mockery, jibe, sneers, contumely, derision, ridicule,
scoffing, sarcasm, sarcastic (caustic, bitter sneering) remarks; to
mock, deride, scoff at, jeer, jibe, laugh at, turn into ridicule,
make fun of, sneer at, hiss and hoot at, mob. Ginulígyat siá sang
mga táo. The men--derided him,--mocked him,--mobbed him. Si Heródes
nagulígyat kay Hesús. Herod mocked Jesus. Indì mo paguligyatón ang
maláut níya nga kapaláran. Don't make fun of his bad luck. (cf. yagutâ,
uligâ).

_ulíhi, ulihí_, See olíhi, olihí--late; to be late, etc.

_ulikíd_, See olikíd--to treat well, etc.

_ulímpay_, (B) See ulíbhay. Magulímpay ikáw ti sáko, agúd índì
mamusíngan ang báyò mo. (Magkúnop ka sing sáko, agúd índì mahigkoán
ang ímo báyò). Put a sack round your neck and shoulders or your jacket
will get dirty. Ulimpayá (Iulímpay) lang diá nga tuálya (ang tuálya
nga diá). (Ikúnop lang iníng tuálya). Put that towel round your neck.

_ulín_, See olín--the stern--, poop--, of a boat, etc.

_úling_, (H) Charcoal, charred wood; to char, burn to charcoal. Ulínga
yanáng káhoy, kay nagakinahánglan akó sing úling sa ákon prénsa. Burn
that wood to charcoal, for I need some charcoal for my flatiron. Sang
amó nga súnug naúling man ang ámon baláy. When that fire broke out,
our house also was burned to the ground. (cf. uríng; abó--ashes).

_ulínggan_, From ulingíg.

_ulingíd_, See ulingíg.

_ulingíg_, Liking, appreciation, care, consideration; to cherish,
appreciate, take good care of, like, take to; have regard or
consideration for. Ginaulínggan níya ang íya bág-o nga sugâ. He likes
(takes to) his new lamp very much. Kon walâ lang akó pagulingíg kay
Fuláno dúgay ko na pinadakúp ang íya karabáw sa ákon lagwérta kag
pinadúl-ong sa munisípyo, agúd multahán siá. If it were not out of
consideration for N.N. I would long ago have given orders to catch his
buffalo in my garden and to take it to the municipal building, in order
to make him pay a fine. (cf. balikíd, hílak, ngílin; olingíg id.).

_ulípon_, See olípon--slave, etc.

_ulít_, To joke, talk playfully, jest, say something sportive or witty;
to fool, chaff, quiz, flatter. (cf. lahóg, unís, íntò, oslít).

_ulít-úlit, ulít-ulít_, Dim. and Freq. of ulít. (cf. lahógláhog).

_úlo_, Head, nob, noddle, pate, etc. See ólo.

_ulobánwa, uló-bánwa_, Capital, metropolis, the principal town of a
district or province, national capital.

_ulóhan, ulohán_, See olóhan, olohán.

_úlpuk_, To leave, go away, abandon, relinquish, desert. (cf. halín,
báyà, bíyà, talíwan).

_ulu-, -ulu-_, See olo-, -olo-, e.g. uluánggid (oloánggid)--a little
like, a little resembling; guluginháwa (gologinháwa)--to have a little
breath, be rather comfortably off; tulutiógtióg--a little vagabond;
mulumág-an--rather light, not heavy; sa uluúnhan--a little farther
ahead, just in front of, etc. etc.

_ulubásan_, Vineyard. (cf. úbas; kaubásan id.).

_ulubáson_, Immature rice, rice still less mature than the
lubkánon. (cf. ubás; alányon--rice ripe for the harvest).

_ulubítan_, The waist; ligature, binding, fastening of a skirt at
the waist. (cf. ubít, alubáksan).

_úlud_, Worm; vermin, insect, any small obnoxious or mischievous
animal. Also verb. Pilás nga inúdlan. A worm-infested
wound. (cf. údlon, ulúron, ódlon).

_ulúd_, Glans penis. See atóg.

_ulugbáti_, See alugbáti.

_ulugtásan_, Exasperating, irritating, nettling, rousing one's
ire or indignity, requiring much patience or control of one's
feelings. (cf. úgtas).

_ulugtúmon_, Grudge, spite, resentment, ill-will, repressed anger,
exasperation; to have a grudge or spite, etc. (cf. úgtom).

_ulúhan_, See olóhan--brainy, clever etc.

_uluhán_, See olohán--top-end, etc. (cf. panólong, kabeséra).

_ulúk_, Polliwog, tadpole. (olók id).

_úl-ul_, To gnaw, bite, nibble. (cf. úd-ud, ól-ol).

_úl-ul_, See ól-ol--to be stiff and painful, etc.

_ululí_, Toilet paper or anything used instead of it. (cf. ulí, urulí).

_ululúson, ululusón_, Cloth, stuff, fabrics, textiles (for dresses,
etc.). (cf. ulús).

_ulumánon_, Pertaining to second childhood, silly, foolish, doting,
childish. (cf. ulianón, urumánon, ayopáka, payaón, tsótso).

_ulúmhon_, Crop, harvest, produce from fields. (cf. umá).

_ulún_, To lay or rest one's head on (upon). Unli (Uluní) lang ang
ulúnan. Rest your head on the pillow. Inúnlan sang bátà ang bútkon
nga walá sang íya ilóy. The baby laid its head against its mother's
left arm. Ginúnlan níla ang íla mga pinutús kag nagtúlug. They used
their bundles as pillows and went to sleep. (cf. ulúnan, ulúnlan).

_ulúnan_, Pillow, head-rest, anything to rest one's head
upon. (cf. ulún).

_ulungán_, The shaft or handle of a lance, spear, etc. See urungán,
unungán.

_uluníson_, (H) Conceited, one who is amenable to flattery or who
likes to be flattered. (cf. unís, ulutíson, olodóton, hululanúon).

_ulúnlan_, Anything used to lay one's head upon, a pillow. (cf. ulúnan,
inúnlan, ulún).

_ulunúngan_, A benefactor, a person whom one is bound to love and
serve out of gratitude; attached to, united with, always in company
of, joined to. (cf. únung).

_ulupángon_, What is to be--, should be--, can be--, hindered,
impeded or stopped; preventable, capable of being checked or
restrained. (cf. upáng).

_ulúpdon_, One whose company is desired, a person that should be one
of the party; companion, partner, associate; anything that is to be
joined to, or should go along with, something else. (cf. upúd).

_ulúron_, Wormy, worm-eaten, infested with worms. (cf. úlud, údlon).

_ulús_, Clothes, garments, wearing apparel, dress. (cf. panápton,
naúg).

_ulusisáon, ulusisaón_, What is to--, should--, can--, be examined
or investigated, subject to examination or inquiry. (cf. usísà).

_ulusoyón_, What is to--, should--, can--, be followed or traced;
track, trail; traceable. (cf. úsoy).

_ulút_, Between, betwixt; the space between, lying between,
intervening--, intermediate (intermediary, intermedial)--, space;
what is or lies between, fill, filling, contents, interposition,
insertion; to lie between, come between, to interpose, insert, put in,
interpolate, intercalate, intersect. Sa ulút (Saginútlan) sang duhá
ka baláy----. Between the two houses----. Dílì na náton makítà ang
alipokpokán sang búkid, kay nagulút ang isá ka madámol nga gál-um. We
cannot see the top of the mountain any longer, for a thick (dense)
cloud has come in between. Ang itúm kag putî útli sang pulá. Put
some red colour between the black and white. Indì ka magulút sa íla
nga duhá, kóndì magpúngkò ka dirí. Don't take your place between
those two, but sit here. Kag lábut pa siní nga tanán nagaulút sa
ámon kag sa ínyo ang (ginaútlan kamí kag kamó sang) isá ka dakô nga
kadadálman. "And besides all this, between us and you, there is fixed
a great chaos." (cf. bál-ot, sál-ot, tungâ, sulúd, lútlut).

_ulutangán_, (H) Place or person to get a loan from, or to become a
debtor to; loan-monger, loan-office. (cf. útang)

_ulutangón_, Money (cash, funds) to be raised, a prospective or
promised loan, etc. (cf. útang).

_ulutanón_, (H) Vegetables, greens, pot-herbs, garden-stuff, squashes,
gourds, potatoes, yams, tubers, legumes, etc. (cf. útan, láswa).

_ulutíson_, (H) Conceited, amenable to flattery; one who likes to be
flattered. (cf. utís, uluníson, olodóton, hululanúon).

_ulútngan_, Teat, nipple, pap, dug. (cf. utúng).

_ulútud_, A frequently used plural form of útud. Ang mga
magulútud. Brothers and sisters. Nagaulútud kitá nga tanán sa sántos
nga pagtóo. We are all brothers and sisters in the Holy Faith.

_ulutwásan_, (H) Loophole, escape, safety-valve, salvation, refuge,
outlet, place or person to turn to for help or assistance. (cf. útwas,
utwásan, paaliwánsan, aláypan, dalángpan.

_ulú-úlu_, To coax, persuade, flatter, wheedle, cajole, talk kindly
to in order to obtain what one wants. See olóólo. (cf. paayónáyon,
langíslángis).

_uluyatán_, (H) Handle, grip, haft, helve; management, direction,
power, influence. (cf. úyat, kaláptan).

_uluyogón_, That is to----, can----, be shaken, etc.; shakeable. (cf,
úyog).

_uluyonán_, That is to----, should--, be liked, etc.; likeable,
pleasing, pleasant, agreeable. (cf. úyon).

_úlway_, To float, soar, hang or hover about (as smoke, or the
like). (cf. bókon; púlway (paúlway)).

_úlway_, To protrude, project, hang out, come out. Nagúlway ang mga
kasúdlan sang binunô. The intestines (bowels, entrails) of the man
that was stabbed were hanging out. (cf. búgway, gáway, káwal).

_úlya_, (Sp. olla) Pot, kettle, boiler. (cf. kólon, tasón, kaldóhan).

_úlyab_, To pull, tear at, shake to and fro so as to separate (loosen)
one thing from another, to draw or pull apart, work loose. Ulyabá
ang báhì túbtub nga makúhà mo sa dútà. Work the dibble to and fro
till you get it out of the ground. (cf. lungálúngà, úyog, hulághúlag).

_úlyak_, To spill, flow over, overflow; spirt, stream out. (cf. ályak,
bukálwà, áwas, póswit, busawák, etc.).

_úlyak_, To laugh and shout with joy, be hilarious. (cf. údyak).

_úlyan_, From ulí for ulihán.


_úlyas_, To spill, etc. See úlyak. (cf. álwak, ályas, etc.).

_úlyog_, Anything that can be rocked or swung to and fro, especially
applied to a sort of scarecrow. By pulling a string the contrivance is
made to swing noisily to and fro thereby frightening birds, etc. off
a field or garden. Rice-fields near harvest-time are often provided
with a whole chain of such scarecrows. (cf. úyog).

_um-_, _-um-_, This syllable goes to form the following tenses: the
Active Imperative, the Conditional Future, the Past. When the verb
begins with a vowel, um- is put before the vowel, e.g. abút--to come,
becomes umabút. When the verb begins with a consonant, um- is put
after the consonant, e.g. halín--to depart, becomes humalín.
1) Active Imperative. Bumúhat ka sinâ. Do it. Make it. Uminúm ka
na kag pumadáyon sang ímo paglakát. Take a drink and continue your
journey. (búhat, inúm, padáyon).
2) Conditional Future. Kon lumígad na ang tátlo ka ádlaw bayáran mo
akó sing (sa) waláy balíbad. After three days you must pay me without
shift. Kon dumángat ka sinâ----. When (If) you obtain that----. (lígad,
dángat).
3) The Past. In vivid narrative equivalent to what is called the
Historical Present. Sang pagkabatî níya siní sa gilayón umílis siá
kag lumakát. On hearing this he at once changes his clothes and sets
out. Tumalikód lang siá kag humípus. All he does is to turn his back
saying nothing. Si Hesús nalóoy sa íya kag sumilíng: "----". Jesus
had mercy on her and said: "----". Tumíndog na man si Nikolás, "Hóo,
may katarúngan siá", sumalígbat siá sang íla halambalánon. Nicolas
too stands up, and interrupting their conversation, blurts out: "Yes
he is right". (ílis, lakát, talikód, hípus, silíng, tíndog, salígbat).
N.B. If, further, "l" is put after the first vowel of the verb, we get
the forms umal-, umil-, umol-, umul-, which denote the agent of what
the root signifies, e.g. umalági--a passer-by (ági); pumililî--an
elector, voter (pílì); tumolóo--a believer (tóo); bumulúthò--one
who goes to school, a student, pupil, alumnus (búthò); bumulúlig,
bumululíg--helper, assistant (búlig); bumalákal--buyer, customer
(bakál); tumalánum--planter, farmer (tanúm); sumilílhig--sweeper
(sílhig); dumalalá--manager, conductor, leader, etc. etc. (cf. inm-,
mag-, nag-, manug-, tig-, tag-).

_umá_, See humá--to low, moo; the lowing of cattle. Humá is the more
usual and correct form. (cf. ma, ma-má, imâ).

_umá_, Cultivated ground, soil, field, farm, farmland; country,
country-side, rural district, farmstead; to farm, till the soil, do
farm-work, be a farmer. Nagaumá (nagapangúma) siá karón kag nagapuyô
(nagaamuyóng) man siá sa íya umá. He is at present doing farm-work
and stays at his farm. Yádtong bánglid ginumá námon sang túig nga
tinalíkdan, ápang karón walâ na námon pagaúmha, kay lánggod ang
dútà. Last year we cultivated that slope over there, but we are not
working it any longer, because the soil is poor. Hóo, kon malúyag ikáw
ipaumá ko sa ímo iníng bakólod. Yes, if you like, I'll let you till
this rise. Diín ikáw nagapuyô?--Sa umá. Where do you live?--In the
country. In the rural district. Ang ímo umá saráng mapalápad pa gid,
kon kaíngnon mo lang ang tanán nga mga kalaíngnon. Your farmland
can be increased yet to a large extent, if you only clear by fire
all the jungles that can be brought under cultivation. (cf. pangúma,
pangúmhan, umánhon, mangungúma, palangúmhan; dútà, lúpà; tubúng).

_umágad_, Son-in-law. (cf. ágad; manúgang--daughter-in-law; in
some places "umágad" and "manúgang" are used promiscuously for both
son-in-law and daughter-in-law).

_úmal_, To become old, worn out, useless, of no use, unserviceable,
applied especially to iron tools. Nagúmal na iníng binángon, bángkaw,
etc. This bolo, lance, etc. is no longer of any use (is useless,
worn out). Naumálan akó siníng súndang. This knife is too much worn
out for me. This knife of mine is useless now. (ómal id.).

_umál_, Worn out, old, useless, of no use, unserviceable, said
especially of pointed or edged iron tools. Umál nga kotsílyo. An
old, useless knife. Ang binángon nga mahábul magatalúm liwán kon
mabáid, ápang ang binángon nga umál índì na mamátì sa bairán, kóndì
kinahánglan nga itúgyan sa manugsálsal. A blunt bolo will get sharp
again, if honed, but a worn out bolo no longer answers to the hone;
it must be handed over to the blacksmith. (omál id.).

_umalági_, A passer-by, stranger; passing, transitory, transient,
temporal. Ang tanán nga mga táo mga umalági lámang silá sa
ibábaw siníng kalibútan. All men are but wayfarers in this
world. Umalági nga kalípay, kasubô, etc. A passing pleasure, sorrow,
etc. (ági). (cf. dumulóong).

_umalágsa_, Tenant, lessee, one who holds land on lease. (cf. ágsa,
agsadór).

_umalámbit_, Participant, partaker, sharer, having a part or share
in. (cf. ámbit).

_umalamót_, Contributor, subscriber. Madámò nga mga umalamót walâ pa
magbáyad sang íla alamotán. Many subscribers have not yet paid their
subscription. (ámot).

_umalámpò_, Intercessor, patron, protector, helper, intermediary,
one who intercedes or makes a recommendation on behalf of
another. (cf. ámpò, magalámpò).

_umalapín_, Partner, associate, helper, assistant, supporter, backer,
patron; a party-man, siding with, taking the part of. (cf. ápin,
kalúyo, kabúlig, tigsákdag, mananábang).

_umamályo_, A portent, prodigy, monster of terrible aspect, a ghost
that appears, according to the superstitious, in a horrible shape
that varies from time to time. (cf. báleu, bályo, báylo, tigbaléu).

_umán_, (B) To repeat, iterate, do again, reiterate; to change,
alter, retract. Indì ka na magumán sa pagpanúmbag (magpanúmbag) sa
búgtò mo. (Indì ka na magliwát magpanúmbag a ímo útud). Don't box
your brother again. Umaná (Liwaná) ang pagpanóktok, hay warâ kabatî
(kay walâ makabatî) ang tagbaláy. Knock (the door) again, for the
owner has not heard it. Umaná ang tábas kang báyò ko, hay índì tákon
kaúyon kará (kariá, kadyá). (Liwaná ang tábas sang ákon báyò, kay
índì akó sinâ makaúyon). Alter (Change) the cut of my dress (coat,
jacket), for I don't like it. (cf. liwán, liwát; laín, túhay).

_úmang_, (B) Foolish, crazy; fool, idiot, lunatic, etc. See búang,
kólò, kalúndong, tampuháw, mangô, etc.

_umáng-umáng_, A kind of shell-fish.

_umánhon_, Pertaining--, belonging--, to the life on a farm or in
the country; one who lives in the country, a boor, peasant, farmer,
mountaineer. (cf. bukídnon, umá).

_umáyaw_, See amáyaw, pinínpin, alopínpin--half-full grains (of rice).

_úmbak_, (B) To leap or jump down. Umbak (Lúkso ka) sa túbig humalín
sa pángpang. Jump down into the water from the bank. Umbakí ang
bató nga ra (riá). (Luksohí inâ nga bató). Jump down on that stone
there. (cf. ámbak id.).

_úmban_, See ámban--polypus (a disease of the nose).

_umbanón_, See ambanón.

_úmbo_, To cede or yield to, bow down to, not to dare (venture). Ang
tanán nagaúmbo sa íya. Ginaumbohán siá sang tanán. No one dares to
fight him. They are all afraid of him. (cf. hádluk, ísol, likáw).

_úmbok_, A quail, a bird that keeps its head bent down towards the
ground; hence metaphorically used of a person that walks about with
his head covered and bent and who does not look about him.

_úmid_, To implicate, involve, drag in, be implicated, be in the same
boat (figuratively). Nagaumíray (--íday) silá. They are recriminating
each other. They are equally implicated. Umíra (--ída) siá. Drag
him in also. Implicate him. Naúmid siá sa salâ. He was concerned
(became involved) in the crime. (cf. daláhig, ugámid).

_úmil_, To get worn out by too much folding, to wear through at a
crease. Naúmil (Nagkaúmil) ang báyò ko. My jacket is frayed or worn
out through too much creasing.

_úmol_, The fist, etc. See ómol.

_umól_, To be or get impatient, cross, angry. (cf. súnggud, úgtas,
ákig, ókdom, ogót).

_umpáring, umparíng_, (B) To go back to where one came from, return
to one's starting point. (cf. bálik, panumbalík).

_úmpaw_, To restore to one's senses or to health, recover, rally,
revive, pull through, resuscitate, bring round, regain consciousness,
come--round,--to oneself,--to. Naumpawán na siá. He has come to his
senses. He has recovered consciousness. Kabáy pa nga maumpawán pa
siá! God grant that he may recover! Ang amó nga bulúng nagpaúmpaw sa
íya. That medicine restored him (to consciousness).

_umpisá_, (Sp. empezar) To commence, start, begin, enter upon, embark
in. Umpisahí ang trabáho. Begin the work. Start working. (cf. súgud,
pamúnò, empesár).

_úmpit_, Affront, insult, act or speech of insolence, scorn,
mockery, contempt; to affront, insult, mock, deride, scoff,
ridicule. (cf. pasipála, tampálas, támay, uligâ, ulígyat, buyáyaw,
ihígihíg).

_úmpok_, To rebound, bounce off, ricochet. Ang bóla nagaúmpok sa
díngding. The ball rebounds from the partition wall. Ginumpokán akó
sang bóla. The ball struck me--in rebounding,--on the rebound.

_úmud_, See paúmud, mainumúron, mapainumúron. The simple úmud (to
suffer, bear with) seems to be out of use. Paúmud--to abstain, forbear.

_umúg_, Dirty linen, wash, clothes to be cleaned by washing. Bulutángan
sang umúg (bulutángan-umúg). Laundry basket, basket for containing
dirty clothes.

_umulúgyon_, Partisan, adherent, partner, cooperator, collaborator;
one who agrees or consents to. (cf. úgyon).

_umulúna_, Pioneer, leader, foremost, one who goes first or
leads. (cf. úna).

_úna_, First, foremost, before anything else; former, preceding, prior,
previous; to do first, do before something else, go before, lead,
guide, be in front. Amó iní ang úna ko nga pagbáyad. This is my first
payment (instalment). Dápat ka sing úna magkarí dirí sa ákon. You
should come to me first. Silíng sang ákon pagsáysay sa ínyo sing
úna. As I explained to you at the beginning (before). Unáhon mo (ang)
pagbúhat sang káha. Make the box first (in the first place). Unáha
ang pagarádo. First do the ploughing. Unáhi siá sa pagarádo. Do
your ploughing before he does his. Be before him in ploughing. Lead
him in the ploughing. Sang úna nga tiémpo--. In former times--. In
bygone days--.

_uná_, To come out first in a competition, to outdo, excel, surpass,
arrive at--, reach--, the goal first. Maunahán níya ikáw sa pagabút
dídto, kay madásig siá maglakát. He will arrive there before you,
for he is a quick walker. (cf. nahauná, úna).

_uná_, (B) To have difficulties in evacuating the bowels, suffer
from a hard stool or from costiveness (constipation), be costive
(constipated). (cf. bún-a, tubúl).

_únab_, To bathe, cleanse a wound, boil, etc. Unábi ang íya
pilás. Bathe his wound. (cf. nágnag).

_unahán_, What is in front of, lies ahead, farther on, ahead,
beyond. (cf. únhan).

_unáhan_, See munáhan--quick-ripening.

_unanád_, To like, be attached to, etc. See hinanarám.

_unát-únat_, To move about, take exercise. (cf. banátbánat,
bayátbáyat).

_uná-uná_, Dim. and Freq. of úna. Also: to start, begin, commence.

_únaw_, To salt, flavour, season, put salt into soup, or the
like. Unáwi ang sópas, tinóla, etc. Salt the soup, the dish of
vegetables, etc. (cf. unáw; asín).

_unáw, únaw_, To rid the tayóbong-root (or similar roots) of juice
preparatory to making starch of it. Usually the pulpy root is crushed
by rubbing it on a stone set in water (unawán). The pressed-out juice
will settle and thicken in the water and be then available as glue,
starch, etc. (cf. unawán).

_unáw_, (B) To feel an aversion or loathing (after having done, eaten,
etc. something to excess); to surfeit. Naunáw (Nalánag na siá sang)
kang pasáyan. He is now averse to eating shrimps. He is surfeited
with eating shrimps. (cf. taká, díway, sumó, súm-od, lánag).

_unáw, únaw_, Table-salt, condiment, seasoning. Túman na balá ang
unáw sa ímo sópas ukón dugángan ko pa? Is your soup salt enough or
shall I add salt? (cf. únaw).

_unawán, unáwan_, The stone (set in water) on which the tayóbong is
rubbed in the process of extracting starch and glue from it.

_únay_, To please oneself, eat one's fill and leave some over, have
enough and to spare in the way of food, etc. Nagaúnay siá sang mga
páhò. He is eating as many mangoes as he likes. Ginunáyan lang níya ang
mga ságing. He just ate bananas to his heart's content. (cf. kánkan,
paúnay).


_unáy_, Stiff, benumbed, painful; to be or become stiff,
etc. Hulághulága ang batíis (pusupusuán) sang masakít, agúd índì
maunáy. Move (Change the position of) the calf of the sick person,
lest it should grow stiff or become benumbed. (cf. bínhod, palamínhod,
tískug).

_unáy_, To be close to, be near to, stay or remain near, be attached
to or within easy reach of. Nagunáy siá sa bulúlngan sing duhá ka
simána. He stayed at the hospital for two weeks. Ináng ímo balatían
kinahánglan nga iunáy sa manugbúlung. That sickness of yours should
be treated (seen to) by a doctor. Anó ang ginaunayán mo dídto sa
íya baláy?--Ang ákon talahíon, agúd dalión níya ang paghumán. What
is the reason of your staying with her in the house?--My dress,
in order that she should hurry up and finish it. (cf. dáyon, estár).

_unáy_, Natural, proper, essential, inherent, pertaining to
one's nature, firmly attached to. (cf. dunâ, kinatúbò, kinaugálì,
kaugalíngon).

_úndag_, A jolt, jolting, shaking; to jolt, roll, shake, sway,
lurch, jerk, move to and fro or up and down. Ang káro nagaúndag. The
cart is jolting. Indì mo pagpaundagón ang káro. Don't jolt the
cart. (cf. limpálímpa, lumpálúmpa, tumbátúmba, tumbôtúmbò).

_úndang_, (H) To finish a meal, a bath, etc.; to leave the dining room,
rise from a meal, leave the bathroom, leave the water after a swim,
etc. (cf. tungá; tákas).

_úndras_, (Sp. honras) Obsequies; to toll, knell, ring the death
bell or passing bell, ring the bells for the funeral of an adult
person. Undrasón mo ang linggánay. Ring the death bell. Undrasí ang
minatáy. Toll the bells for the dead. (cf. ónras, plasíbo).

_úndò_, Measure, size, bulk. (cf. taláksan, solókban, kadakuón,
kadák-an).

_ungâ_, Child, baby; follower, adherent, dependent,
hanger-on. (cf. bátà; sumulúnud, ilógilóg, mailógilógon).

_ungá_, To molest, bother, excite an aversion or loathing. Ginaúnghan
siá sang kagáhud sang mga bátà. He abhors that noise made by the
boys. (cf. soól, taká).

_ungáb_, Notched, indented, lacking a tooth (some teeth), especially
one of the front teeth. See sungáb. (cf. bingáw, bingawón).

_úngad_, To dig or burrow with the snout, to root. Ginaúngad sang
báboy ang gamót sang ságing. The pig is rooting out (digging out
with its snout) the root of the banana stem. Paungára (-áda) lang
dirâ ang báboy. Let the pig root there. (cf. súbok, íbok).

_úngal_, To bark, yelp, howl (of a dog); to voice, express, state
in a loud voice or in rather strong language. (cf. úwang, tághol;
sínggit, turayáw, pugaás).

_ungás_, Turned up (of the nose). See dungás.

_úngas_, To turn up one's nose, sniff; to search after, look for,
seek. (cf. dúngas).

_únghan_, From ungá.

_úngkil_, To apply a lever in succession to another, lift by
alternating or successive levers. Ungkilí ang halígi. Lift the post
by alternating levers. Iúngkil ang sibúkaw. Put the piece of sebucao
in as an additional lever.

_úngkil_, Also used in the meaning of kánkan, údak--to eat to one's
heart's content, do as one pleases, etc.

_úngon_, Prick, prickle, thorn, spine, splinter. (cf. dalíngag, súyak,
tunúk, dúgi).

_ungót_, Stuck deep (in mud, etc.); sunk in, fixed, secured. Ang
piokós ungót gid sa íya bâbâ. The cigar is well fixed in his
mouth. (cf. úngot).

_úngot_, To enter deep so as to be removable only with difficulty,
sink in (of wheels in mud, etc.), cling or stick to. Ang kángga
nagúngot sa bagúnbun (lúnang). The cart sank deep in the mud.

_ungóy-ungóy, ungóy-úngoy_, Poor, low, indigent, penurious, wretched,
miserable; hard. (cf. ímol, dungúl, huyúthúyut, lapígot).

_úngud_, To be attached to, remain faithful to, be united with, adhere
to, to not leave or forsake. Maúngud akó sa ímo túbtub sa kamatáyon. I
shall remain faithful to you till death. Abáw, nagúngud gid ikáw sa
sugálan túbtub naggáb-i. Why, you did not leave the gambling table
till night-fall. (cf. únung).

_úngud_, To follow suit, be able to perform or bear as well as
another. Makaúngud ka sa pagpuláw sing isá ka simána tungúd sa
nagamasakít? Can you bear the fatigue of watching the sick person
during the night for a week? Kubús nga binúlan ang íya ginabáton karón,
kay ang bág-o níya nga agálon índì makaúngud sa pagsóhol sa íya sing
mahál súbung sang ginhímò sang úna níya nga agálon. At present he
receives a low monthly wage, for his new master cannot afford to pay
him as much as his former employer. (cf. batás, sunúd).

_ungwénto_, (Sp. unguento) Unguent, ointment, salve,
liniment. (cf. halámpul, haláplas, talámbal).

_úngyat_, To twist, turn awry, pinch (ears, etc.). Ungyatá ang íya
dalúnggan. Pinch his ears.

_úngyat_, See únyat--to stretch, extend.

_únhan_, Before, in front of, ahead of, farther on. Sa, únhan. Farther
ahead. Farther on in the direction one is looking or walking. (cf. úna,
uná, unahán).

_únhay_, Race, competition, contest; to compete with, contest, race,
try to be first. (cf. úna, uná, paunáuná, palúmbà, paindísíndis,
padag-ánay).

_unidád_, (Sp. unidad) Unity, union, agreement; to have union, be
united. Walâ silá sing unidád. Walâ silá magaunidád. They are not
united. They don't pull well together. (cf. hisáhò, hiúsa, hiúgyon;
kaisáhan).

_unipórmi_, (Sp. uniforme) Uniform; to wear--an uniform,--the
regimentals. Nagaunipórmi siá sing káki. He wears a khaki uniform.

_unís_, To flatter, cajole, wheedle, coax. Unisá siá. Coax him. Draw
him by flattery. (cf. odót, utís).

_únkil_, To lift by alternating levers. See úngkil id.

_únlan_, etc. From ulún--to rest one's head upon.

_únlog_, (B) To tease, mimic, etc. See sónlog.

_únsa_, (Sp. onza) An ounce. Unsa nga buláwan. A Spanish doubloon.

_unsíta_, Dim. of únsa. Fine gold; a small (half) doubloon.

_úntà_, (H) Oh that! Would to God that----! May it come to pass that
----! Maybe! Let us hope so, etc. Often it may be translated as "would,
should (like)". Malúyag akó úntà magdúaw sa íya, ápang----. I would
like to visit him, but----. (cf. kúntà, kuntánì, untánì, ráad, dáad).

_untánì_, See úntà. Untánì maáyo gid kon----. It would be very good
if----. It were well if----.

_úntat_, Stoppage, discontinuation, discontinuance, interruption,
end; to stop, end, give over, adjourn, bring to--an end,--a close,
discontinue, interrupt, cease. Nagaúntat na ang ulán. The rain is
stopping. It is giving over to rain. Untatí na lang ang ímo pagsulát,
pangabúdlay, etc. Give over writing, working, etc. Untatá ang íya
pagsugál. Put an end to his gambling. Naúntat na siá sa amó nga
palangakoán. He has been removed from office. (cf. puút, langán,
tápnà).

_úntay_, To stretch out, extend, straighten a limb, a rope,
etc. Untayá ang ímo bútkon. Stretch out your arm. Hold your arm out
straight. Iúntay ang ímo tiíl. Stretch forth your foot. Untayí siá
siníng kalát, kay íya aláson (pagaaláson). Straighten this rope for
him, for he is going to wind it up. Iúntay mo akó siníng hábul, kay
madámò sing yokót. Please smooth this blanket for me, because it is
full of wrinkles. (cf. tádlong, táning).

_úntud_, (B) To stop, cease, halt. (cf. dúlug, puút, táyod, úntat,
tápnà).

_úntul_, To rebound, recoil; to shrink from, avoid (labour, toil,
etc.). (cf. úmpok).

_unúd_, Flesh, meat, muscles (as distinct from bones); contents,
filling; to contain, hold. Hingulíi kamí sa tiénda sing pulús unúd. Buy
for us in the market meat alone (without bones). Malúyag ka magkáon
sing unúd (kárne) sang báka? Do you like to eat some beef? Kaúyon
ikáw sang unúd sang báka? Are you fond of beef? Iníng botílya walâ
gid sing unúd. This bottle is empty (has nothing in it). Iníng
tabungós nagaunúd sing duhá ka pásong. This basket holds (contains)
two bushels. (cf. kárne; sulúd).

_unúdnon_, Fleshy, meaty, pithy; carnal, sensual, worldly. (cf. unúd).

_únung_, To be attached to, stay with, keep one company,
remain with, share--, take part--, in another's joys, sorrows,
difficulties. Ginaunúngan níya ang masakít. He is always with the
sick person, keeps him constant company. Magaúnung akó sa ímo túbtub
sa ka matáyon. I will (shall) remain with you till death. Nagaúnung
gid siá sa ákon. He is very much attached to me. He shares my joys
and sorrows. (cf. upúd, búylog).

_unungán_, The shaft of a spear, lance, etc. See ulungán, urungán.

_unús_, A strong wind, gale, squall, storm, violent blast or gust of
wind; a violent fit (of passion).

_únut_, To fall out or off (of feathers, hair, etc.). Nagúnut ang
íya bohók. His hair fell out.

_unút_, To go with, accompany. (cf. upúd, búylog, tawás, únung).

_únyat_, To stretch lengthwise, lengthen, draw out (an elastic band,
etc.). Unyatá ang lástiko. Stretch the elastic band. (cf. úntay).

_upá_, Chaff, especially rice-chaff separated from the grain by
pounding; bran, husks. (cf. lábhang, líntok).

_upâ_, Food chewed before giving it to a small child.

_upâ, úpà_, To chew food before giving it to a small child. Upaí ang
bátà. Chew the food for the baby. Upaá ang kán-on, lubí, etc. Chew
the rice, the coconut meat, etc. (cf. supâ, símpà).

_úpag, upág_, To hinder, impede, disturb, distract, interrupt. (See
upáng lingáw, bálag, pamalábag, dúpag, lúpag).

_úpak_, (B) Peel, bark, pod, rind, husk; to peel, shell, shuck. Upáki
(Paníti) ang kabúgaw, ang kamóti, ang mansánas, etc. Peel the pomelo,
the sweet potato, the apple, etc. (cf. pánit, ánit).

_upáng_, To hinder, impede, put obstacles in the way, disturb, stop,
prevent, embarrass, thwart. Náno ang nakaupáng sa ímo? What has
hindered (stopped, thwarted) you? Buút níya magpúkan yanáng sámbag,
ápang ginupáng ko siá. He wanted to cut down that tamarind tree, but I
stopped (prevented) him. Ang isá ka mapág-on nga korál amó gid lámang
ang maáyo nga igaupáng sang pagsulúd sang mga báboy sa ímo pamulákan. A
strong fence is the only means of preventing pigs from entering your
garden. Naupáng ang maáyo níya nga katuyoán. His good intentions
were baffled. His fine (good) scheme--miscarried,--was brought to
nought. Daw sa dílì na maupáng inâ. It is now very difficult to stop or
prevent it (that). It is almost impossible to check or thwart it. Indì
gid silá magpaupáng sang íla nga ginahándum. They won't allow their
aspirations (wishes, desires) to be interfered with. (cf. balábag,
pamalábag, sáblag, táblaw, túblag, puút, tápnà, etc.).

_úpas_, To fight, quarrel, (especially of horses, pigs, dogs,
etc.). Tambagí ang mga kabáyo nga nagaulúpas. Separate the horses
that are fighting.

_úpas_, (B) The banana-stalk, etc. See tinúb-an, búnlak, ángkag.

_upáw_, Bald, hairless, featherless; the fine hairs growing on the
neck. Upáw siá. He is bald. Kuháa sang nabáha ang upáw ko. Shave off
with the razor the small hairs on my neck. (cf. bungád).

_upís_, A small coin; farthing. (cf. opís).

_upók_, To stand, bear, suffer, eat, etc. something, by constraint or
through the force of circumstances. Maupók kitá sang ugá, kay mahál
ang ísdà nga láb-as. We have to content ourselves with eating dry fish,
because fresh fish is too dear. (cf. batás, ántus, tupús).

_upóng_, A bundle, bunch, two handfuls, particularly applied to
rice harvested with the kayóg; to arrange in bunches, etc. Pilá ka
upóng ang gináni mo? How many handfuls of rice did you harvest or
cut? Upongá ang ináni mo. Arrange the rice you have cut in bundles
of two handfuls each.

_úpud_, To burn up, consume completely. Ang kaláyo nagúpud sang
káhoy. The fire completely burned up the wood. Naúpud na ang ákon
tabákò. My cigar is finished, is burned up to the stump.

_upúd_, The remnants of burnt wood, the stump of a cigar, etc.

_upúd_, (H) Companion, company; to accompany, go along with, be
with. Upúd ko siá. He is my companion. Sín-o ang nagupúd sa ímo? Who
accompanied you? Updi siá. Go along with him. Ang mga hámbal nga
walâ pagaúpdi sang mga ángay nga búhat walâ sing pulús. Words without
deeds are of no use. Paúpda siá sa ákon. Order him to go along with
me. N.B. "upúd" is at times also used in the meaning: husband, lover;
wife, concubine. (cf. tawás, búylog).

_upúdan_, See púdan, pudanán--a board worn over the back; the back.

_upúd-úpud_, Dim. and Freq. of upúd. Also: to sympathize with, share
another's joys and sorrows, or the like. (cf. únung; búylog).

_upúd-upúd_, A malignant ulcer or sore, a kind of leprous disease
that frequently destroys a whole finger or toe, or even a hand or foot.

_upúk_, See upók--to stand, bear, etc.

_upús_, Charred wood, remnants of wood left after a fire, a piece of
wood partly burned; the remnant or stump of a smoked cigar; to burn,
destroy by fire. Ginupús sang kaláyo ang ámon baláy. The fire burned
our house to ashes. (cf. abó, súnug).

_upús nga sinulî_, A piece of wood burned on one side and turned
round so that the other side may burn. Metaphorically: Sang dídto
na kamí sa uluúnhan may nagsúgid sa ámon nga nagubâ ang táytay,
gánì daw sinulî lang kamí nga upús. When we had gone a little ahead
we were told that the bridge was destroyed; so we turned back (did
not continue our march).

_urá_, To annoy, excite aversion, molest. Ginaurahán na akó sang
kagalúng sang kabatáan. I am being annoyed with the boisterousness
of the children. (cf. taká, soól, ungá).

_uráb_, (B) To gnaw, nibble, bite, eat (much fruit, etc.). Warâ
(tána) ti gána magkáon (kang kán-on), hay nagsári kang uráb kang
samlági. (Walâ siá sing gána magkáon (sang kán-on), kay nagságad sang
káon sang sámbag). He does not want to take food (rice, dinner)--,
He has spoilt his appetite--, because he has eaten (has been gnawing,
nibbling) too much tamarind-fruit (too many tamarinds). (cf. áp-ap,
háng-it, káon, kíbkib, kítkit).

_úrag_, Lewdness, etc. See órag, úlag.

_uráhab_, Rattle, death-rattle; to have the rattles, to wheeze;
to breathe one's last, be at the last gasp. (cf. tingâ).

_uráis_, Dull, stupid, ignorant, uneducated, illiterate; rough, coarse,
boorish. (cf. manól, bástos, bukídnon, kalóng, búngaw, kólò, kagúng).

_uráka_, A kind of beverage; an intoxicating drink.

_uráng_, A prawn, shrimp. (cf. uláng).

_urángul_, To howl, roar, yelp, bark. (cf. úwang, úngal.

_uráod, urá-od_, To scoop or scrape out (coconut meat from the shell,
etc.). (cf. kokód, kódkod, tilád).

_urároy_, An exclamation of grief or distress; to moan, sigh, complain
of pain, or the like. (cf. aragóy, aróy).

_urásip_, See ugásip--the pulp of coconut meat after the oil has been
pressed out.

_urát-urát_, To wish, desire, long for, hanker after,
like. (cf. himúlat, híngyò, hándum, lúyag).

_úray_, (B) Pure, undefiled, unadulterated. See úlay, lubús, lúgus,
pulús.

_uríbay_, (B) See ulíbay--to carry in a sling over the shoulder, etc.

_uríka_, (B) To take good care of, manage well, deal thoughtfully
with; to be diligent, assiduous. Urikáha (Urikáhi) ang patubás ta
(Tatápa (Riparáha) sing maáyo ang áton patubás (pinatubás)), hay
(kay) básì kulángon kitá. Take good care of what we have harvested,
for we may fall short of what we need. (cf. tátap, ripára, ámlig;
písan, úkud, utitíd).

_urimón_, Sedan-chair, litter. (cf. talabón, tulabón--a stretcher).

_úring, uríng_, (B) Charcoal. See úling.

_uríud_, To press, push, knock, squeeze or force against
something. Inuríud níya siá sa díngding. He forced (squeezed) him
against the wall. (cf. oróod, búnggò, dáldal).

_urók_, (H) A young pig, piglet. (cf. udók, idík).

_urók_, To take fright, shiver, tremble with fear, as chickens when
a hawk comes near.

_úrsa_, To stand, bear, suffer, tolerate, put up with. Indì akó
kaúrsa siníng pagkáon. I cannot stand this kind of food. Daw sa índì
na maúrsa ang íla maláut nga kagawián. Their bad conduct can hardly
be tolerated any longer. (cf. batás, íro).

_urúad_, (B) To eject from the mouth, spit out. Iurúad ang sáb-a
nga mánghod. (Ilúad ang ságing nga línghod). Spit out the unripe
banana. Ginurúad na (níya) ang katúmbal, hay lám-ag (kay támà)
kakáhang. He spit out the chili, because it was too hot. (arúad id.;
cf. lúad, ád-ad).

_urubítan_, (B) See ulubítan--waist, line, belt.

_urudóton_, Conceited, one amenable to flattery or to be
flattered. (cf. uluníson, ulutíson, hululanúon).

_urugílon_, (B) Talk, conversation, chat; to say, speak, tell,
converse. (cf. súgid, sugilánon, hambárò).

_urúkay, urukáy_, (B) Merry-making, mirth, a joyful social gathering
with singing and dancing, etc., as often indulged in after a
marriage by the tiglalakí ang tigbabaé, or the like. May urúkay sa
baláy ni Fuláno. Nagaurúkay sánda sa baláy ni Fuláno. (May sinádya
(nagasinádya silá) sa baláy ni Fuláno). They are making merry in
N.N.'s house. (cf. sádya, sinádya, garís, ginarís, dógsing, dinógsing,
húgyaw, etc.).

_urulí_, See ululí--toilet paper.

_urumánon_, Childish, pertaining to second childhood,
silly. (cf. ulianón, ayopáka, ulumánon).

_urúng_, To astonish, surprise, cause admiration, shock. Naurungán
siá. He was surprised. (cf. búlung, tingála, kibút, oróng).

_urungán_, The shaft, handle (of a spear, lance, etc.). Kápti ang
urungán sang bángkaw. Grasp the handle of the lance. (cf. ulungán,
unungán).

_úrut_, (H) To finish, use up, get through, make an end of, eat up
completely, spend everything, wear out completely. Naúrut na ang íya
kwárta. All his money is gone, spent. Nagúrut siá sang gámit sang
tanán níya nga kalalángan. He exhausted all his means. He used up
all his resources. Ginúrut níya sang inúm ang ápdo sang kalisúd. He
drained the gall of bitter grief. Indì mo pagurúton sang gásto (sa
paggásto) ang búg-os mo nga binúlan. Don't spend the whole of your
monthly salary. (cf. úbus, sáid, tîtî, tápus, ápus).

_urutúp_, (B) A knife, anything with a sharp edge for cutting, as
a piece of sharp stone, bone, tin, wood, bamboo, etc. (cf. súndang,
garanás; ótop).

_urút-úrut_, (H) Dim. and Freq. of úrut. Sa sulúd sang isá ka pituádlaw
maurútúrut níla sang káon iníng humáy. They will be able to eat up
all the rice within a week. (cf. ubúsúbus).

_urúy-úruy_, To chat, converse familiarly, be intimate. See odóyódoy.

_usá_, Deer. (cf. lágsaw).

_usá_, One, etc. See isá id.

_úsa_, (Sp. osa) She-bear. (úso (óso) nga babáye id.).

_úsang_, Chewing; to chew, masticate. Usánga ang kárne sing maáyo. Chew
the meat well. (cf. úsap).

_usáog_, (B) To go seawards, go down a valley or river, proceed down
the river. Bág-o pa lang nagusáog (tána) sa bánwa. (Bág-o pa lang
siá nagpabánwa (nagkádto, nagpakádto sa bánwa)). A very short while
ago he went down to town. Kaína gid lang buút akó magusáog, pay warâ
akó makatarús, hay nagurán. (Kaína gid lang buút akó magdúlhug, ápang
walâ akó makadayón, kay nagulán). This very morning I wanted to go
down (the hill, valley, river), but did not go, because it began to
rain. (cf. súbà--to go up river).

_úsap_, To chew, etc. See úsang. (cf. gús-ab).

_usará_, Only one, one, one only, alone, single, only. (cf. isá,
isará; búgtong).

_usá-úsa_, To be alone, be without company, be all by
oneself. (cf. isáísa).

_usá-úsa_, To open and move the eyes, begin to see (of new-born babies,
or the like).

_usá-úsa_, A kind of plant.

_úsdang_, To waste, spend, squander, spoil, throw away. (cf. uyáng,
úsik).

_úsdang_, To fall on one's back; to stamp the feet on the floor
(ground). (cf. úgsang, úsgang; pusádpúsad, pundágpúndag).

_úsdul_, To shake, tremble, quiver, quake. (cf. kiréu, tág-us,
pálak, línog).


_úsgang_, See úsdang--to fall on one's back, etc.

_úsgon_, From usúg--to follow, etc. Usgon mo siá. Follow him. Chase
him.

_úsik_, Waste, squandering, loss, useless consumption or expenditure,
lavishness, prodigality, labour lost or in vain; to waste, spoil,
spill, drain, squander, fritter away, spend or use to no purpose. Usik
gid lang inâ sang pílak, sang mahál nga mga tinión, etc. That is
waste of money, loss of precious time, etc. Indì ka magúsik siníng
kahigayónan. Do not miss this opportunity. Indì mo pagusíkan ang
kán-on, pílak, etc. Don't waste the rice, money, etc. Ginusíkan
níya ang mánggad sang íya nga asáwa. He squandered his wife's
wealth. (cf. uyáng, hinguyáng).

_usísà_, To examine, investigate, search, inspect, explore, inquire
into. Usisáon mo inâ kon matúod ukón butíg. Find out whether that is
true or not. Ginusisáan (Nausisaán (notice the accent)) (siá sang)
ang íya sayúp. His guilt was investigated (proved). He was investigated
(was found guilty).

_úslan_, etc. From ulús--to dress, etc.

_uslít, uslitán, uslitón_, See oslít, oslitán, oslitón.

_úsmo_, To low, moo (of cattle). See má, má-má, humá, imâ.

_úsmud_, To sink down, be swallowed up; go bankrupt. See ósmod.

_úsngab_, To bite, gnaw, nibble at; tear to pieces (with the
teeth). (cf. úsap, úsang).

_úsngad_, To put one's nose near an object, smell, sniff. Ginusngarán
(inusngarán) sang báboy ang idô nga patáy. The pig sniffed at the
dead dog. (cf. sínghot, panínghot, panimáhò; úsngab).

_úsngad_, To snort, blow air through the nose, as one expelling, or
trying to avoid breathing, a bad smell, etc. (cf. púsnga, lághong;
sámbo).

_úso_, (Sp. oso) Bear, (óso id.).

_úso_, (Sp. uso) use, fashion, vogue, type; the initials of a
branding iron. Amó iní ang íla úso dirí. This is their custom (way)
here. Markahán mo lang ang ákon karabáw sang úso. Brand my buffalo
with the usual mark. Walâ kamí sing bíno nga ginabalígya, kóndì pára
úso lámang. We have no wine to sell, but (what we have is) for our
private use only. (cf. batásan, kinaugálì, kostúmbre).

_úsog, usóg_, See úsug, usúg.

_úsok_, See ósok--post, stake, etc.

_úson, usón_, See óson, osón--heap (of stones); ozone, etc.

_úsoy_, To trace, track, trail, follow the trace of, follow
up, follow the course of a river, or the like. Usóya (Lighotá)
ang makáwat túbtub nga ímo madakúp. Track the thief till you catch
him. Ginúsoy (Gintúltul) níya ang karabáw dirâ sa bakólod, ápang walâ
níya makítà. He trailed the buffalo there on the hill, but did not
find it. Magúsoy ka lang sa íya. (Apása (Tultulá) lang siá). Simply
follow his trail. Usóyon (subáon, usaógon) náton ang subâ. Let us
follow the river (up or down). (cf. túltul, ápas, sunúd, usúg, líghot).

_usúb-úsub_, To stir up, encourage, animate, rouse. Ginusúbúsub na man
lang níya ang íya sádto malúya nga buút kag pumatúbò siá sing kaísug sa
pagbátok sa kay Fuláno. He roused himself from his former irresolution
and mustered sufficient strength to oppose N.N. (cf. ísug, paísug).

_úsug_, To rub (one's eyes). Magúsug ka sang (Usúga ang) ímo matá
túbtub nga maggwâ ang púling. Rub your eye till the mote comes out.

_usúg_, To trace another's steps, follow, look for, get on the trail
of. Usga (Usugá) siá. Get on his trail. Track his foot-steps. Chase
or pursue him. (cf. úsoy, túltul, ápas, sunúd, abátábat, hingabút).

_usúg_, Witchcraft, sorcery, spell, charm; to bewitch, cast a
spell upon, cause stomach-ache or diarrhoea. Ginusúg siá, konó,
ni Fuláno. His stomach-ache, they say, is due to the witchcraft of
N.N. Indì ka magúyat sang íya inuyátan, kay básì kon may usúg siá
magasakít ang ímo tián. Don't touch what he has touched, for, if he
is a sorcerer, you may get stomach-ache. (cf. hiwít, bárang, híkaw).

_usúg-úsug_, Dim. and Freq. of usúg. Also: to brave, defy,
challenge. Ginausúgúsug na níya ang pagtámpad sa (sang) may katalágman
nga palaabúton. He is now braving (facing with courage or fortitude)
the future fraught with dangers. (cf. usúbúsub, ákyat, súlung).

_úsung_, To carry somebody in a half-lying, half-sitting position
in one's arms, a method frequently used in carrying women and
children across rivers, or the like. Usúnga siá. Carry her in your
arms. Makaúsung ka balá sa íya sa tabók sang subâ? Do you think
you can carry her in your arms across the river? Iúsung lang ang
bátà. Carry the child in your arms. Iúsung akó sang ákon ilóy sa
pagtabók sa subâ. Please carry my mother across the river in your
arms. Sang paglúsad níya sa sakayán dáyon siá níla ginúsung nga walâ
gid makatúmban sa salúg ang íya mga tiíl. When he left the boat they
at once took him and carried him in their arms so that his feet never
touched the ground. (cf. kúgus, kólkol; abá, tíbong).

_úsung_, (B) A boaster, braggart, liar; cheat, rogue, rascal; clown,
buffoon. (From Usung, Osong--a famous and very popular character
of folk-lore who played many a prank on high and low; (in (H)
Púsong, Huán Púsong)). Pausúng-úsung--to lie, tell stories, cheat,
pretend to be very ignorant, etc. in imitation of the exploits of
Usung. (cf. púsong).

_ús-us_, See ós-os--to slip down, etc.

_úswad_, See úswag.

_úswag_, To step back, make room, give (make) way; to postpone,
procrastinate; to extend, prosper, go on well, succeed, advance, make
progress. Uswag (Magúswag, umúswag) kamó dirâ. Step back there, make
room. Kon amó inâ índì makaúswag ang áton bánwa. If things are so then
our town cannot make any progress. Ginpaúswag níla ang kaadláwan sang
íla pándut. They postponed the day of their feast. Pauswagá ang ímo
palatikángan. Extend your business. (cf. idóg, ísol; tín-ad, sányog,
kaayohán, kauswágan).

_uták_, Knife, bolo. See binángon.

_útan_, Any kind of vegetable including legumes, tubers, salads,
etc.; to boil or cook vegetables. Utánon mo iníng dágmay, balúnggay,
alugbáti, etc. Cook this dágmay, these balúnggay-leaves, these
alugbáti-shoots, etc. (cf. ulutanón, láswa, tóla, túla, tinóla,
lapó, tanók).

_útang_, Debt, liability, debit, score, account; to have a debt,
be in debt, owe, borrow, obtain a loan, run up a bill, incur a--,
contract a--, get into--, run into--, debt. May útang siá sa ákon
nga duhá ka púlò ka písos. He owes me (has a debt to me of) twenty
pesos. Ginutángan níya si Fuláno sing isá ka gatús. He borrowed
one hundred (pesos) from N.N. Pautánga lang siá sing diótay nga
kwárta. Just lend him a little money. Nautángan mo ang ímo mga
ginikánan sang ímo kabúhì. You owe your life to your parents. Dílì
ka magpangútang kag índì ka man magpaútang. Neither a borrower nor
a lender be. Note the accent in the following: Bisán kon mautanggán
akó----. Even if I have to get--, run--, into debt----. (cf. hulám--to
borrow).

_utás_, Severed, cut through, cut off; to sever, cut off. Nautás ang
íya bútkon. His arm is cut off. Utás na (Nautás) ang íya ginháwa. His
breath is broken off i.e. he is dead, he died. (cf. púnggul, pungól,
útud, tígbas, púgut, búgras).

_utáut, utá-ut_, To chafe, fret, wear out by rubbing, etc. Nautáut
(Nataís) ang kalát kag nabúgtò. The rope got chafed and
broke. (cf. taís, ínas).

_utáw-útaw_, Floating, drifting; to float, drift, swim, remain on the
surface of. Nagutáwútaw siá sa túbig sing duhá ka táknà. He floated
on the water for two hours. (cf. lutáw, kubáw).

_utáy-utáy_, Retail, small quantity, little by little; to retail,
deal in small quantities, do little by little, by little and little,
in small instalments, etc. Ginautáyutáy lang níya ang pagbáyad sang
íya útang. He is paying off his debt in small amounts at a time (in
(by) instalments). Maáyo kon índì mo pagtíngban sang íya galastóhon
ang bátà mo nga nagatoón sa Manílà, kóndì utáyutayán mo lang. It
is advisable (good policy) not to give your son that is studying
in Manila the whole amount for his expenses in a lump sum, but to
let him have it by instalments (by small remittances from time to
time). Bungkagá lang ang isá mo ka manóso (máno) nga tabákò kag
ipautáyutáy, agúd madalî maúrut sang bakál. Just undo one of your
bundles of tobacco-leaves and sell it retail so that it may be bought
up soon. Nagabalígyà siá sing utáyutáy. He is selling retail. He is
a retail-merchant. (cf. píndak--wholesale).

_útbug_, To rise, ascend, spread (of smoke, dust, etc.). Bás-an mo ánay
sing túbig ang salúg kag ugáling silhigán mo, agúd nga índì makaútbug
ang yáb-ok. First sprinkle the floor with water and then sweep it,
otherwise the dust will rise. Ginautbugán kitá dirí sang yáb-ok. We
are being enveloped here in dust. (cf. alintabó, timbúok).

_útbung_, Top, tip, end, point, etc. See ótbong.

_utbúngan_, Tip, top, end; goal, termination,
consummation. (cf. útbung).

_útdan_, etc. From útud--to cut off, etc.

_úti_, To be diligent, active, assiduous, do with zeal or energy,
do thoroughly. Utíhi ang pagpangúhà sang dalúkut sa báyò ko. (Utíhi
ang pagpamuúl kang baríri sa ulús ko). Clean my dress thoroughly
of the baríri-seeds. (cf. písan, pántok, bákas, úkud, húgud, maúti,
kaúti, kautihón).

_utís_, Flattery, fooling; to flatter, fool, wheedle, cajole,
coax. Utisá siá. Flatter (fool, humour) him. Persuade (induce) him
by flattery. (cf. odót, unís, íntò, hásò).

_utitíd_, Care, solicitude, diligence; to do or perform with care,
take charge of, cater for, treat well, manage with zeal, apply
oneself with right good will (with an eye to one's own interest or
advantage). Utitirá (-idá) siá. Take care of him. Look well after
him. Maálam gid siá magutitíd sinâ. He knows very well to manage that
and to look to his own profit. Ginautitíd níya sa gihápon ang tanán
nga mga buluháton níya. He habitually performs all his duties well
(with an eye to his own advantage). N.B. Utitirá siá. (H) Utitidá
(tána). (B) has at times also the meaning: Exact a strict account of
him. Make him pay back every centavo, every favour received, or the
like. (cf. tátap, sagúd, sapópo, písan, úkud).

_útud_, (H) Brother, sister; to be brothers or sisters; to be of the
same kind, belong to the same class or category. Nagaútud silá (nga
duhá). They (The two) are brothers (brother and sister). Nagaulútud
(Nagaululútud) silá. They (if there are more than two) are brothers and
(or) sisters. Nagaululútud ang íla mga delárgo. Their trousers are
cut from the same cloth. Ang mga magútud (magulútud). Brothers and
(or) sisters. (cf. búgtò, kautúran).

_utúd_, (H) See the following útud. Siá galí ang nagutúd sang sangá. He
actually cut off the branch himself.

_útud_, To cut off, sever, separate from, break off; to cut short,
interrupt, break off abruptly (a conversation, or the like). Utdon mo
iníng káhoy. Cut through this piece of wood. Ginútud níya ang sangá. He
cut (broke) off the branch. Ginútdan siá sang manugbúlung sang íya
páa nga walá. He had his left leg cut off by the surgeon. (cf. búgtò,
búgras, lígtas, etc.).

_utúd_, Cut off, broken off, severed; a piece or part of.

_utúd-útud_, Dim. and Freq. of útud--to cut off, etc.

_utúd-utúd_, Broken, interrupted, with interruptions, faltering; to
break, be broken, falter. Sa utúdutúd (nagakautúdutúd) nga tíngug
(pangatingúg)--with a broken or faltering voice. Pagpahimúynga
(Pagpahimuyúnga) na lang ang ímo bátà kon amó inâ nga utúdutúd man
lang ang íya pangeskwéla. You had better keep your boy at home, if he
goes to school only by fits and starts. Kon amó inâ nga utúdutúd ang
íya pangóbra índì ka sa íya magsóhol sing inádlaw, kóndì sa tágsa ka
galamitón nga íya mahumán. If he so often stops in his work, don't
pay him daily wages, but pay him by the piece. (cf. utúngutúng).

_utúg_, To be or become erect; pautúg--to cause an erection (of the
membrum virile).

_utúm_, To bear, stand, suffer, tolerate; to subdue, overcome, conquer,
hold one's own against. (cf. okóm, otóm).

_utúng, utúng-útung, utúng-utúng_, To be prominent, stand forth,
be elevated or higher than the surroundings, to jut out, project,
said of any small elevations or projections, as a tumour, wart,
pimple, etc. (cf. ulútngan).

_utúng-utúng_, Faltering, undecided, wavering; to falter, stammer,
hesitate, waver. Nagautúngutúng siá kon maghámbal. He stammers. He
speaks falteringly. Sulúd dirí, índì ka magutúngutúng. Come in,
don't hesitate (to enter). (cf. utúdutúd).

_útus_, To be a long time, last a long time, remain or stay long. Ngaá
nga nagútus ka dídto? Why did you stay there long? Indì mo ánay
pagdugúson ang mga páhò, kóndì pautúsan mo gid, kay báklon ko sa
ímo sing mahál. Don't pluck the mangoes yet, but let them remain
on the tree for a long time still (till they are thoroughly ripe)
and I shall pay you a good price for them.


_utús_, To extract, express, press or force out by crushing (as the
juice of sugar cane, or the like). (cf. inutús, íntus).

_út-ut_, See ót-ot--to gnaw, nibble, etc.

_utút_, Wind, fart; to break wind, let a fart
(colloquial). (cf. pútput).

_útwas_, To emerge, come--, rise--, to the surface, to float;
to get free, escape, extricate oneself from any difficult
position. (cf. bútwà, bútwas; lutáw, utáwútaw).

_utwásan_, Loophole of escape, salvation, outlet, place or person to
turn to for assistance or help. (útwas).

_úwà_, See ówà--to dribble milk, etc.

_uwák_, See owák--the raven, crow.

_úwak, uwák-úwak_, See tuák-túak--to fight to a finish, etc.

_uwák-úwak_, See owák-ówak--to caw.

_úwang_, See ówang--to yelp, howl, etc.

_uwáy_, See owáy--rattan.

_úway_, See óway--grandmother.

_úy_, Fie! Pshaw! Pooh! Pish! Nonsense! An exclamation of contempt
or disgust.

_úya_, Plentiful; to be plentiful, abound, be many. Kon magúya ang
ámon kadiós (Kon uyáhon ang ámon kadiós, kon uyáhan kamí sang (sing)
kadiós), hatágan ko gid si Fuláno sing isá ka tabungós. If there are
(If we have) plenty of cadios-peas I shall certainly give N.N. a
basketful. (cf. óya).

_úya, úy-a_, Oho! Hurrah! Lo! Why! An exclamation of surprise, joy,
etc. (cf. hoy).

_uyâ_, A disease of the nose; polypus. (cf. ámban, ambanón).

_uyáb_, Wild, unruly, untamed; to run wild. Báboy nga uyáb (naguyáb). A
pig that has run wild. (cf. ilá, húyab).

_uyád-úyad_, See ayód-áyod, iyót.

_uyáhan, uyáhon_, Plentiful, abundant, fruitful, productive,
fertile. (cf. úya, óya).

_uyahón_, (B) Face, feature, mien, gaze, look. (cf. guyá, nawóng,
panúluk).

_uyakúp_, Fine particles of rice, smaller even than "bínlud"; powder,
face-powder. (cf. yápyap, pólbos).

_uyák-úyak_, Wasting, squandering; to waste, squander, lavish, spend
uselessly or to no purpose, be a spendthrift. (cf. úsik, uyáng,
buhahâ, binuhahâ).

_uyáng_, To spend foolishly, waste, squander, expend. Dílì mo
paguyangán ang kán-on, kwárta, etc. Don't waste rice, money,
etc. (cf. úsik).

_úyang_, Grandmother. (cf. úlang, bayí, úway).

_úyap_, A kind of small fish.

_úyap_, To share, participate, have a part in. (cf. áyap, ámbit).

_uyápad_, Level ground, plain, field. (cf. lápad, kuyápad).

_uyapús_, An ulcer, boil, furuncle, tumour. (cf. púgsa).

_uyás_, (H) Grain, kernel, seed, small piece. (cf. iyás id.).

_úyat_, To hold, keep in the hand, grasp, get (take) hold of; to hold a
child at baptism, be godfather or godmother. Uyáti ang kamót ko. Take
hold of my hand. Hold my hand. Sín-o ang maúyat (magaúyat) sang íya
bátà? Who shall be the godfather (godmother) of his child? (cf. kapút,
kúgus, anák).

_uyá-uyá_, To jump up and down, bounce, rebound; jump and dance with
joy. (cf. tumbôtúmbò; hinúgyaw).

_úyaw_, To stop, keep, hinder from going home, detain, said of bad
weather or the like. Naúyaw (inúyaw) siá dídto. He was detained there
(by bad weather).

_úyaw_, A repetition of an accident or ill fortune in the same
family. Uyaw sa íla iní, kay may nalúnud sa íla sang isá ka túig
kag karón napátyan na liwán. This is another shock for them, for
last year one of their family was drowned and now they have lost
another. (cf. mauyawón).

_úyaw_, To be new or strange in a place or position, be unaccustomed
or not acclimatized as yet. See mág-o id. Naúyaw akó dirí. I am yet
a stranger here.

_uyáy_, (B) Slow, dull, lazy, indolent, slack, remiss. (cf. búndul,
hínay, pákok, támad, ligóy).

_uyayâ_, See uyáy id.

_úyhaw_, To cry out aloud, shout, vociferate. (cf. sínggit, turayáw,
pugaás, hinúgyaw).

_úyog_, To shake, swing, move to and fro, cause to tremble or
vibrate. Uyóga ang úlyog. Pull the string of the scarecrow (swinging
apparatus) for scaring off birds. (cf. línog, táy-og).

_úyon_, Agreeable, pleasing, to one's liking; to like, be pleased
with, be fond of, to relish, be partial to. Indì akó makaúyon sang
báboy. I don't like pork. I am not partial to (fond of) pork. Indì
makaúyon sang báboy ang ákon solóksolók. Pork does not agree with
my stomach. Pork is bad for my stomach. Ginauyónan níya gid inâ. He
likes that very much. He is perfectly content with it. Maáyo ang
ámon patubás, kon magúyon ang panahón. We shall have a good harvest,
if the weather is favourable (nice, agreeable, propitious).

_úyong_, Grandfather. (cf. úlang, lakí; úyang, imáy,
bayí--grandmother).

_úysit_, Fortunate, lucky, happy. See uísit. (cf. buísit--unlucky).

_úy-uy_, A hearty laugh, loud laughter, guffaw; to laugh heartily,
to guffaw; to enjoy, delight in. (cf. talángkaw, arík-ik, óy-oy).




V


_v_, This letter does not belong to the Visayan Alphabet. Wherever
it occurs in terms taken from other languages "b" is generally
substituted, e.g. vino--bíno; vigilia--bihílya; evangelio--ebanhélyo.




W


_w_, As this letter does not belong to the Spanish Alphabet it does
not occur in Visayan literature previous to the American Occupation;
"o" and "u" were generally used in its place. At the beginning of a
syllable its correct pronunciation is almost identical with (or just a
shade softer than) the "w" in English words as "wag, well, will, woe,
would, etc.". At the end of a syllable after "a" it forms the diphtong
"aw" (e.g. daw, táwtaw, sáwsaw, línaw) that is nearly equivalent to
the English "ou" in "out, about, loud, etc.". At the end of a syllable
after "e" or "i" its correct pronunciation is quite peculiar and can
be learned only by hearing, e.g. bagéw, baréw, siríw, téwbew, etc.
It is to be remarked that many Visayan
words ending in "o" or "u" lose these
vowels in some verbal forms and in terms
derived from them and take the letter
"w" instead, e.g. báywon, saláywan,
gámwan, sápwan, kaburúywan, etc. (from
bayó, salayó, gamó, sapó, buyó, etc.).

_waáy, wa'áy_, For walâ sing--there is none, etc. Waáy akó kwárta. I
have no money. Waáy síngsing dirí. There is no ring here. Waáy táo sa
baláy. Nobody is at home. There is no one in the house. Wa'áy sáma
(sánglit, súbung, ikaduhá, ángay, etc.). There is no equal (peer,
compeer, second, comparable to, etc.). It is unexampled, peerless,
unprecedented, unparalleled, extraordinary, incomparable, matchless,
or the like.

_waáy-wáay_, Swinging, stir, movement; to swing or move (one's arms,
etc.); to wriggle, writhe, move one's limbs in all directions; to
stir, move about, be active. (cf. waláswálas, kisáykísay, hulághúlag,
bíknol).

_waáy-wáay_, To turn round, change one's mind, be fickle or
wavering. (cf. lísò, háylo, dalá, daládála).

_wád-an_, etc. For waláan and walaán from wálà and walâ.

_wáding_, To be shaky or wobbly, swing to and fro, walk with a halt,
to limp; to persuade, dissuade, induce, convince, gain over to one's
point of view. Indì gid mawáding si Fuláno. N.N. cannot be persuaded
(convinced, turned from his purpose by argument or entreaty, or
the like), (cf. dîmawáding, paniwáding, bawód, bayúd, daúg, dalá,
daládála, wánding).

_wadíng-wáding_, Dim. and Freq. of wáding. (cf. wandíng-wánding).

_wágak_, To be or get loose, break asunder, break in pieces, fall to
pieces, fall down, disintegrate, fray (of seams, book-bindings, fruit
falling from trees, or the like). Nagakawágak ang íya sárwal. His
trousers are (nearly) falling--down,--to pieces. (cf. busáag, púlak,
dágdag, wás-ag).

_wagák_, Broken asunder, burst, fallen to pieces, loose, rotten,
smashed, broken in pieces, shattered. (cf. wágak).

_wág-as_, To spread, scatter, disperse; to fall to pieces,
disintegrate, smash, be smashed. (cf. wás-ag, buluágas, busáag,
bulúblag, lápta).

_wagás_, Gold, bullion, pure gold, solid gold, bar-gold. (cf. bús-og
nga buláwan).

_wágay_, To protrude, hang out, project, jut out. Pawágay--to cause
to protrude, thrust or push forward, spill. (cf. búgway).

_wágklos_, See wágkos, wáklos--belt. (cf. páha).

_wágkos_, See wágklos.

_wágtang_, To drop, fall down, get loose. (cf. tángtang, táktak,
dágdag).

_wág-wag, wágwag_, To scatter, strew, spread, throw about, sow;
to waste, squander (money, etc.); to destroy, demolish, undo,
unmake, break down, break in pieces. Iwágwag (iwás-ag, isábwag) ang
mga búlak sa salúg. Scatter the flowers on the floor. Ginwagwagán
(ginsabwagán, ginwás-agán) níla ang alágyan sang prosesyón sing madámò
nga búlak. They scattered many flowers on the road over which the
procession passed. Ginwágwag gid lang níya ang íya pílak. He wasted
(squandered) his money. Ginwágwag níla ang pántaw, kay buút níla
ilísan sing bág-o. They broke down the kitchen-balcony, because they
want to replace it by a new one. Nawágwag ang putús sang ulúnan kag
nagguluwâ ang dúldul. The pillow-case broke (burst) open and the
kapok-cotton came out. (cf. wás-ag, sábwag, sáb-og, wágak; údhà,
buhahâ; gubâ, busáag).

_wáhig_, To turn aside, push back, clear one's way, pull or
thrust aside with a jerk or a sudden swift movement. Wahíga ang
mga kagíngking. Bend back the bamboo-branches. Ginwáhig níya si
Fuláno. He pushed (pulled, jerked, threw) N.N. aside. (cf. tíklud,
tulúd, bútong, wáslik).


_wái, wá-i_, An exclamation of praise and wonder (often mixed with envy
or jealousy). Wái mo! Well done! Wái níya! He is a fine fellow! Wái
níla! They are to be congratulated! How happy they are! Also used
sarcastically: Wái mo, kay walâ ka magpáti sa ákon. It serves you
right, because you would not listen to me.

_wái, wá-i_, Freedom from care or solicitude, happiness, content;
to be carefree, be happy, be contented, live at ease, have no worry
or trouble. Wái níla, kay manggaránon silá. They are carefree (can
live at ease, are well off or happy), because they are rich. Wái
níla sinâ, kay--maáyo ang íla kahimtángan,--yárà silá sa maáyo nga
kahimtángan. That does not worry them, for they are well off. Mawái man
níla kon magbalatián akó? What do they care, if I should fall ill? It
would not affect them in the least, if I would take (if I took) ill.

_wak_, The raven. See uwák.

_wákal_, To talk much, chatter, boast, brag, prattle. (cf. búrà,
hádak, ngásal, etc.).

_wakalán_, A great chatterbox; boaster, braggart. (cf. wákal, buraán,
palahámbal, hadakán).

_wákha_, A broker, ticket seller in the game of "huéting", etc. (wákha
seems to be of Chinese origin).

_wáklì_, To jostle, strike, push with the elbow; to turn, push or throw
back (the ends or corners of a garment, etc.). Iwáklì ang kápa. Turn
back the corners of the cope. (cf. wáslik).

_wáklos_, Belt, girth, girdle, cincture; to belt, gird, girdle,
girth. (cf. wágkos, páha, koréa).

_wákwak_, A croak, crow, caw, cackle; to crow, croak, caw,
cackle. (cf. uwákúwak).

_wákwak, wakwákan_, Witch, wizard, sorcerer, one in league
with the devil, one who practises the black art (necromancy,
magic). (cf. pakpákan, silíksilík, áswang).

_wakwákan_, Voice, throat, windpipe; a croak, crow. (cf. wákwak).

_walâ_, No, not, none, no one, not any, nothing; there is not,
does not exist, there has not been (existed); to be not, have not,
be a nonentity, to lack, be deprived of, be not there, to disappear,
be gone. Nagkádto ka dídto?--Walâ (akó magkádto). Did you go (Have
you been) there?--No, I did not go (I have no been there). Walâ siá
pagsugál. He does not gamble. He never gambles. Walâ siá magsugál
kahápon. He has not been gambling yesterday. Walâ siá magasugál. He
is not gambling (just at present. May kwárta ikáw?--Walâ. Have you
(any) money?--No, I have not (none). Walâ kamí sing humáy. We have no
rice. Walâ siá dirí. He is not here. Walâ akó gánì sinâ makasáyod. I
really did not know it (that). Walâ níya pagtumána (pagatumána) ang
sógò. Walâ siá magtúman (magatúman) sang sógò. He did not fulfil (is
not fulfilling) the order or precept. He was (is) disobedient. Walâ
siá magatoón sa karón nga túig. He is not studying (schooling) this
year. Náno na lang ang ímo sinâ sa íla pagdakúp, kon walâ ka sing
hinangíban? How can you catch (arrest) them unarmed (without arms,
unless you have arms)? Sa walâ sing kon anó----. Without any apparent
reason----. Suddenly----. Without much ado (fuss)----. Walâ sing anó
man. Don't mention it. It is very little (nothing). Sa walâ gid madúgay
umabút siá. It did not last long before he arrived. Sa walâ sing
balíbad (lídan). Without excuse (fail). Ginakawalaán (Ginakawád-an,
ginakawár-an) silá konkaisá sing pagkáon. At times they have nothing
to eat (are lacking, are deprived of, food). (cf. waáy, waláy, wáy,
warâ, warát, warâ ti; dî, dílì, índì, bokón; kinawalâ).

_wálà_, To deny, gainsay; to forget, forgive. Ginawálà níya ang
íya útang. He denies his debt. Waláa inâ sa ímo panumdúman. Forget
it. Wipe it off your memory. Waláon (wád-on, wár-on) mo ang íya nga
sayúp. Forgive (Pardon) his fault. Ang pagkawálà sang mga salâ. The
forgiveness of sin. (cf. walâ, himutíg, patáwad, pálà, dúlà).

_walá_, Left, the left hand. Sa walá. To the left. On the left hand. At
the left side. Walá siá sing panglabô, pangáon, etc. He cuts, eats,
etc. with the left hand. Walá ang ayón mo ukón ang toó? Are you
left-handed or right-handed?

_walágay_, To protrude, stick out, hang out, project. (cf. wágay,
wálwal, búgway, gíway, gáway).

_wálak_, To shake, vibrate, oscillate, tremble. (cf. pálak).

_walák-wálak_, Dim. and Freq. of wálak--to shake, tremble, etc.


_walák-wálak_, To shake, tousle (as a punishment). Dákpa siá kag
iwalákwálak. Catch him and tousle (shake) him.

_walalóhan_, (H) A measure of one eighth, especially one eighth of
a bushel of rice. (cf. waló, walóhan, waralóhan).

_wálas_, To wriggle, writhe, move about restlessly, contort the limbs,
as one who is in great pain, or the like. (cf. hiwasâ, wáros).

_walás-wálas_, Dim. and Freq. of wálas--to wriggle, etc.

_waláwag_, To scatter, sow, broadcast, spread; to squander, waste,
throw away, spend uselessly or to no purpose.(cf. wágwag, waráwag).

_wálay_, To wriggle, writhe, move, etc. See wálas.

_waláy, walá'y_, (H) For walâ sing. Walá'y
sapayán----. Notwithstanding, nevertheless, though, although, in
spite of----. Waláy pulús. No good. Useless. Of no use. Waláy táo sa
baláy. There is nobody at home. (cf. wa'áy, waáy, wáy, warát, warâ ti).

_waláy-wálay_, Dim. and Freq. of wálay--to wriggle,
etc. (cf. waáywáay).

_wálda_, Gesticulation, gesture; to gesticulate, move one's hands
wildly, saw the air with one's hands, jump and dance (with rage,
out of joy, or the like). Ginwaldahán akó níya sa kaákig. In his
anger he gesticulated fiercely in front of me.

_waldá-wálda_, Dim. and Freq. of wálda. Also: to run wildly through
the streets, be very excited.

_wáli_, Sermon, lecture; to preach, lecture, discourse on, declaim,
hold forth. Iwáli mo sa íla inâ. Walíhan mo silá sinâ. Preach it
(that) to them. Give them a lecture about it. Anó ang ginwáli sang párì
kaína? What was the parish priest preaching about this morning? Maáyo
siá magwáli. He is a good preacher (lecturer, orator). Buás sa ága
may wáli (sa) nahanungúd sang (sa)----. Tomorrow morning there will
be a sermon about----. Ginwalíhan níya kamí sang maáyo nga batásan. He
gave us a lecture on right conduct. (cf. láygay).

_walihán_, Pulpit, tribune, platform, chair; stump,
hustings. (cf. diskursóhan).

_wálik_, To turn or twist round or sideways, to deflect. Walíka
ang arádo, sa toó. Turn the plough to the right. Ginwálik níya ang
bandehádo. He turned the dish round. (cf. wárik).

_wáling_, See wáding--to be wobbly, shaky, etc.

_wáling_, To turn sideways or in another direction. See wálik.

_wális_, (Sp. ojal, ojales) Button-hole.

_walís_, Left-handed; awkward. (cf. walá--left, left hand).

_walís_, To push with the elbow; to strike, slap. (cf. sikó, sikól,
síkdol; huyáp, tapí, wáhig, lipát).

_walí-wáli_, Dim. and Freq. of wáli--to preach, lecture, etc.

_waló_, Eight.

_walóhan_, See walalóhan--the eighth part of a given measure.

_waló-wálo_, A small poisonous sea-snake.

_wálwal, wál-wal_, To hang or bulge out, protrude, project, stick out
(of the tongue, of pockets, etc.). Nagawálwal ang íya pányò. His
handkerchief is hanging out. Pawalwalá lang ang pinutús. Let the
package hang out. (cf. diwál, kabítkábit, káway, búgway).

_wálwal_, Prattling, prating; to prattle, prate, talk much, talk
nonsense. (cf. ngálngal, búrà, etc.).

_wándang_, To be open or exposed to view, extended, spread out;
to open, cut open, dissect. Nawándang na ang báboy. The pig is cut
up. (cf. wángwang).

_wánding, wandíng-wánding_, See wáding, wadíng-wáding--to be shaky,
etc.

_wángal_, Boasting, bragging, prattle; to talk much, prate, be a
chatterbox, talk nonsense. (cf. wákal, warángal, dúkal, búrà).

_wangál_, A loud, indistinct cry, a groan; to utter a loud cry,
groan aloud, emit an inarticulate sound. (cf. wángal, sínggit).

_wáng-it_, To gnaw, nibble, bite off piece by piece. Wang-itá lang ang
maís nga binóog. Just gnaw (off the cob) the roast corn (popcorn). Ang
idô nagawáng-it sang túl-an. The dog is gnawing the bone. Ang mga
bátà malúyag magwáng-it sang tubó. Children like to eat sugar-cane
(biting bits off the stalk). (cf. páng-os, háng-it, kítkit).

_wangî-wángì_, See bangî-bángì--to change from side to side, etc.

_wanglô-wánglò_, To shake (the body) to and fro, to move or strut about
ostentatiously, move the head proudly, and the like. (cf. biád-ad,
biád-bíad).

_wángwang_, Wide open, gaping; to gape, be or make wide open. Wángwang
nga pilás. A gaping wound. Nagawángwang ang gangháan. The door is
wide open. Wangwangí ang pilás, agúd maggwâ ang nânâ. Open the wound
so that the pus may flow out. (cf. wándang, bábha, wáwha, gísì).

_waní_, (B) To change from one vessel into another, to transfuse,
transfer, translate. Wányon (Huarón, ihuád) mo ang bíno nga dián
(yárà) sa damahuána sa mga botílya. Bottle the wine that is in
the demijohn. Iwaní (Ihuád) akó anáy kadyáng (siníng) lánggaw sa
prásko. Please pour this vinegar into the flask. Sulát nga winaní sa
ininglés. A letter that has been translated into English. (cf. huád,
sáylo).

_wánwan_, To go out, leave the room, house, town, etc., go away,
depart. Nakawánwan na siá. He has gone out. (cf. halín, lúmbus).

_wányan_, etc. From waní--to transfuse, etc.

_wáog, wá-og_, To turn or twist (one's neck and raise the head at
the same time). (cf. tikwá-og, tikwa-óg, tukháyaw).

_waóg, wa-óg_, Turned, awry, twisted (of the neck, or the like).

_waóg-wáog, wa-ógwá-og_, Dim. and Freq. of wáog. Also adjective:
twisted, awry, turned, crooked.

_warâ_, (B) No, not, none; there is not, etc. See walâ.

_waralóhan_, (B) See walalóhan.

_warángal_, To prattle, talk nonsense (as in one's
sleep). (cf. ngálngal, ngásal, ngarángal, sála, wálwal, wákwak).

_waráng-wárang, waráng-waráng_, To shout angrily, vociferate,
rail at, curse and swear at. Indì mo siá pagwarángwarángan
(pagwarángwarangán). Don't shout at him so angrily. (cf. yáwyaw,
pamuyáyaw; sínggit, turayáw).

_wáras_, (B) To move, etc. See wálas.

_warásag_, To lie about in confusion or disorder. See wás-ag, barásag.

_warát_, (B) See warâ ti. (cf. walâ sing, waláy).

_warâ ti_, (B) There is none, does not exist, etc. See walâ sing.

_waráwag_, To sow, spread, scatter, broadcast. Iwaráwag ang bínhì sa
sabudán (saburán). Sow the seed in the seed-plot. Sow the seed-plot
with seed. (cf. sábud, sábwag, waláwag).

_wárik_, To turn aside, move or shift aside, take another
direction. Iwárik (Waríka) ang kángga sa walá. Turn the cart to the
left. Nagwárik (nagkawárik, nawárik) ang manibéla. The steering wheel
turned in another direction. (cf. wálik, tikô, likô, lísò).

_wárik, warík-wárik_, See bálik, balík-bálik--to return, go or come
back, return again and again.

_wáros_, (B) See wálas--to wriggle, writhe, etc.

_wás-ag_, To scatter, spread; to undo, unmake, demolish, destroy,
break in pieces; to disintegrate, fall out or off and spread in
all directions, as grain escaping through a hole in a sack, or the
like. Ginwás-ag sang hángin ang mga dáhon nga layâ sang káhoy. The wind
scattered the dead (dry) leaves of the tree. Kon itók-ap mo ang sáko
ang íya sulúd inawás-ag. If you shake the sack its contents will fall
out. (cf. wágwag, busáag, lápta, aláplag, sábud, gubâ, ránggà, etc.)

_wásay_, Hatchet, axe; to use or apply--, cut down or fell with--,
an axe or hatchet. Wasáya ang káhoy. Use an axe for the tree. Fell
the tree with an axe. (cf. pulúd).

_wásdak_, To crumble to pieces, demolish, wreck, shatter, fall down in
a heap, collapse (of buildings in an earthquake, etc.); to fall, drop
(as fruit from a tree, etc.). Ginwásdak sang línog ang ámon baláy. Our
house was shattered (ruined, destroyed) by the earthquake. Hinápit
sang líntì ang íya sululátan kag nawásdak (nagkawásdak) ang íya
hulút. Lightning struck his office and wrecked his room. (cf. busáag,
wás-ag, gubâ, láglag, ránggà).

_wasí_, To lose, drop (something inadvertently); to disappear, get
lost, fall down (out). Usisáa sing maáyo ang pinutús mo, kay básì
nawasí ang kahón nga tabákò. Examine your parcel well, for maybe the
box of cigars has been lost. Amligí ang sensílyo, agúd dílì mawasí
ang ibán. Take good care of the change (coins), so that none may be
lost. (cf. wígit, dúlà, dágdag).

_wasigán_, Part, partition, division, panel (of binalántak-work).

_wáslik_, To strike backwards with a stick, a whip, etc.; to throw or
push back, turn back. Ginwaslikán akó níya sang íya látigo. He struck
back at me with his whip. Iwáslik sa idô ang bastón. Strike the dog
behind you with your stick. Waslikí siá sing lúnang (lalaó). Throw
some mud at him from behind. (cf. wáklì, walís, wáhig, lábtik).

_wáswas, wás-was_, To shake out clothes, a blanket, a sack, etc.;
to beat or strike against. Iwáswas ang sáko, agúd maggwâ kag madágdag
ang íya (sinâ nga) sulúd. Shake the sack that its contents may come
out and drop down. Waswasí siá sang sílhig. Strike him with the
broom. (cf. yásyas, dáldal, dásdas, hohô, linô).

_waták-waták_, Separate from others, spaced, spread out, not joined--,
not close--, to others. See atákaták, putáputá.

_watí_, Equal, square, neither winning nor losing, on a level, on an
even footing. (cf. pátas, patás, túpung, tupúng).

_watí-watí_, (B) Unimportant, trivial, not prominent,
vulgar, common, of trifling value, mostly said of things (not
of persons). (cf. wití-wití; girí-girí--the common folks, simple
people as distinct from the lutáw--the great or prominent members of
a community).

_wátwat, wát-wat_, To widen or open (as a wound in order to extract
a splinter, etc.). Watwatí ang pilás túbtub nga makítà ang tunúk
(dógi). Open the wound so that the thorn can be seen. (cf. wángwang,
bukás).

_wáwaw_, A bark, yell, howl; to bark, yell, howl, roar, emit a loud
cry. (cf. úwang; tiábaw, tiángak, siagít, etc.).

_wáwha_, A slash, gash, cut, rent, wide hole; to slash, gash,
tear or rip open. Sín-o ang nagwáwha sang ákon báyò? Who tore my
jacket? Binunô siá; nawáwha ang íya kílid kag bumúgway (nagbúgway)
ang íya tinái. He was stabbed; his side was ripped open and his bowels
protruded. (cf. wángwang, bábha, gísì, gíhay, etc.).

_wáw-waw_, See wáwaw,--to bark, yelp, etc.

_wáy_, Contr. of waáy, wa'áy equivalent to walâ sing. Wáy kapuslánan
inâ. That is of no use. That is no good. Wáy sáyod inâ. That's
nonsense.

_wayáng_, An open plain, extensive grounds, level fields in a broad
valley, or the like.

_wayá-wayá_, Scum, the film that forms on liquids like vinegar,
pickles, canned (bottled) fruit, etc. (cf. kútap, kúlap, latáb).

_wáyway, wáy-way_, To fall or hang down, as long hair,
etc. (cf. wálwal, káway, kabítkábit, etc.).

_wélga_, (Sp. huélga) Strike; to go on strike, quit work. (cf. paáloy).

_welgísta_, One who quits, or has quit, work, a striker.

_wígit_, To fall or drop down unnoticed, fall out of a pocket, etc.,
get lost; to lose, drop, let fall down, throw away. Nawigítan siá
sang íya kolíntas sa simbáhan. She dropped her rosary-beads in church
without noticing it. Kay sín-o balá ang pányò nga nawígit dirí? Whose
is the handkerchief that has been dropped here. Ginwígit sang babáye
ang pányò nga íya kináwat sang pagkakítà níya nga nagapadúlong sa íya
ang tagíya. The woman dropped the stolen handkerchief, when she noticed
that the owner was approaching her. Andamán mo gid ang ímo kolíntas
kag pulséras, agúd dílì ka sinâ mawigítan (agúd índì mawígit). Be
very careful with your necklace and bracelet or you may lose them
(or they may be lost). (cf. dúlà, wasí).

_wíit_, To wry or distort the mouth, curl the lips, pout, make (pull)
a face or grimace. (cf. kiwî).

_wiít_, Pouting, curled, distorted, twisted, shaped in the form of
a grimace, said of the mouth, the lips, or the like. (cf. wíit).


_wiít-wiitán_, The corners of the mouth. (cf. wiwián).

_wíli_, Entertainment, amusement, distraction; to entertain, amuse,
distract; to like, be pleased or delighted with, have a liking or
predilection for, take delight in. Ginawíli níya silá sang sugilánon,
sang musiká, etc. He entertains them with conversation, with a concert
(music), etc. Ginakawilíhan ko gid ang pagtán-aw sang prosesyón. I very
much like to see the procession. Ngáa nga nagakawíli ka dídto? Why
have you such a liking for that place there? Why do you like to be
there? Wilíha ang mga dumulúaw sang kánta. Amuse (distract, entertain)
the visitors with some songs (singing). (cf. lúyag, bangá, lingáw).

_wílwig, wíl-wig_, Nearly cut through, hanging only by a thread,
dangling; to dangle, hang down loosely, be attached loosely
(slightly). Nabálì ang íya bútkon kag nagwílwig (nawílwig,
nagkawílwig). His arm was broken and hung down loosely. (cf. kábit,
kibít).

_wílwil_, See wílwig id.

_wirí-wirí_, Gibberish, rapid or gabbling talk, babble, jabber,
unmeaning words, nonsensical talk; to gibber, gabble, babble, jabber,
prattle, prate, mumble, murmur, growl, to utter, say or speak
(indistinctly). Butíg gid lang ang íya nga ginawiríwirí. What he
babbles (says) is a lie. Maálam siá magwiríwirí sang latín. He knows
to gibber (a few words of) Latin.

_wisík_, Sprinkling; to sprinkle, besprinkle, bedrop, scatter in
drops. Wíski (Wisikí) siá sing túbì. Sprinkle water on him. Sprinkle
him with water. Nawískan siá sang lúnang. He was bespattered with
mud. (cf. lábtik, ásik, lásik).

_wíswis, wís-wis_, A small tuft or lock (as of hair, etc.). Isá ka
wíswis nga bohók. A lock of hair.

_wití-wití_, Common, ordinary, not prominent, vulgar. Ang mga táo
nga witíwití. The ordinary (common) men. Men of inferior or low
origin. (cf. watíwatí, girígirí).

_wítwit, wít-wit_, Rumour, report, hearsay, whisper; to rumour, report,
whisper, tell, say. (cf. silíng, súgid, konó, múno, hudínghúding,
haní).

_wiwián_, The corner (corners) of the mouth. (cf. wiítwiitán).




X


_x_, The letter "X" is not needed in Visayan. It occurs in foreign
words that have been incorporated in the Visayan language, but
even in these words the tendency is to write "ks" instead of
"x", e.g. ekstraordináryo for extraordinario, ekstremaunsyón for
extremaunción, eksámen for examen.




Y


_y_, The letter "Y" in Visayan, as in English, is sometimes a
consonant, sometimes a vowel. In both cases it is pronounced as in
English. As a vowel "Y" forms diphtongs with a, o, u, e.g. in the words
"may", "ngóyngoy," "púypuy".

_ya_, For íya, níya, e.g. kadámpig ya--íya kadámpig, kadámpig níya.

_yábi_, Key; to lock with a key. Yabíhi ang gangháan, baúl, etc. Lock
the door, the trunk, etc. with the key. (cf. liábi, lyábi).

_yabî_, To pout, etc. See yámbì.

_yáb-ok_, Dust, fine dry particles of earth or other material; to be
or become dusty. (cf. gapógapó, tapótapó).

_yab-okón_, Dusty, full of dust, covered with dust.

_yádan_, An expletive or exclamation of surprise, chagrin,
disappointment or the like. (cf. manyági, yádi, yáwà, líntì, yámat,
gátud).

_yádi_, See yádan id.

_yádì_, (B) Worth something, useful, of use, profitable, advantageous,
serviceable; to be worth something, be useful, etc. Panigputá nínyo
ang mga búnga kang kamúnsil ta; yádì pa riá bisán ibakál ta lang ti
gas (ang bilí (báyad) na). (Sigputá nínyo ang mga búnga sang áton
kamúnsil; yáwat pa inâ bisán ibakál lang náton sing gas (ang íya
bilí (báyad). Gather together all our kamúnsil-fruit (pods); they
are--useful,--of use,--worth something, even if only sufficient to
buy a little kerosene (with the proceeds from their sale). (cf. yáwat,
pangunyádì).

_yádto_, (H) That, that there; it is (was) there (at a farther distance
than implied by dirâ). Hóo, yádto amó ang ákon kálò. Yes, that is my
hat there. Diín si tátay mo?--Yádto sa umá. Where is your father?--He
is at the farm. Ginhinambitán níya yádto, kay----. He mentioned that,
because----. (cf. ádto, ató; dídto, rúgto).

_yágsim_, Brackishness, saltiness; to be or become brackish, salty,
disgustful, unpalatable (said particularly of water).

_yagúm-at_, Mockery, derision; to mock, scoff at, deride, ridicule,
jibe, sneer, scorn, make sarcastic remarks. (cf. uligâ, ulígyat,
tiáwtíaw, támay).

_yagutâ_, See yagúm-at--to scoff at, etc.

_yahóng_, A bowl, basin, pan, cup, goblet.

_yahóng-yáhong_, Anything that resembles a bowl, any kind of vessel
or dish of a roundish shape, rather deep and without handles. Also:
a kind of plant.

_yákal_, A kind of tree and its valuable timber.

_yakát_, Invitation, persuasion, inducing, urging; to urge, induce,
persuade, incite, instigate, prevail upon, attract, allure, entice,
draw. Yakatá ang bátà sa pagkádlaw. Make the baby laugh. Induce
the baby (by playing with it, or the like) to laugh. Iyakát akó
siníng bátà sa pagkasádya (sa pagkádlaw). Please do something
to--entertain,--amuse, the baby (to make it laugh). Ginyakát akó
níya sa pagtámbong sa báile. He induced me to go to the dance. Walâ
kúntà silá sing lúyag sa pagsugál, ápang si Fuláno sa íla ang
nagyakát. Really they had no desire to gamble, but N.N. induced
them to play at cards. Silíng níla mahípus siá; índì man galî, kay
ginyakát nínyo. They said he was a quiet (silent, taciturn) man;
but he is not, as (you saw yourself when) you drew him out (paid much
attention to him). Walâ gid siá sing gána sa pagtán-aw sang síni, kon
índì pagyakatón. She has no desire to go to a moving-picture theatre;
she has to be prompted. Hinúgay kamó sang gáhud dirâ! Ari si Kwan ay,
nagapangyakát (sang gáhud)! Stop that noise there! But, good (great)
heavens, that fellow, what's his name, is always so rowdy, boisterous,
inciting others to make a noise. Amó gid inâ ang kinaugálì siní nga
bátà nga walâ pagkádlaw? Yakatá, kay tan-awón ta. Is that the baby
without a smile? Just play with it and let us see. (cf. hágad, ágda,
tulúd, ís-is, galít, sótsot, súdyot).

_yákyak_, To spread, scatter, cover with; drop or throw on the
floor, throw away, discard; to waste, squander. Yakyakí ang dálan
sing balás. Cover the road with small gravel (sand). Ginayákyak gid
lang níya ang pílak. He is throwing the money away. He is squandering
money. (cf. húmlad, ládlad; pilák, waráwag, waláwag).

_yalaúban_, Place where one prostrates himself; altar. (cf. yaúb).

_yámat_, An expletive nearly equivalent to yáwà. Yámat! Blast
it! Dash it! Confound it! Damn it! To hell with it! Yámat, nabúgtò ang
kalát. Hang it! The rope has snapped! Yámat, anó ang lábut mo! What
the devil is that to you! Yámat, naglupók ang góma! Damn it, the tyre
has burst! (cf. yáwà, líntì, gátud, yádan).

_yámbì_, To project the underlip, to pout, make grimaces, pull a face
(by projecting the underlip). (cf. yabî, yámid, hálhal).

_yamî_, To be soft, etc. See ramî.

_yamî_, (H) Coldness, coolness; to be or become cold, cool, cooled
down, low (of temperature). Nagyamî na ang minatáy (bángkay). The
corpse is now cold. (cf. yamíg).

_yám-id_, Pouting; to pout, be sullen, to thrust out the lips and
avert one's face in displeasure, disgust or disapproval. Indì ka
magyám-id. Don't pout. Don't sulk (be sullen). Ginyamirán (-idán)
níya akó. He curled his lips at me in disgust. (cf. yámbì; hílhil,
hálhal; súngon, súnggud).

_yamíg_, Coldness, coolness, frigidity; to grow (be) cold,
cool, frigid. Nagyamíg na ang bángkay. The corpse is cold
already. (cf. lamíg, ramíg, túgnaw, búgnaw).

_yáming_, Stick, cane, rod, cudgel; to apply or use a stick, to beat
with a stick, etc. Andam ka; básì yamíngon ka níya. Beware of him;
he may beat you with a stick. (cf. bastón, bilogón, tagsáon, lalámpus,
bulunál; lámpus, búnal, hánot, etc.).

_yám-is_, Sweetishness; to grow sweetish, be somewhat sweet; to be
or become mawkish, nauseous, sickly (particularly said of things that
taste unnaturally sweet). (cf. tám-is).

_yámo_, (Perhaps from the Sp. llamar) Objection, complaint,
remonstrance, reclamation; to complain, grumble, murmur, grouse,
have a grievance, show resentment, bring forward a complaint, prefer
a charge, express a wish. Anó (Náno) ang ginayámo mo? What are you
complaining about? Palayámo siá. He is always complaining. He is one
of those that never are content. (cf. reklámo).

_yampák-yámpak_, Joking, jesting, fooling; joke, jest, hoax; to joke,
etc. (cf. lahógláhog, langás, utís, odót, etc.).

_yamuhát_, To follow one's whim, to eat, drink, talk, etc. whenever
a chance offers or one feels inclined to, to do at all seasonable and
unseasonable times (hours), to let oneself be guided by the promptings
of one's fancy. Indì mo pagyamuhatán ang pagkáon. Indì ka magyamuhát
sang káon (sa pagkáon). Don't take food whenever your fancy prompts
you. (cf. yapákyapák).

_yamuhíng_, To dirty, stain, soil, sully. (cf. músing, táp-ing dágtà,
hígkò, lagôlagô).

_yámyam, yám-yam_, Liking, desire, wish; to wish, want, desire, like
to, hanker after, crave, covet, yearn for. Nagayámyam siá sa pagkádto
sa Manílà. He wants to go (He is keen on going) to Manila. (cf. lúyag,
lubá, hákab, hándum, híngyò, hingamó, íbug).

_yanâ_, (H) That, that there, but not as far away as yádto, ádto,
ató. (cf. inâ, diá, riá, ra).

_yanáng_, Contr. of yanâ nga. Yanáng mga panápton. Those
clothes. (cf. ináng).

_yang_, Contr. of íya nga, íya ang. (cf. ya.)

_yangáp-yángap_, Seeking, looking for; to seek, look for, go in
search of, try to find or obtain. Nagayangápyángap siá sing pagkáon
(Ginayangáp-yángap níya ang íya pagkáon), kay nawád-an siá sa
baláy. She is going about in search of something to eat, for she has
nothing at home. (cf. lágap, hágap, sághap, pangítà, pangalágkalág).

_yánggaw_, Attraction, inclination, propensity; to attract, habituate,
cause a liking for, make partial to, make (grow) fond of. Nayánggaw
na siá sang tubâ. He now likes (He has got to like; toddy very
much. Ginayánggaw siá ni Fuláno sang sáut, belasyón, etc. N.N. is
making him fond of (habituating him to, introducing him to) dancing,
wakes, etc. (cf. gálit, galít, hánas, ánad, bánggad, lúyag, úyon,
wíli).

_yánghag_, Staring, gaping; to stare, gape, be surprised, be taken
aback, be astounded, to startle. (cf. pamalúng, búlung, tingála,
kibút).

_yangkót-yángkot_, Various small items, an assortment of trifles
or small articles, purchases, etc. Mapailóngílong akó sa buás, kay
may baláklon akó nga yangkótyángkot. Tomorrow I am going to Iloilo,
for I have to buy various small articles there. Náno ang pinamakál
mo?--Yangkótyángkot (Mga yangkótyángkot). What have you bought?--A few
(Some) miscellaneous items (articles). (cf. pitsépítse, sarîsárì).

_yangô_, (B) Death-rattle; to be in the last agony, be at the last
gasp, to breathe one's last. (cf. huyangô, tingâ).

_yáng-ob_, Prominent, protruding, projecting, especially applied to
the chin and said of people whose cheeks have fallen in on account
of their having lost their teeth.

_yángub_, Weal, bruise, laceration; to bruise, etc. (cf. lángub,
lábhag).

_yángyang_, Wide open; to open, be wide open. Yángyang ang ganháan. The
door is wide open. Indì mo pagkalipatán sa pagyángyang (pagpayángyang)
sang tanán nga mga gawáng. Don't forget to open all the doors and
windows. (cf. wángwang, bukás, ábri).

_yáno_, (Sp. llano) Simple, plain, ordinary, quiet, without much
ceremony or ostentation, not pompous, grand or solemn. Paglubúng nga
yáno. A simple funeral. (cf. bunáyag, pugóypugóy, watíwatí).

_yánta_, (Sp. llanta) Tire, tyre, hoop, wheel-tyre, the iron hoop
that protects the rim of a wheel.

_yapák-yapák_, The doing of something in and out of season;
faultfinding; a faultfinder; to do at all times (according to one's
whim); to carp, cavil, find fault with (the defects or mistakes of
others), take offence very easily (at trifles). Yapák-yapák siá
sing bábà (bâbâ). Her tongue is always busy. She is an annoying
chatterbox. She is always finding fault with something or with
somebody. Masyádo (Támà) sa íya kayapákyapák. He is a caviler
(caviller), faultfinder. He is always complaining about (criticizing)
something (somebody) or other. (cf. yamuhát, híkay, múlay).

_yapá-yapá_, To speak like one that is out of breath, to mumble,
murmur indistinctly, to be dumbfounded, be astounded or surprised,
stare and gape, endeavouring to say something, but unable to do so,
or the like.

_yápyap_, Powder, fine particles of rice (adhering to the "kalálaw",
etc.). (cf. uyakúp).

_yárà_, (H) There; over there; there is (was), but not as far away
as yádto, ádto, dídto. (cf. árà, dirâ, dián, etc.).

_yári_, (H) Here; here is (are). (cf. dirí, ári, doón, dínhi, rúgya,
etc.).

_yáspì_, To be or become pale, pallid, blanched, etc. See láspì,
lúspì, lúspad, lún-ad.

_yásyas_, To beat or strike against with full force, blow freely upon
(of wind, etc.). Ginayasyasán sang hángin ang ámon baláy. Our house
is being struck by the full force of the wind. (cf. dásdas, dáldal,
búntal, búngkol, sámpal, sámpay).

_yasyásan_, A place open to the wind, exposed to the full force of
an impact, etc. (cf. yásyas).

_yátì_, An expletive used in anger or disgust. (cf. yáwà, líntì,
gátud, yámat, yátis).

_yatíng-yatíng_, Very lean, emaciated, thin, spare, meagre; weak,
feeble, frail; to be or become lean, weak, etc. (cf. hágpis, níwang,
lúya).

_yátis_, An exclamation used in anger or disgust. See yátì id.

_yaúb_, Short of teeth, lacking teeth, etc. See yáng-ob.

_yaúb_, Prostrate; to prostrate oneself, lie flat on one's face,
bow down to the dust, make a very deep reverence.

_yáwà_, The devil, satan, demon, fiend. Frequently used in cursing
and swearing or as a mere expletive.

_yawán-on_, Devilish, satanic, demonic, demoniac, demoniacal,
fiendish, hellish.

_yawáon_, Devilish, etc. See yawán-on.

_yáwat_, Of use, useful, serviceable, advantageous, worth something,
profitable, not to be thrown away; to be of use, etc.; to go to,
become the (useful) property of, or the like. Yáwat seems always
to be used with a following pa, e.g. Yáwat pa inâ. That is useful
yet. It would be a pity to throw it away. Básì pa lang nga iyáwat pa
sa ímo inâ. That may finally be given to you. You may yet become the
proprietor of it. (cf. yádì, panginyáwat, pangunyádì).

_yáwyaw_, Scolding, chiding; to scold, chide, shout at, vituperate,
use strong language, curse and swear at. (cf. buyáyaw, púyas, sínggit,
pamúlag, timoláng).


_yâyà, yáyà_, To open wide, lay open. See wángwang, yángyang).

_yâyâ, yayâ_, Wide open, laid open, gaping. (cf. yáyà).

_yáya_, A children's nurse, dry-nurse, day-nurse, nursery maid; wet
nurse. (cf. sisíwa, manuglíbang (manug-, libáng) sang mga bátà; áma).

_yayát_, Extendible, extensible, elastic; to stretch, dilate, spread,
extend, expand. (cf. hayát, hínat).

_yayát-yáyat_, Dim. and Freq. of yayát--to extend, etc.

_yáyay_, To sit in a hammock and sing; to sing or lull a child to
sleep, to sing a lullaby. (cf. laláy, láylay, lalálála, ilííli).

_yáyong_, To bear--, carry--, transport--, something between two
or more persons (on a pole, or the like); transportation, etc. by
means of a stretcher, etc. Ginayayóngan níla ang minatáy. They are
bearing the corpse. Ginyayóngan siá níla sa dúyan. They carried him
in a hammock. (cf. tíngga, píngga, tuángtúang).

_yayongán_, A stretcher, litter, bier, pedestal of a statue, or the
like, fitted with shafts for carrying. (cf. yáyong, ándas).

_yégua, yégwa_, (Sp. yegua) Mare, female horse. (cf. kabáyo nga
babáye).

_yélo_, (Sp. hielo) Ice; to freeze, turn into ice.

_yéso_, (Sp. yeso) Gypsum, plaster cast, chalk, pencil of pipeclay,
plaster, crayon; yeast, barm.

_yókò_, (B) To crease, cause wrinkles, wrinkle, furrow.--Kon
pungkoán mo ang báyò magayókò. If you sit on the jacket, it will
be creased. Indì mo pagyokóon ang ákon delárgo. Don't crease my
trousers. (cf. yókot, úkut).

_yokô_, (B) Crease, furrow, wrinkle; creased, wrinkled,
furrowed. Madámò sing yokô ang (Dúro kaukút sang) ímo bestído. Your
dress is full of creases. (cf. yokót, ukút).

_yókot_, To crease, etc. See yókò. (cf. úkut).

_yokót_, Fold, crease, etc. See yokô. (cf. ukút).

_yókyok_, To bend, incline, twist, turn. (cf. tikô). Also: to take
a firm stand or position. (cf. síkad).

_yôyô, yóyò_, To slacken, grow weak or feeble. (cf. lúyò, lúyà, lúya).

_yúbit_, (H) Ridicule, derision, mockery, raillery, chaff, badinage;
to tease, make fun of, ridicule, deride, laugh at, banter, rally,
chaff, poke fun at, mock, scoff at. Indì ka magyúbit sa mga piáng,
lamón, etc. Indì mo pagyubítan ang mga piáng, lamón, etc. Do not make
fun of (Do not scoff at) the lame, blind, etc. (cf. yúgit, yagutâ,
yagúm-at, uligâ, ulígyat, tiáwtíaw, úmpit).

_yubitán_, (H) A scoffer, mocker; one who ridicules or makes fun of
another; clown, buffoon, jester. (cf. yúbit, mayúbit, mayúgit).

_yubón_, Skull, head. (cf. bagól).

_yubón-yubón_, Dim. of yubón. Also the soft front part of a child's
skull. (cf. yubónyubonán).

_yubón-yubonán_, Fontanel, fontanelle. See lubôluboán, yubónyubón).

_yúdyud_, To pull, drag, draggle, trail along the ground, or the
like. Yudyurá (-udá) ang idô nga patáy sa búhò kag ilubúng. Drag the
dead dog to the hole and bury it. Ginayudyurán níya ang salúg sang
sáko nga nasúdlan sang humáy. He is pulling the sack of rice over
the floor. (cf. gúyud, gánoy).

_yúgit_, (B) To tease, ridicule, make fun of. See
yúbit. (cf. tiáwtíaw).

_yugitán_, (B) A scoffer, etc. See yubitán.

_yúgtò_, To show displeasure, be annoyed, dissatisfied, discontented,
impatient, angry. (cf. kísdong, lárong, ariwaróng, súngon).

_yúgyug_, To shake, move, swing to and fro. (cf. úyog).

_yúhot_, To be (get or make) tough, hard, difficult to make an
impression upon. (cf. húnit, áwot, tíg-a).

_yuhót-yúhot_, Dim. and Freq. of yúhot. Rather tough, hard, etc.

_yúhum, yuhúm_, To smile, laugh pleasantly. Nagyuhúm siá sang pagkabatî
níya sang amó nga kahalam-útan. He smiled when he heard that pleasant
story. Ginyuhumán níya akó. He smiled at me. Yuhumí ang bátà. Smile
at the baby. (cf. kádlaw).

_yuhúm_, A smile, laughter. (cf. kádlaw).

_yuhúm-yúhum_, Dim. and Freq. of yuhúm. Ginayuhúmyuhúman kitá karón
sang maalabáab nga sílak sang ádlaw. We are being smiled upon by the
warm rays (beams) of the sun.

_yúkbò_, To bend the knee, bend down, incline. (cf. kuúb, sikóktot).

_yúkdò_, To squat, crouch, bend down, stoop low, stoop over (a
table, etc.). Daláyon gid silá nagayulúkdò sa sugálan. They are
always stooping over the gambling table, i.e. they are inveterate
gamblers. (cf. húkdò).

_yúkyuk_, See yókyok--to bend, etc.

_yumô-yúmò_, (B) To smile, etc. See yuhúmyúhum. Ginayumôyumóan na
akó. Nagayumôyúmò (tána) kanákon. (Nagayuhúmyúhum siá sa ákon). He
is smiling at me quite pleasantly.

_yúm-uk_, Softness; to be or become soft, etc. See hómok, lúm-ok.

_yunâ_, Loose, not close together, not tight; to be or become loose,
etc. See hugák, halúg, tugák.

_yunâ_, To be or become unsavoury, tasteless, insipid, flat, said of
overdone tubers, meat, fish, etc. Ang kárne nagyunâ, hay natám-an
kang lágà. (Ang kárne nagyutâ kay natám-an sang lâgâ). The meat is
tasteless, because it has been boiled too long.

_yundô-yúndò_, To play with, fondle, divert, amuse, make smile (a
baby, etc.). Magyundôyúndò ka sa bátà. Play with the baby. Amuse the
baby. (cf. lahógláhog, hampánghámpang, dálò).

_yunggô-yúnggò_, See yundôyúndò.

_yúngyung_, To taste, experience, enjoy, derive pleasure
from. (cf. tiláw, águm, dángat).

_yúnke_, (Sp. yunque) Anvil, smithy; a percolator for straining sugar
cane juice (inutús, íntus) previous to boiling it. (cf. landasán;
salaán).

_yunô-yúnò_, (B) To strut, walk with pomposity or affected dignity,
move the head and shoulders coquettishly, or the like. (cf. yuódyúod).

_yuód-yúod_, To walk with a lofty gait, to strut, etc. See
yunôyúnò. (cf. tiád).

_yupók_, A dimple; a dent, indentation. Kon magyuhúm siá may duhá
ka makawiwíli nga yupók sa íya mga písngi. When she smiles there are
two pleasant dimples on her cheeks.

_yúpok_, To dimple, form dimples; to dent, indent, make
indentations. Nayúpok (Nagkayúpok) ang láta. The tin is indented. Indì
mo pagpayupókon ang láta. Don't dent the tin (can).

_yúpyup_, A whiff of smoke, of opium, etc.; to inhale, suck in,
imbibe. Isá ka yúpyup sang asó sang tabákò. A whiff of tobacco
smoke. Palayúpyup siá sang ápyan (apyán). He is an opium smoker. Indì
kamó magyúpyup sing ápyan, kay maláin inâ sa láwas páti sa kalág. Don't
smoke opium, because it is bad both for body and soul. (cf. súyup,
sópsop).

_yutâ_, See yunâ--tasteless; loose.

_yútyut_, To be sticky, viscous. (cf. pilít, dokót).

_yútyut_, To bend, curve, give way, sag. (cf. abóy, táboy, lúy-on).

_yúyo_, A toy in the form of a disk tied to a string. The string
is wound in a groove round the edge of the disk, the disk is thrown
and when it reaches the end of the string, it winds itself up again,
and returns to the hand.

_yuyó_, To moan, groan, sigh. (cf. bákhò, ugayóng).

_yôyô, yúyò_, See yôyô, yóyò--to slacken, etc.

_yúyum_, To be or become pleasant, pleasing, delightful, delicious,
nice, sweet, charming, beautiful. (cf. tám-is, wíli, lúyag, úyon,
ányag, tahúm, gayón).




Z


_z_, This letter is not needed in Visayan. Foreign terms containing
the letter "Z" are written with "S" in Visayan, e.g. zapato, lazo,
become sapáto, láso.





                           SUPPLEMENT
                           (HINGAYAW)


A


_áblay_, To lean--, put one's arm or hand--, on another's
shoulder. (cf. ágbay).

_abrasíta_, To hug--, clasp--, take--, in one's arms. Nagaabrasitaháy
silá. They are walking arm in arm. (cf. hakús, púgus, abráso).

_abrisíta_, See abrasíta.

_ábung, abúng_, To intercept, stop, catch (by crossing one's way,
or the like). Pinaabúngan (Pinaabungán) silá níya sa mga táo. He had
them caught by his men. He ordered his men to catch them. (cf. dakúp,
lipót, bángan).

_abyasión_, (Sp. aviación) Aviation, aeronautics. (cf. lupád).

_adbertí, adbertír_, (Sp. advertir) To advise, give warning, instruct,
give notice, call attention to. Adbertihá siá sinâ. Bring it to his
notice. Notify him about it. Call his attention to it. Ginadbertí
níya akó nga----. He sent me word that----. He advised me
to----. (cf. tíngga, tíngkaw, paálam, pahibaló, abíso, paabíso).

_ádò_, (B) To caress, fondle, pet, play with. (cf. dálò, álò).

_ádò_, (H) To shake, swing, brandish, flourish (a weapon, or the
like). (cf. barumbáda, túsay).

_agá-ága_, Of a morning, every morning. (cf. agáagá, agahán).

_agá-agá_, Rather late in the morning. (cf. hapónhapón--rather late
in the evening).

_agahán_, Morning-, what is done, or takes place, in the
morning. (cf. ága).

_agák_, Also: a coward, poltroon, etc. See matálaw, talawán.

_agák-ak_, A squawk, shriek, squeal, an outcry (as of a cock when
caught, or the like); to squawk, etc. (cf. tiángak, iyágak, siagít).

_agám-agám_, Dim. and Freq. of agám. Also: to take a firm hold of,
do (handle, manage) well (carefully).

_agáp_, Also: Early, premature, too soon, untimely. Agáp nga
kamatáyon. Premature (untimely) death. (cf. láb-as, hiláw, hinálì,
kuyús).

_agáw_, Usurper; one who takes (or is accustomed to take) things by
force; highhanded, overbearing, violent. (cf. ágaw).

_ágbaw_, Dismay, alarm, terror, consternation; something that inspires
fear or creates a panic; fearful, terrific. (cf. makahahádluk).

_ágdan, ágdang_, Useful, serviceable, of use, worth something, capable,
reliable. (cf. águd, pulús, yáwat, yádì).

_ágdaw_, A kind of tree. See ádgaw.

_agigísil_, The temple (of the head). (cf. agigísing).

_agíl_, Small, undersized, stunted. See agíl-agíl.

_agronomísta_, (Sp. agrónomo) A writer on agriculture; rural inspector
or overseer; husbandman, farmer. (cf. mangungúma).

_ágto_, (B) See ágtò--to go to, etc. (cf. kádto).

_aguáhi_, (Sp. aguaje) Tidal wave; the wake of a ship; sea current,
stream; impetus, impetuosity, vehemence; to gather force, increase,
augment. Nagaaguáhi pa ang húblag ni Fuláno. N.N.'s movement
(agitation, scheme, policy) is still gathering force.

_aguráng_, (In olden times) Chief, lord, master, Sir. (cf. dátò,
ginóo).

_agúrò_, To moan, sigh, sob, etc. See iyagúrò, aguyóng, iyágak, bákhò).

_agwáhi_, See aguáhi.

_áhag_, To choose, select, pick out. (cf. ág-ag, árag, pílì, áno).

_ahát_, Compelled, constrained, forced, obliged, against one's will,
nolens volens; sudden, premature. (cf. pílit).

_aháw_, Pure, unmixed, genuine; all, complete, entire, without
exception. (cf. lúnlun, lubús, túnay, lúnsay, pulús, pasáy).

_aháw_, (Probably from the Sp. ajado) Spoiled, crumpled, rumpled. Aháw
nga báyò. A crumpled jacket.

_akíd_, Also: Selfish, close-fisted, stingy; to be or become stingy,
etc. (cf. ímot, dalók, hákug, makiíya, akút).

_áklab_, To bite, snap, tear with the teeth. (cf. kagát, úkub,
tukúb, áp-ap).

_akút_, Selfish, stingy, etc. See akíd.

_aláag_, The waxing moon, near full-moon. (cf. paugsarón).

_alabyánon_, One to be--befriended,--made friends with,--treated with
kindness and consideration. (cf. ábyan).

_álad_, Fence. (cf. korál, kodál).

_alakiák_, To laugh aloud, burst out laughing, to
guffaw. (cf. talángkaw, halákhak, arók-ok, arík-ik).

_alakoón_, What is to be--undertaken,--taken charge of,--seen
to,--attempted,--set about; duty, responsibility, burden (to be
shouldered). (cf. ákò; palangakóan, katungdánan, tulumánon, buluháton).

_alalamán_, That is to--, should--, can--, be studied or learned;
knowledge, wisdom, experience (to be gained, gathered, acquired,
obtained). (cf. álam).

_alamág_, Flash, spark, sparkle, scintillation, glittering,
glistening, said of a fire-fly, of the scales of a fish, or the like;
phosphorescence. (cf. alámag).

_aláng-alangánon_, Untimely, inopportune, inconvenient, premature;
remiss, slack, negligent, careless, falling short of what is
required. (cf. alángálang, alangón).

_alangón_, Immature, young, untimely, etc. See alángalangánon.

_alapogón_, Also: Good-for-nothing, no use, of no avail, a useless
person, an old spinster, or the like. (cf. ápog).

_alatubangón_, That is to be--, should be--, can be--, faced (met,
confronted); prospect, future. (cf. atúbang; palaabúton).

_álì, alî-álì_, Also: Prominent, foremost, the best (of a
kind). (cf. lutáw, tínggas, etc.).

_alibáhod_, See bugáhod--rubbish, refuse.

_alibálay_, A kind of very savoury fish.

_alibúgos_, Wart; blister, pustule, pimple. (cf. kalónggo, láp-ok).

_alibúnung_, To be giddy, dizzy, confused, upset. (cf. língin,
aligúnung, libúg, líntong).

_alikúmo_, A kind of crab. (cf. alimángo).

_alimbáhon_, A variety of coconut. See limbáhon, libáhon.

_alimwágas_, To spread, scatter, disperse; to run away,
flee. (cf. áplag, tál-as).

_alingágngag_, Also: The palate. (cf. tángon, idilímdim, ngalágngag).

_alingáut_, Also: Sultriness, stuffiness, close heat; to be or become
sultry, etc. (cf. gín-ot, bóhot; indaháng).

_alíngit, alingít_, Resentment, grudge, ill-will, ill-feeling;
to resent, nurse resentment, bear a grudge. (cf. aligótgot, ákig,
gulut-ánon).

_álò_, Inlet, creek, channel (of sea-water).

_alompílan_, A kind of creeper with acidulous leaves that are used
as condiment. (cf. alupídan).

_álon_, Fire, blaze, conflagration. (cf. súnug, kaláyo).

_alumílaw_, Also: To burn dimly, give a feeble light (of a lamp,
etc.). (cf. kiráwkiráw, kirótkirót).

_amarílyo_, (Sp. amarillo) Yellow; gold, golden, colour of
gold. (cf. dalág, darág).

_ambót sa ímo_ (_íya, íla, kay Fuláno, etc._). I leave it all to you
(him, them, N.N., etc.). Do what you like. You ought to know. It
rests with you. You should know your own mind. I leave it to your
(his, their, N.N.'s) judgment. (cf. sumálà sa ímo).

_ambulánsya_, (Sp. ambulancia) Ambulance, field hospital; a stretcher
or vehicle to convey the wounded or sick to a hospital.

_amenúdo_, (Sp. a menudo) Little by little, retail; to
retail. (cf. utáyutáy).

_amorótik_, Bat (cf. múrtik, koláknit, kolápnit, etc.).

_anáno pa_, Quite frequently this means: (and) as is (was) to
be expected, naturally, consequently, of course, as a matter of
course. Hubúg siá kag madánlug ang dálan, anáno pa nakadúpyas siá kag
nahúlug sa pángpang sang subâ. He was drunk and the road slippery;
consequently he slipped and fell down the bank of the river.

_angí_, (B) So-and-so. Ang angí. Mr. (Mrs.) So-and-so. See kwan.

_angó_, (B) See angí.

_ánhon_, From anó. Anhon mo? What can you do? Anhon mo iní? What
shall you (will you) do with it? How are you going to use (handle,
treat) this (it)?

_aníbong_, A kind of palm. (cf. anáhaw).

_anóy-ánoy_, (B) A large and deep mudhole, puddle (as on the level
parts of a road during the rainy season, etc.). (cf. danáw, tigál-ub,
linggálhub).

_antáray_, Distance, separation, interstice, interval; to be
distant (separate, away) one from another. Limá ka tápak ang íla
antáray. Nagaantáray silá sing limá ka tápak. There is a distance
(an open space) of five feet between them. They are spaced five feet
apart. (cf. ántad, bál-ot).

_ányan, ányon_, From áni--to reap rice.

_apás-ápas_, Dim. and Freq. of ápas--to follow. (cf. ilógílog,
sunúdsúnud).

_ápò_, Grandfather. (cf. úyong, úlang).

_apógon_, Chalky, limy, containing--, full of--, lime. (cf. ápog).

_arasán_, (B) Order, system, propriety, proper arrangement. Warâ ti
arasán ang (Walâ sing kahusayán (kasamputánan) ang íla) prosesyón,
panokár, pamágting, etc. nánda. There is (was) no order in their
procession, music, ringing of bells, etc.

_areglár_, (Sp. arreglar) To regulate, arrange, settle. (cf. húsay).

_áron_, Blaze, fire. See álon. (cf. kaláyo, súnug).

_árong_, See áron.

_arúad_, (B) To spit out, eject from the mouth. (cf. lúad, urúad).

_áwak, awák-áwak_, To overflow, spirt out, spill, exude,
ooze. (cf. álwak, áwas, búswit, púswak, tubúd, ágay, ílig).

_áwat_, Of use, worth something, etc. See yáwat. (cf. yádì, pangunyádì,
panginyáwat).

_-ay_, (Short for -anay) A very frequently used suffix denoting
reciprocity or an action by many, e.g. pilasáy, pinilasáy (pílas--to
wound); bukaráy, binukaráy (búkad--to open, disclose); hikayáy,
hinikayáy (híkay--to disparage, criticize); hikawáy, hinikawáy,
(híkaw--to envy, spite); agawáy, inagawáy (ágaw--to snatch, take);
sulátay, sinulátay (sulát--to write); minulayáy (múlay--to carp, cavil,
run down); tabanáy, tinabanáy (tában--to run away with), etc. etc.



B


_babáeng' búhat_, Spinster, old maid; woman, female; belonging to
the fair (weaker) sex. (cf. babáe, babayhána, mabáknit)

_badidáy_, Lullaby; girl, sweetheart, darling (used humorously).

_badidóy_, See badidáy. Also: boy, young man, lover, sweetheart.

_bágay sa_, Concerning, referring to, with regard or reference to,
with respect to. Ibálik ko na ang ákon hámbal bágay sa----. I'll now
come back (return) to say a few things more concerning----. Ang íya
pagkáhas bágay sa paglápas sang kasogoán----. His audacity with regard
to violating (breaking) the law----. (cf. nahanungúd, nahatungúd).

_bágkos_, Belt, girth, girdle, cincture. See wágkos, wáklos, páha.

_bagó-bagó_, The string, line, cord of a fishing rod. (cf. hapón;
tigdawán, tigáwnan).

_bagóong_, Pickled fish, pickles, fish steeped in brine or
pickle. (cf. ginamús).


_bagóong_, A kind of sea-snail. (cf. bagóngon).

_bagótbot_, A kind of vine or creeper.

_bahî-bahían_, Shameless, etc. See bahîbáhì.

_báhin_, Ministry, department, division, office, bureau. Báhin sang
áway. Ministry of War. Báhin sang katínlò. Bureau of Health.

_bákal_, Also: Tartar, salivary calculus. (cf. kíkì, tingéw).

_bákat_, To tighten, to be or make tight (strained, close). (cf. hugút,
dapát, táning, tríngka).

_bakát_, Tight, taut, close, stretched. (cf. hugút, taníng).

_bákbak_, Also: to beat, drub, give one a hiding, punish
severely. (cf. tarítári, torótóro, bakábáka, búnak, labá, pákas).

_balaánon_, Blessed, blissful, happy, beatific, glorious; holy,
saintly, spiritual, mystic. (cf. baláan, buláhan; kalibutánon--worldly,
earthly, sensual).

_balagangán, balagángan_, Oven, stove, furnace, hearth. (cf. bagáng,
dapóg, sun-adán, dalúnghan, lulutuán).

_balaisán_, Controversy, difference; something that is to be debated
or discussed; debatable, disputable, open to question, subject
to contention or controversy; place where something is debated,
etc. (cf. báis).

_balakól_, Stick, cane, rod, cudgel, club. (cf. bákol, balálbal,
bulunál).

_balalasahón_, That is to be shuffled (as cards, etc.). (cf. balasahón,
balása).

_balalunón_, Provisions for a trip, etc. (cf. bálon).

_baláng_, A club, bat. (cf. bálang; palakóg).

_balanganán_, Ambush, ambuscade, trench, hiding place (for lying in
wait for); one to be--waylaid,--ambushed,--attacked from a hiding
place. (cf. bángan, balanggáan).

_balanggáan_, Ambush, etc. See balanganán. (cf. bánggà).

_balantitúon_, One who has to represent, or to play the role of,
a Chinaman. (cf. bantítò).

_balaskugáy_, See baskugáy--a kind of lobster.

_balát_, A kind of mollusk or shell-fish.

_baláyong_, Also: the drumstick tree.

_balî-bálì_, A kind of plant.

_balikawáng_, Also: Hip, hipbone, femur, thighbone, thigh, hip-joint;
buttock, rump.

_bál-ong_, To check, curb, hinder, stop, etc. See pál-ong.

_balót_, Pickled fish. (cf. bagóong, ginamús).

_baluárte, balwárte_, (Sp. baluarte) Bulwark, defence, stronghold,
fortress, fort; trench. (cf. trintséra, palalípdan, palamakurán).

_balukás_, To separate, put asunder, tear away from. (cf. bulág;
támbag).

_báng-aw_, Also: to foil, baffle, thwart, frustrate; to fail, be
foiled, etc. Nabáng-aw (Nagkabáng aw, nagkalabáng-aw) ang (Nabang-awán
silá sang) íla mga hándum. They failed to reach the object of their
desires. Their hopes were disappointed.

_bángbang_, A kind of dish prepared in the form of vermicelli or
spaghetti.

_bánhul_, Swelling, friction, chafe; chafed, swollen, hard, stiff
callous; to chafe, harden, be or become swollen, etc. (cf. pamánhul).

_baniká_, To lie about in heaps, in disorder,
higgledy-piggledy. Nagabaniká gid lang dirí ang mga
lalábhan. The clothes to be washed are lying about here
higgledy-piggledy. (cf. hál-id, lán-ok, dúm-ok).

_banógon, banogón_, Like a hawk, pertaining to a hawk; having grey
and red spots, spotted grey and red. (cf. banóg).

_bantítò_, Nickname for a Chinaman (used humorously or in contempt).

_báog_, A decaying or rotten nail, claw, hoof, etc. that is about to
fall off; to decay, rot (of a toe-nail, etc.).

_barágbà_, (B) To quarrel, altercate, fight, wrangle,
squabble. (cf. bagâ, súay, áway, bangígbángig, timátíma).

_barangáy_, A boat worked by oars; a ward of several families; a
settlement, colony, district, village, borough of a town presided
over by a freeman (timáwa), kabesílya or teniénte.

_baránggay_, See barangáy.

_barás_, (B) Sand. See balás.

_barôrô_, Bent, crooked, twisted, huddled up; to bend, curve, wriggle,
writhe, wince, squirm, huddle up, cringe, crouch, fall down in a
heap. Nagbarôrô siá sa salúg tungúd sang mabáskug nga tíndak nga
íya nabáton. He fell down in a heap on the floor from the violent
kick. (cf. sikrotót, bulídbulíd, ligídligíd, singkorót, singkayóng).

_básag_, To break, crush, smash, crack, shatter to
pieces. (cf. busáag).

_baság_, Smashed, shattered, broken, crushed (of bones, boxes, etc.).

_bás-il_, To guess, surmise, opine, suppose, think. (cf. bánà, bántà,
máy-om, lágpat).

_bátbat_, To foliate, beat into a leaf or thin foil. Binátbat nga
buláwan. Gold leaf. (cf. ságyad, panágyad).

_báwal_, To curb, check, prevent, restrain, prohibit,
stop. (cf. pugúng, sagáng, puút, tápnà).

_bayág_, Fork, bifurcation, crotch; the tendons, muscles and folds
of skin near the crotch of an animal. (cf. sakáng).

_báyle_, See báile--to dance, etc. (cf. sáot).

_biáhe_, (Sp. viaje) Tour, trip, journey, travel, voyage; to tour,
travel, make a trip. (cf. panglagúyaw, panglaguyáwan, panglakátan,
paliwálíwa).

_bígà_, A variety of dágmay.

_bígsì_, Grasp, grip; rough handling; to grasp, grip, handle roughly,
use rudely, to beat or thrash. (cf. gamól, pangamót).

_biláhò_, A disease of the ear. (cf. ilíg).

_bilaúg_, A kind of shell-fish. (cf. pakinháson).

_bílay_, A screen, partition, curtain; shelter. (cf. biómbo, kúmbung,
kansíl).

_bilídlan_, Place where something is seen or viewed, etc.; table,
list, roll, catalogue, synopsis. (cf. bilíd).

_bilídlon_, That is to be seen or viewed; worth while seeing,
remarkable, noteworthy, notable, noticeable. (cf. bilídlan).

_biligsían_, That is to be--taken hold of,--handled roughly,--treated
rudely,--taken to task, etc. (cf. bígsì).

_bilyár, bílyar_, (Sp. billar) Game of billiards; billiard table;
to play billiards.

_binaklanáy_, Buying, commerce, business; to buy, etc. (cf. bakál).

_binalatóng_, A variety of bananas.

_binaligyáay_, Selling, dealing, commerce. Ang binaklanáy
(pag binaklanáy) kag binaligyáay (pagbinaligyáay). Buying and
selling. (cf. balígyà).

_binaslanáy_, Reciprocity, mutuality; to reciprocate, do
mutually. (cf. bálus).

_binatasán_, To accustom oneself to, acquire the habit of, become
familiar with. Gintudloán níya siá sa pagbinatasán sa pagtawág
sa íya nga ilóy. She taught him (to accustom himself) to call her
mother. (cf. batásan).

_binayaráy_, Payment, paying, settling of debts, squaring of accounts,
etc. (cf. báyad).

_bínsol_, The sharp spines on the back of a pági-fish (thornback).

_bíntan_, From binít--edge, border, etc.

_bintiróy_, (Probably from the Sp. aventurero) Adventurer; youth,
bachelor, love-swain, knight-errant.

_bíntol_, A small portable trap for catching crabs, shrimps,
etc. (cf. pamíntol).

_binuhahâ_, To spend lavishly, to squander, waste, be a
spendthrift. (cf. buhahâ).

_binuslanáy_, Alternation, performance by turns, succession by turns;
to alternate, interchange, do one after another or turn and turn
about. (cf. bulús, bulúsbúlus).


_biráw_, A kind of shrub that yields an acidulous fruit.

_bíslak_, To cleave, split; a piece of split wood or bamboo,
etc. (cf. bís-ak, baníslak, baníklan).

_bíslug_, A depression, shallow hole, lowest part of a rice-field,
etc. (cf. nalupyakán, alimpásong, libaóng).

_bítì_, Clatter, rattle, volley; to rattle, clatter. (cf. árak, bárak).

_búag_, To stir or move about crawly-mauly (mawley),
higgledly-piggledly, to jumble, jostle, make a confusing noise or stir
(as bees in a hive, ants near an anthill, etc.). (cf. surumbálì).

_buák_, Slice, portion, share, division (of a pomelo, orange, or the
like). (cf. tilód).

_búdlò_, See the following búdloy.

_búdloy_, The tip or end of tubers and other roots. Ginúbus níya sang
káon bisán pa ang mga búdloy sang úbi. He finished even the root-tips
of the úbi (uvi yam).

_búdngan_, From búlung, búrung--to spin; to admire, be astonished, etc.

_bugáhod_, Rubbish, dirt, refuse, extraneous matter (as mixed with
fish in a fishing net, etc.). (cf. alibáhod, ságbot, hígkò).

_bugáw_, Anything used (as a stick, whip, etc.) for driving away or
scaring off an animal, or the like. (cf. búgaw).

_bugól_, See bulúg--short-haired, close-cropped, etc.

_bugól-bugól_, Lumpy, full of little lumps, covered with lumps,
rough. (cf. bigólbigól, bilógbilóg).

_búkhay_, To divide, partition, part; to rummage; a division, share,
part. (cf. abúkay, balúskay, balúkhay; báhin).

_bulágsak_, To drive in, ram in, force down; throw down with some
force. (cf. pulágsak, búgsak, púsdak).

_buláhug_, To stumble into, step in, fall into a hole, or the
like. (cf. buláug, túdag, tádag, tásak, ládag).

_bulásog_, To fall down, fall (break) through a floor, etc.; to stumble
in, step in, put one's foot in. (cf. buláug, húlug, dágdag, tádag).

_bulásot_, See bulásog.

_buláw_, Jaundice, icterus; biliousness.

_búlbug_, To strike, beat against, etc. See púlpug.

_buluksíngan_, An enclosed place where boxers try their skill,
price-ring, boxing ring. (cf. búksing (Engl. boxing)).

_bulukután_, Enclosure, pen, den, place where a person or an animal
is confined. (cf. bókot).

_bulunángon_, That is to be--spun,--made into thread or yarn; fibre,
yarn, thread. Búlak nga bulunángon. Cotton for spinning. (cf. bunáng).

_bulungáton_, A disclosure--, notification--, declaration--,
publication--, manifestation--, to be made; that is to be disclosed,
etc. (cf. bungát).

_buluswángan_, Aperture, orifice, fistula, outlet (of a wound for
the discharge of pus, etc.). (cf. búswang).

_bumalákal_, A buyer. (cf. bakál).

_bumulúlig, bumululíg_, Helper, assistant, etc. (cf. búlig, kabúlig).

_búnak_, Also: to beat, drub, club, thrash, punish
severely. (cf. bákbak, tarítári, etc.).

_búnal_, Also: to strike a ball, etc. Bunála ang bóla. Strike (hit)
the ball.

_bungáng-aráw_, Prickly heat. (cf. bungáng-ínit, aláw).

_búngbung_, Also: to prolong the eaves of a roof as a protection
against the sun or rain, to attach any kind of awning to the border
of a roof.

_buggaítan_, Prominent, outstanding, excelling, excellent, surpassing,
the best (of a kind). (cf. lágting, tínggas, lutáw, alîálì, bántug).

_búnggò_, Also: Collision; to collide. Nagbunggóay (nagbunggoánay,
nagbinunggóay) ang duhá ka trak. The two trucks collided. (cf. súnggò,
lúnggò).

_bungî_, Hare-lipped. See sungî, ongî.

_búngkag_, Also: to undo something for the first time, as to deflower
a virgin, to go to confession for the first time, or the like.


_búni, buní_, To divulge, spread, make or become public, get abroad,
etc. (cf. balahúbà, buyágyag, bantálà, lápta).

_buranghágan_, To be very--loud,--outspoken,--lively (on every
occasion, whether joyful or sad); to be a great talker or
chatterbox. (cf. búrà, buraán).

_búray_, To scatter grains or poultry-food to chickens,
etc. (cf. bóbod).

_burugásan_, (B) A receptacle for keeping hulled rice. (cf. bulugásan).

_burúg-on_, (B) Fit to be roasted; nearly ripe (of corn,
etc.). Maís nga burúg-on. Corn that is--nearly ripe,--fit to be
roasted. (cf. bóog).

_buruhatón_, (B) See buluháton--work, etc.

_búsgan, búsgon_, From busúg--to be full, satisfied, etc.

_búswak_, To gush out, spirt, flow out in a stream. (cf. busawák,
búswit, póswak).

_bútlig_, A pimple. (cf. butíg, bugás, púnggod).

_bútong_, Also: Foreclosure; to foreclose (a mortgage), to seize,
confiscate, sequestrate, lay--hold of,--claim to, bring under the
hammer. (cf. pamútong).

_buút_, Also: to be about, be on the point of. Sang buút
siá--mamatáy,--magsakáy pa Manílà, etc. When he was--about to die,--on
the point of embarking for Manila, etc.

_búyla_, Grandmother. (A corruption of the Sp. abuela).

_búyla_, To pull, drag, push, etc. See búlya, búklas.

_búyò_, A parcel or bundle of flax, wool, cotton, etc. put on a distaff
for spinning; to bundle, make a bundle of; to knock down, floor, lay
(lie) down in a heap, huddle up.



D


_dáan_, (B) May (Might) it be so, etc. See dáad. (cf. ráad, ráan,
kúntà, untánì).

_dágay_, A furrow-slice, the soil turned up by the plough, especially
when ploughing in wet soil.

_daguldúlan_, A kind of small fish, also called dánglay (when very
small) and dalupanî (when full-grown).

_daítol, da-ítol_, To put or place on (upon), to push, press, compress,
squeeze, crush. (cf. dát-ol, dát-og).

_daitolán_, Press, pressure, grip, firm grasp, clamp, vise. (daítol).

_dalá_, Also: To manage, cope with; to guide, regulate; to drive
(an automobile, etc.).

_dalakdákan_, That is to be well--provided for,--looked after; a
good position, a well-paid occupation, a remunerative employment,
or the like. (cf. dákdak).

_dalaóra, dalaúra_, Sun-kissed or sun-coloured clouds, as often seen
at sun-rise and sun-set.

_dáldal_, To beat against, strike upon, push, impel, force on, shove,
drive (said of wind, waves, etc.).

_dálhay_, Landslide, a portion of land that falls down from the side
of a hill, of a steep river-bank etc. usually due to the undermining
effect of water; diminution, lessening, decrease; to cave in, fall
down, crumble. (cf. típhag, hunâ, kadalháyan).

_dalíhì, dalihî_, To fall down, crumble away, etc. See dálhay, ós-os).

_dánag, dán-ag_, To be light or clear, to shine, etc. See sánag.

_dánas_, To drag, draggle, pull, haul. (cf. gánoy, gúyud, bútong).

_dángtan_, etc. From dángat--to reach, obtain, etc.

_dáplak_, A kind of bird.

_dáplus_, To smear over, plaster, salve, etc. See dáplas, dapólas,
háplas.

_darág_, (B) Yellow, gold colour, golden. (cf. dalág, amarílyo).

_dá-up_, To join the hands; to applaud, clap the hands. (cf. tokáp,
palákpak, pamalákpak).

_dáwa_, A kind of grain resembling Indian corn; millet. (cf. batád).

_dáwi_, To fish with rod, line and hook, catch fish (in the
sea). (cf. pamunít, pangísdà).

_dáya_, (B) That, that there. (cf. diá, riá, ra, inâ, yanâ).

_dayón_, To carry out, go on with, perform, execute, accomplish;
fulfil, put into execution, realize, get or go through a
business. (cf. tarús).

_depékto_, (Sp. defecto) Defect, imperfection, blemish,
fault. (cf. samád, kasamarán, kakulángan, sayúp, salâ, balatían,
torák, kinaláin).

_día_, (B) Here, here is. (cf. doón, dínhi, dirí, ári, rúgya).

_dídi_, (B) To bathe, lave, give a bath to; to take a bath. (cf. lígos,
dígos, palígos, kókoy).

_díkal_, To prattle, prate, be a chatterbox; to boast,
brag. (cf. wákal, búrà, hádak).

_dikalán_, Chatterbox, chatterer. (cf. buraán, wakalán, hadakán,
palahámbal).

_dimalás_, Unfortunate, unlucky, ill-fated, disastrous; to be
unfortunate, etc. (cf. dimálas).

_dináut_, Decidua, deciduous membrane discharged at childbirth;
meconium, the first matter discharged from the bowels of a newborn
infant.

_dingótnon_, Selfish, egoistic, covetous, miserly, stingy. (cf. dingót,
maímot, maínot, maísip).

_diotíng_, Small, little, tiny. (cf. diót, diótay, ikî, tikî, isót,
etc.).

_disíg_, To sift rice, etc. See sisíg. (cf. sirísíri).

_diskusyón_, (Sp. discusión) Discussion, debate; to discuss, debate,
(cf. báis, sápol; súay, áway, bagâ, sumpákil, bangígbángig).

_diwáwong_, Reeling, stumbling, tottering; to reel, stumble, totter,
as a drunken person, or the like. (cf. paniwáding, dulíngdúling).

_donsélya_, (Sp. doncella) Single woman, young lady, unmarried female
(cf. dalága).

_duhô_, Class, kind, variety, sort, division; to classify, divide,
distribute, tabulate. (cf. báhin, pínig, sárì, bágay).

_dúling_, Squinting; open-eyed; to squint. (cf. balisíng, libát,
kírhat).

_duluhóon_, That is to be--divided,--classified,--distributed,
etc. (cf. duhô).

_dulungkáan_, Harbour, port, haven; shelter, asylum, home. (cf. dúngkà,
dungkáan).

_dumalayón_, See dumaláyon--a guest, etc.

_dún-an_, From doón--to mark, brand, etc. (dón-an id.).

_dútlan_, etc. From dulút--to pierce, etc.



E


_esgríma_, (Sp. esgrima) Fencing; to fence, practise fencing.

_eskína_, (Sp. esquina) Corner, angle; street-corner,
turning. (cf. likóan, pamúsud).

_eskór_, Score, number of points gained in a game; to score. (English).



F


_fuérsa_, (Sp. fuerza) Force, strength, might, vigour; coercion,
compulsion; to force, compel, etc. (cf. kusúg, kabákud, kabáskug,
kapág-on, kalíg-on, pakúsug, pílit, lúgus, puérsa).



G


_gánghal_, Clumsy, stupid, foolish, awkward, dull, slow. (cf. pákok,
kagúng, bikwálon, pungág, mangô, tangadál, tipangág, búngaw, tampuháw,
etc.).

_garóti_, (Sp. garrote) Garrote; strangulation, throttling; a fit or
swoon; to strangle, throttle; cause a fit or swoon. (cf. kugâ; lipóng).

_gináhud_, Noise; to be noisy, etc. See gáhud, ginalóng.

_ginalóng_, Noise, obstreperousness; boisterousness; to be noisy,
rowdy, obstreperous, boisterous. (cf. galúng, gináhud).

_ginarís_, Liveliness, hilariousness, noisy mirth; to be noisy, rowdy,
lively, mirthful. (cf. garís).

_gisíng-gisíng_, The temple of the head. (cf. agigísing,
dungán-dúngan).


_gisíng-gisingán_, Grey-haired about the temples; to grey (gray),
become white (of the hair near the temples). Nanggisínggisingán
(Naggisínggisingán) na siá. He (She) is grey-haired. He (She) has
turned gray (near the temples or forehead). (cf. úban, bukáy, putî).

_góong_, To fasten, secure, tie. (cf. góos, higót).

_gúlay, guláy_, See gúray, guráy--to be straight; line, streak, etc.

_gulípat_, To pinch, twist (one's ears, etc.). (cf. gulínat).

_guluâ, guluwâ_, Plural forms of guâ, gwâ--to go out, come forth, etc.

_gumulúà_, One who goes out, etc.; actor, actress, stage
player. (cf. guâ, gwâ).

_gwâ_, Also: edition, issue (of a paper, book, etc.).



H


_habús-habús_, To blow, howl, strike or beat against (of wind,
etc.). (cf. hagánus, dáldal, sámpay, mádlus, unús, huyúp).

_habúyò_, To drop down in a heap, collapse, be huddled up. (cf. búyò).

_hádkan_, From halúk for halukán. (cf. hágkan, hárkan).

_hagála_, See higála, higára--companion, friend, etc.

_hágkan_, From halúk--to kiss. (cf. hádkan, hárkan).

_haláhad_, To make a lunge at, strike at, brandish, flourish, swing
to and fro. (cf. haráhad, túsay, ádò).

_halakotán_, Place to which something is hauled; anything used
for hauling, dragging, pulling (as a cart, truck, tractor,
etc.). (cf. hákot).

_halakotón_, That is to be hauled, carried, conveyed, etc. (cf. hákot).

_halalínan_, Origin, source, birth, root, cause, anything that starts,
or gives rise to, something else. (cf. halín).

_halalungán_, What is to be--, should be--,--cherished,--treated
with care,--handled cautiously; risky, dangerous, perilous,
hazardous, requiring caution, worthy of great attention or
watchfulness. (cf. hálong, alamlígan, alandáman).

_halalígyon_, That is to be made into a post, material (wood, iron,
etc.) for posts. (cf. halígi).

_halatagán_, One to whom something is to be given; beneficiary,
recipient. (cf. hátag).

_haloán_, A mudfish. See haroán id.

_hálus_, Also: almost, nearly, well nigh.

_hamulíg_, Having--, producing--, large bunches, productive, fruitful,
said especially of bananas. (cf. búlig).

_han_, (B) An interjection or exclamation: Ah! Oh! Look! See! Quite
frequently "han" is attached like a suffix to demonstrative pronouns
and adverbs of place, e.g. rahán, riahán, diahán--this one; that one;
rugyahán--here, over here; rugtohán--there, over there, etc.

_hángkob_, Spar, purlin, roof-spar, particularly one for supporting
a lángkub-roof.

_hántub_, Damp, moist, difficult to light, not easily inflammable;
to be or become damp, etc. (cf. hát-ob, álhom, maálhom, maarúm).

_hányan, hányon_, etc. From haní--to whisper, etc.

_hapón-hápon_, Every evening, of an evening. (Sa) Hapónhápon
nagapaliwálíwa siá sa baybáyon. Every evening he takes a stroll on
the beach. (cf. hápon).

_hapón-hapón_, Rather late in the evening, nightfall. Náno ang óras
sang íya pagabút?--Walâ akó makatán-aw sa taknáan, ápang hapónhapón
na. At what o'clock did he arrive?--I did'nt look at the watch,
but it was--about nightfall,--at the close of day,--late in the
afternoon. (cf. hapónhápon; agáagá--late in the morning).

_harákay_, A strong wind, gale, storm. (cf. hángin, unús, bágyo).

_hárkan_, etc. (B) From harók (halúk)-- to kiss. (cf. hádkan, hágkan).


_harúpuy_, A light breeze, slight wind, zephyr. (cf. dupóydúpoy).

_hátdan_, From hatúd--to convey, transfer, etc.

_hát-ob_, Damp, etc. to be damp, etc. See hántub, álhom, etc.

_hatók-hatók_, Bruised, wounded, punctured, lacerated, torn, full of
(covered with) wounds or holes. (cf. pilasón, hanóg, lanóg, buhôbuhô).

_hawâ_, To contemn, disdain, scorn, despise, vilify, abominate, treat
as of no consideration. Básì kon hawaón lang níla kitá. Perhaps they
will treat us with contempt (scorn).

_hibál-an_, For hibaloán from hibaló--to know, etc.

_híbalo_, See hibaló id.

_híbyok_, A kind of palm. See hídyok id.

_hiláw_, Sudden, unexpected, premature. Hiláw nga kamatáyon. Premature
death. A sudden, unexpected death. (cf. agáp, hinálì, kuyús).

_hiláw_, Light, clear, bright (of colour); to be or become light,
etc. (cf. lútò--dark, deep (of colour).

_hilimbísan_, A fishmonger's table or stall, place where fish
is scaled and cleaned; fish-refuse, fish-scrap; place where one
is--watched,--sounded,--under observation. (cf. hímbis, hilimbíson).

_hilimbíson_, That is to be scaled, etc. (as fish); one to
be--sounded,--probed,--investigated. (cf. hilimbísan).

_hilimpítan_, Place where something is to be--perfected,--given the
last touch. (cf. hímpit, lalantípan).

_hilimpíton_, That is to be perfected, etc. (cf. hímpit, hilimpítan).

_hilinagoón_, What is to be (should be)--hidden,--concealed,--kept
secret or out of sight; secret, concealed, hidden; venereal. Mga
balatían nga hilinagoón. Venereal diseases. (cf. tágò, hinágò).

_hilíng_, To furbish, polish, brighten, to shine, glisten, be glossy
or lustrous, have a bright surface. (cf. híning, silíng, sílì, púlug).

_hilínis, hilinís_, Polish, polishing powder; dentifrice. (cf. hínis).

_hilisaysáyon_, What is to be explained, elucidated or enlarged upon;
explicable, explainable. (cf. hisáysay, sáysay).

_hiliwaán_, Place where something is cut up; shambles, butchers'
stalls. (cf. híwà).

_himáan_, To be aware of, know of, have mutual knowledge of. Walâ
silá maghimáan (maghilimáan) sinâ. They were not aware of that
fact. (cf. máan, hibaló).

_himáklang_, Having large leaves or branches, especially said of
palms. (cf. páklang).

_himúgo_, Also: Ground rice mixed with sugar and coconut
meat. (cf. bayé báye, baíbái).

_himuligót_, To frown, sulk, scowl, be offended, cross,
angry. (cf. bulingót, kolisáw, súnggud, súngon, kísdong, lárong,
ariwaróng).

_himúyas_, To use strong language, chide, scold, abuse loudly,
vituperate; to expostulate with, remonstrate. (cf. púyas, pamúyas,
pamúlag).

_hinagô, hinágò_, To hide, conceal, keep secret, cover with
silence. (cf. tágò, tinagô, likúm, lílong, hinabón).

_hinák-hinák_, Breathless, panting--, gasping--, for
breath. (cf. hingákhingák, himpókhímpok, hápò, mahápò, pungâ).

_hinámpung_, To reach, come to, arrive at, make. (cf. sámpung, abút,
sáp-ong, sámput, dángat).

_hinapús-tapús_, Towards the end, near completion, nearly finished,
almost complete; extreme, consummate; to be nearly finished,
etc. (cf. tápus, talipuspusón, hingapús).

_hingaón_, One who eats much; voracious, omnivorous, insatiable,
glutton, gourmand, "greedy-guts". (cf. káon, pangáon).

_hingáyò_, Petition, request; to ask, request, petition,
solicit. (cf. pangáyò, híngyò).

_hingúnud, hingunúd_, Fleshy, meaty; tuberiferous, having--,
producing--, developing--, tubers. (cf. unúd, pangunúd).

_híngyò, hingyô_, Also: petition; to petition, etc. See pangáyò,
hingáyò.

_hinóon_, To say "yes", to consent, approve, assent, agree, comply,
yield. (cf. hóon, tándò, sugút, túgut).

_hínsan, hínson_, From hínis--to rub, etc.

_hinulungán_, See hinurungán--climax, apex, etc.

_hinun-ánon_, Also: to inquire, ask, gather news or
information. (cf. pángkot, pamangkotánon).

_hinúnlan_, Placenta and membranes discharged at
childbirth. (cf. inúnlan, dináut).

_híraw_, Half-closed, half-open; to be only half-open (of eyes).

_hisáysay_, To explain, expound, elucidate, enlarge upon. (cf. sáysay,
ásoy).

_hiurúng, hioróng_, To be taken aback, be astonished, be surprised,
etc. See oróng, urúng, tingála, búlung.

_hiwálà, panghiwálà_, Denial, contradiction, negation, disavowal;
to deny, contradict, gainsay, disavow, refuse to admit. (cf. himutíg,
wálà, walâ).

_horô_, Foul, rotten, tainted (particularly of fish). (hurô id.).

_hóshos, húshus_, To drop, fall down, sink, become loose, slip out
(off), escape; to loosen, cause to fall or sink. (cf. ós-os).

_huás-húas_, To push and pull; to masturbate.

_hubág_, Landslide; to cave in, crumble, fall down. (cf. típhag,
dálhay).

_húbsan, húbson_, From hubás--to evaporate, etc.

_húgus_, To tear--, pull,--drag--, take--, down. (cf. halúgut, káskas).

_húl-an_, From huól--to be difficult, trying, etc.

_huláwid_, To entangle, implicate, complicate, retain, keep secure,
hold fast to. (cf. háwid).

_hulugán_, That on which something falls, or the like, hence:
term, definite space of time, fixed period, date, instalment,
etc. Binaligyáay (Binaklanáy) sa (sing) hulugán. Selling (Buying)
by instalment (on an instalment plan). (cf. húlug).

_humulúkum, homolókom_, Judge, justice, magistrate;
umpire. (cf. hokóm).

_húndan, húndon_, From hunúd--to be afraid, etc.

_húnsan, húnson_, From húnus--to pull out, draw, etc.

_hurá-húra_, Hurry, anxiety, insistence; to be anxious (quick) about
something, be in a hurry, insist on. (cf. kurátkurát, dalîdálì).

_húthut, hóthot_, An expression used for urging on a dog, etc.; to urge
on, incite; instigate, animate. Húthut, dákpa sa lubút. Hey (Heigh)
catch it (a goat, etc.) by the neck. (cf. ís-is, país-is, sútsut).

_huy_, An exclamation: Hey! Heigh! heigh-ho! Whoa! Oh! Ah! (cf. hi,
hía, halá, hoy).

_huyátà_, See huyágpà--slightly inclined, sloping, etc.

_huyó-huyó_, Bad, poor, wretched, miserable, weak, etc. See
hungáyhungáy, huyúthúyut.

_húypan, húypon_, From huyúp--to blow, etc.



I


_íbok_, The snout of a pig, proboscis, (cf. hingódhingód).

_igái_, Whereas, whilst, when, in as much as, etc. (cf. singgái,
ibágo, ugái).

_ígmat_, See alígmat--to watch, keep vigil.

_ika-_, This prefix is very often used for the formation of nouns,
e.g. ikabáyad--resources, assets, wherewithal, cash; ikagásto--money to
be spent, expenses to be paid, funds, pecuniary means; ikabúlig--source
of help, means, assistance, expedient, support; ikatakús--worthiness,
capacity, dignity; ikasángkol--capability, attainments,
accomplishments; ikaláin--disadvantage, drawback, loss, injury,
calamity; ikasabát--a ready answer or reply, etc. etc. (cf. inóg-).

_ika-_, A prefix that goes to form ordinal numbers,
e.g. ikagatús--hundredth; ikalíbo--thousandth; sa ikapúlò níya ka
pagbálik--on his tenth return; sa ikaduhá ka púlo'g limá ka ádlaw--on
the twenty fifth (day), etc. etc.

_ikuduhá_, Also: Peer, compeer, match, equal. Waáy (walâ sing)
ikaduhá--without peer, peerless, unsurpassed, unequaled, without a
rival, or the like.

_íkban_, etc. From ikíb--to bite off a piece, etc.

_ilabí_, Especially,
and--especially,--particularly,--chiefly,--foremost,--above
all. Nagsilíng siá sinâ, kay----, ilabí na gid kay----. He said so,
because----, and above all because----. (N.B. The i- of this ilabí
is the Sp. y--and).

_ilihíon_, Urine to be discharged, urination, wanting to do
number one. Nagguâ siá, kay inabút siá sing ilihíon. He went out
to ease himself. He left the room, because he wanted to do number
one. (cf. íhì).

_ilimnánan_, Bar, inn, restaurant, public house. (cf. ilímnan, inúm).

_ilitlógan_, Place where eggs are laid, where spawn or roe is
deposited, egg-basket, egg-box, spawning bed, spawning ground (place),
nest of eggs. (cf. ítlog).

_ilóg-ílog_, Dim. and Freq. of ílog--to imitate,
follow. (cf. sunúdsúnud; ilógilóg).

_ilulúthang_, What is used for shooting, as a rifle, musket, revolver,
cannon, catapult, machine-gun, etc. (cf. lúthang, badíl, pusíl).

_ímnan, ímnon_, From inúm--to drink.

_impisá_, See empesár, umpisá, súgud, pamúnò--to begin, start,
commence.

_ímpug_, A scoop, ladle; a small box made of the shell of a
coconut. (cf. ipóg).

_ímtan_, etc. From ímot--to be stingy, etc.

_inagúnto_, Gasping--, panting--, for breath; to gasp,
etc. (cf. agúnto).

_ináni_, Rice (harvested). (cf. áni).

_inányan_, Rice-field from which the rice has been gathered. (cf. áni).

_inapináy_, Cooperation, mutual help, support; to cooperate, help
each other, etc. (cf. ápin).

_inisipáy_, Selfishness; reckoning; to be selfish; to count,
etc. See ísip.

_inm-, -inm-_, A verbal prefix (intercalation) corresponding to nag-
and naga-, which are at present much more commonly employed than the
rather old-fashioned inm- and -inm-. Ginmíkan (naggíkan); ginmigíkan
(nagagíkan); sinmákà (nagsákà); sinmálig (nagsálig); sinmasálig
(nagasálig); tinmotóo (nagatóo); dinmápit (nagdápit); dinmángat
(nagdángat); inmabút (nagabút); inmúrut (nagúrut), etc. etc.

_íras, irás_, (B) Line, row; furrow. See ídas.

_írong_, (B) To sniff at, run after, etc. See ílong. Also: to stand
together in a group or circle with the faces turned towards each other.

_isdáan_, Fishy, full of--, abounding in--fish; fish--. Trak nga
isdáan. A fish-truck. A truck laden with fish. Sakayán nga isdáan. A
fishing smack (boat). (cf. ísdà).

_ísgan_, etc. From ísug--to be brave, violent, strict, etc.

_itál-itál_, Loose, insecure, not well joined, not firmly attached
or connected; to be or become loose, etc. (cf. katálkatál).

_ítyan_, etc. From ití--to void excrements (of birds, etc.).



K


_káag_, Bareheaded; to go about with the head uncovered. Nagakáag
lang siá sa ínit (inítan). He goes about bareheaded in the
sun. (cf. kógkog).

_káag_, To flutter, be in a flurry, be at a loss what to do, want to
run away, or the like. Waáy ka gid pangáman; maanó ka ábi kon abután
ka sing bisíta, makáag (ka) lang? You have not made any preparations
whatsoever; what will you do, if visitors should turn up, will you
flurry yourself or run away? (cf. parápará, palágyo, libúg, líntong).

_kaalángtan_, Connection with, implication, concatenation,
interdependence. (cf. ángot, angót, kaangtánan).

_kaaláyhan_, Benefits, advantages, prosperity, welfare, the good
things of life, favours, happiness. (cf. kaayohán).

_kaamolítan_, Ruin, perdition, destruction, harm, injury,
damage. (cf. amolít).

_kaasoyán_, Use, usefulness, avail. Walâ sing (Waáy, wa'áy)
kaasoyán. No use, good for nothing, of no avail. (cf. ásoy, átsoy).

_kabalitáan_, News, reports, information, announcements,
etc. (cf. balítà).

_kabanháwan_, Resurrection, resuscitation, revival, bringing to life
again. (cf. bánhaw).

_kabanságan_, Fame, renown, reputation, glory. (cf. bánsag,
kabantúgan).

_kabanyagaán_, Wickedness, malice, vileness; vile, mean, wicked,
wretched, malicious. (cf. banyágà).

_kabeséra_, Also: the top of, the head of a table as a place of honour
for distinguished guests, etc. (cf. olohán, panólong).

_káb-it_, To hang on, suspend from. See sáb-it.

_kabungáhan_, A grove of betelnut palms; a collection or heap of
betelnuts; fruit (in general). (cf. búnga).

_kabungkágan_, Destruction, demolition, perdition, ruin,
undoing. (cf. búngkag).

_kabúthò_, Classmate, companion, fellow-student. (cf. búthò).

_kabúylog_, Companion, mate, chum; sympathizer; with, together with,
jointly with. Kabúylog sa íya. Together with him. (cf. upúd, kaúpud).

_kadahilánan_, Pretexts, excuses, plausible arguments; means,
resources, tricks. (cf. dahílan).

_kadalháyan_, Landslide, avalanche, the crumbling or falling down
of earth and stones from a steep river-bank, from the side of a
mountain, etc.; decrease, diminution. Tinúmpi nga pílak nga walâ sing
kadalháyan. An inexhaustible heap of money. (cf. dálhay.)

_kadangátan, kadangatán_, Obtainment, acquisition, acquirement,
reception, gain. (cf. dángat).

_kadimatán_, Liking, inclination, propensity. See kadimát.

_kádras_, Tear, abrasion, scratch; to scratch, wound slightly,
etc. See kádlas, gádras.

_kadugángan, kadugangán_, Augmentation, increase, growth, development,
addition. (cf. dúgang).

_kádyos, kadyós_, A kind of peas. See kadiós.

_kaginhawáan_, Life, breath, breathing, full liberty to act and enjoy
life, independence. (cf. ginháwa).

_kahámak_, Slight, disregard, disrespect, neglect, contempt, condition
of a thing or person that--is of little or no concern,--need not be
paid any attention to. (cf. hámak).

_kahamúot_, Liking, pleasure, delight, complacency, state of being
pleased with. (cf. hamúot).

_kahanubuán_, Happenings, events, incidents, facts,
history. (cf. hanabô, tabô).

_kahápon nga ádlaw_, Yesterday (in (during) daytime). Kahápon nga
ága. Yesterday morning. Kahápon nga (sing) hápon. Yesterday afternoon
or evening.

_kahulasán_, Ease, facility. See kahulás.

_kaisáhan_, Agreement, settlement, accord, union, pact. (cf. isá).

_kakaliwâ_, Uncouthness, unsightliness, ungainliness, boorishness,
clumsiness, awkwardness. (cf. kaliwâ, baksiwâ, bikwálon).

_kakubús_, Lowness, lowliness, humble station or position;
meanness. (cf. kubús).

_kakubúsan, kakubusán_, See kakubús. Also: the humble, poor, low caste,
low class, Pariah.


_kalanogónan, kalanogonán_, That is to be pitied or
regretted. (cf. kanógon).

_kalapasán_, Omission, neglect, negligence, failure to comply with
orders, duties, etc. (cf. lápas).

_kalás_, A harrow. (cf. pakalás, pakarás--to harrow).

_kalíngyas_, See kalínyas--to wind on a bobbin, etc.

_kalós, kalús_, See salók, kándus--to scoop up (out), draw water, etc.

_kalúbud_, Youthfulness, tenderness, softness, weakness. (cf. lúbud).

_kalúkud_, To roll up, wrap up; to gag. Kinalúkud níla siá. They
gagged him. (cf. panimúlon; tágpò, tágpon).

_kamangbibíhag_, Magnet. (cf. batóbalánì).

_kamanwaháan_, Prosperity, welfare, progress, success,
well-being. (cf. manwáhà).

_kamapasunaíron, kamapinasunaíron_, Thoughtfulness, regard,
consideration, sympathy, kindness. (cf. pasunáid).

_kamauyahón, kamauyáhon_, Fertility (of soil); plenty,
galore. (cf. maúya).

_kamingawón_, Loneliness, dejection, etc. See kamíngaw.

_kamínsot_, A kind of fish. See tamínsot id.

_kampyón_, (Sp. campeón) Champion; hero.

_kapágrus_, Strength, robustness, vigour, health. (cf. págrus).

_kapahamákan_, Low or mean station (position); low estimate, contempt,
contemptibility, despicableness. (cf. hámak, pahámak).

_kapaindís-índis_, Competitor, rival, contestant. (cf. paindísíndis).

_kapasláwan, kapaslawán_, Failure, setback, drawback, fiasco,
disappointment, want of success. (cf. páslaw).

_kapilitán_, Compulsion; to be compelled or forced. Nagkapilitán siá
sa--. He was compelled (forced) to----. (cf. pílit).

_kapitípit_, Completeness, totality, extreme point, climax, height
of, midst of (distress, darkness, etc.); utter, consummate, absolute,
complete. (cf. pitípit).

_kapupuluán, kapuluán_, Islands, isles, archipelago. (cf. pulô,
kapupúd-an).

_kapupún-an_, Fulness, plenitude; abundance, plenty,
affluence. (cf. punô).

_karakasá_, To rustle (of dry leaves, starched clothes, etc.);
to jerk, jump, make a sudden movement, be in a hurry. (cf. kólas,
líktin, kuratán).

_karakatán_, A kind of banana. (cf. lakatán).

_karatíl_, (Sp. carretel) Spool, reel; rope-walk reel, rope-maker's
twisting machine, rope-wheel, cable-wheel; to twist, make
ropes. (cf. lúbid).

_karísmò_, Dirt, filth, stain. (cf. rísmò, kahígkò).

_kartéro_, (Sp. cartero) Letter-carrier, postman, one who carries or
distributes letters.

_kasamuánan, kasamwánan_, Mixture, blending; common, joint. Dútà nga
kasamwánan. A field that is the joint (common) property of several
persons or of a whole community. (cf. sámò, salamuánan, salamuanán).

_kasán-o_, When, at what time (of the past). (cf. kán-o, sán-o pa).

_kasaw-ahán_, Impropriety, indecency, unbecoming conduct,
unsuitability. (cf. sáw-a).

_kaslanáy, kinaslanáy_, Marrying, marriage, the celebration of
marriages or nuptials; to marry, get married (of many). (cf. kasál,
pangasáwa).

_kasubuán_, Rivers, river-system. (cf. subâ).

_katanhagáan_, Wonder, miracle, prodigy, marvel; wonderful, marvellous,
miraculous, extraordinary. (cf. tanhágà, katingaláhan.

_katigô_, Scarcity, rarity, dearth, lack, want, scantiness. (cf. tigô,
kaíwat, kahínà).

_katúgnan_, Order (s), command (s), injunction (s), errand
(s). (cf. tógon, túgon, bílin, kasogoán).

_katúl-id, katul-irón_, Exactness, preciseness, punctuality,
exactitude, zeal, diligence, application. (cf. túl-id, kaíd-id,
kapísan).

_katúnay, katunáyan_, Purity, genuineness, solidity, quality of being
unmixed, unadulterated, etc. (cf. túnay).

_katusuhán, katúsu_, Injustice, malice, wickedness, guile,
cheating. (cf. tóso).

_kaubásan_, Vineyard. See ulubásan.

_kaúkus, káwkos_, (English: caucus) Caucus; party conference, political
meeting; gathering, meeting (in general). (cf. katilíngban, katipúnan).

_káwing_, Junction, copulation, articulation; to join, copulate,
articulate.

_kayáng-káyang_, Also: the border of a roof, the
eaves. (cf. balísbísan).

_kíbit_, To fly to a great distance, be hurled (flung) far
away. (cf. tisíl, táyog).

_kígyan_, etc. From kigí--to strip (hemp, etc.).

_kímpay_, Maimed, mutilated, etc. See kímpul, kúmpul.

_kina-_, A prefix frequently used to form (abstract) nouns and
(intransitive) verbs, e.g. kinabúdlay--toil; to toil (búdlay);
kinasádya--mirth, merriment, celebration; to make merry, etc. (sádya);
kinagánsal--noise, boisterousness; to be noisy, etc. (gánsal),
etc. etc.

_kinamatárung_, Justice, right, reason, argument,
proof. (cf. katarúngan).

_kinasabaáy_, Litigation, legal contests, disputes, etc.; to litigate,
etc. (cf. kasábà).

_kínke_, See kíngke--lamp, light.

_kiridíg_, See koridíg--stunted, etc.

_kiryó-kíryo_, Also: gingerly, bashful, shy, timid; to move about
shyly or timidly, etc.

_kíslan_, etc. From kilís--to wash (clean) rice, etc.

_kókok_, A kind of snail with a white shell. It is often found
on trees.

_kolá_, (Sp. encolar) To glue, stick, paste; to be (lie, stand, sit)
closely attached to. (cf. kóla, dokót, pilít, kupô).

_kól-an_, etc. From kolô--to expand and contract.

_kólwan_, etc. From koló--to carry by means of a string round the
forehead.

_kombidádo_, Also: an invited guest.

_komitóy_, (Humorously) Committee; member of a committee, a stuck-up
fellow, big gun; self-important, overbearing, proud.

_kompás_, Also: to beat time; to lead, be boss or master; to
gesticulate, move or wave the hand.

_komposisyón_, Also: Note book, composition book.

_konbensyón_, (Sp. convención). Convention, congress, assembly,
meeting, caucus. (cf. sinápol, tinipóntípon, katipúnan).

_kótlan_, etc. From kotól--to pluck, cull.

_kótse_, (Sp. coche) Coach, carriage, omnibus, tramcar, autobus,
motor bus.

_kubrekáma_, (Sp. cubrecama) Coverlet, counterpane,
bedspread. (cf. sobrekáma, tabón).

_kúbsan_, etc. From kubús--to be low, etc.

_kúbyal_, See kubyál--to struggle, etc.

_kudíng_, See kuríng--cat.

_kúkuk_, See kókok--a kind of snail.

_kulámog_, Also: the outer and less oily portion of coconut meat.

_kulapó_, Fine earth, slime, sediment, deposit; to deposit, cover with
sediment (as inundated fields, etc.). Kon may bahâ, pagakulapohán gid
iníng umá kag magaáyo ang dútà. If there is a flood, this field will
be covered with sediment and the soil will improve. (cf. láy-on).

_kulasísi_, Also: A meeting in honour of a person that has recently
died; a wake. (cf. belasyón).

_kunlâ-kúnlà_, Dim. and Freq. of kúnlà. Also: to stutter, stammer,
speak brokenly, or falteringly. (cf. hát-on).

_kúntan_, etc. From kunút--to crease, wrinkle, fold, plait.

_kúpay_, To disintegrate, fall to pieces. (cf. púgday).

_kupáy_, Fallen to pieces; close-cropped, close-shorn,
featherless. Mungâ nga kupáy. A hen without feathers.

_kurús_, Cross. See krus. (cf. pangurús).

_kurús-kúrus_, Dim. and Freq. of kurús. Also: crosswise, across;
crossing (crossed) in all directions.

_kurúting_, To call the chickens together. See kurútay.

_kúyla_, (Sp. colear) To twist a bull's tail (in bull-fighting);
to frighten another by touching him stealthily from behind. Indì
siá pagkuylahá. Indì mo siá pagkuylahón. Don't scare (frighten)
him. (cf. kínhol, pakínhol).

_kúypi_, (B) To take from, deduct, subtract. Ginkúypi na
(níya) ang napúlò ka sentimós. He subtracted (took, stole) ten
centavos. (cf. búhin, kúhà, lábni, lámang).

_kwéba_, (Sp. cueva) Cave, grotto; cellar; den (of wild
beasts). (cf. gíkab, gíab, búhò).



L


_labangánan_, Line, boundary, military works of defence;
trenches. (cf. labangán).

_láb-as_, Also: premature, sudden, unprepared. Láb-as nga kamatáyon. A
premature death. (cf. agáp, hiláw, hinálì).

_lád-an_, etc. From laúd--to eat greedily, etc.

_lagádì_, (B) See lagárì--saw, etc.

_lágap_, To seek, look for, etc. See lághap, sághap, pangítà, etc.

_lagawán_, A loafer, idler, tramp, hobo, vagabond, rover. See
lagáwlágaw.

_lagót-lágot_, Dim. and Freq. of lágot--to creak, crack.

_lagót-lagótan_, Joint, junction, articulation (of bones,
etc.). (cf. lutálutahán).

_lágsan_, etc. From lagás--to pursue, run after.

_lágtok_, Hard, raw, uncooked, said of peas and beans, especially
of monggo.

_lágtok_, A useless fellow, good-for-nothing, weakling; weak, feeble;
to be or become weak, etc. (cf. lágtoy, lúya, pígaw).

_lakatán_, A variety of bananas. (cf. karakatán).

_lalaswáhon_, Vegetable. See ulutanón, turulán-on, útan, láswa.

_lám-an_, etc. From láum--to hope, expect.

_lamputóng_, To take a short cut, etc. See láktud.

_lán-aw_, Fluid, liquid; to liquidify, be or become--watery,--fluid.

_landían_, A coquette, flirt; vain, frivolous. See lándì.

_lang-ásláng-as_, A vagabond, rover, loafer, hobo,
tramp. (cf. tiógtióg, laásláas, haráyháray).

_lánhan_, etc. From lahón--to roast corn in the husk.

_lanót-lánot_, Dim. and Freq. of lánot. As thin or as slender as--,
resembling--, a hemp fibre; hanging on a thread. Lanótlánot na lang
ang íya kabúhì. His life is hanging on a thread i.e. he is in great
and immediate danger of death.

_láon, laón_, See láun, laún.

_lapád_, A kind of cactus.

_lasáng_, Forest, wood, woodland, grove, sylva. (cf. kakahúyan).

_lásaw_, To be or become watery, thin (of liquids); to thin (out),
make thin. (cf. básiaw, lángiaw; lapúyut--to thicken).

_laswáhon_, (B) See lalaswáhon, ulutanón--vegetables, etc.

_lát-ang_, Also: Interstice, interval; dash, hyphen (of punctuation).


_letsúga_ (Sp. lechuga) Lettuce.

_límas, limás_, To bail--, dip--, scoop--, out water from a boat,
to lighten a boat.

_linábo_, Put--, lain--, in steep for one night. Bunáng nga
linábo. Yarn that has lain in steep overnight.

_linagátik_, Clash, rattling, clatter; to rattle, etc. See lagátik.

_linukúsan_, Circumference, periphery, distance round. (cf. lúkus,
líkus).

_lít-ad_, To bend backwards, fall, or tumble over, on one's
back. (cf. balít-ad, tiahád, tik-yahád).

_lób-an_, etc. From lobô--to make a hole.

_lomóton_, Mossy, covered with moss. (cf. lómot).

_lubút_, Also: The coccyx, end of the vertebral column.

_lúdop_, To dive, dip, plunge. (cf. sálum).

_lugántud_, (B) Strong, healthy, robust; to be strong, be in--,
enjoy--, good health. Si Fuláno nagalugántud pa. (Si Fuláno mabáskug
pa). N.N. is quite strong yet. (cf. lumpaód.)

_lúgdang_, Also: dregs, sediment. See lágdò.

_lúghut_, To enter and look for, search, reconnoitre,
examine. (cf. líghot, usísà, lághap, sághap).

_lúgpis_, To be or become thin, lean, haggard, weak. (cf. hágpis,
níwang).

_lúkus_, Ring, periphery, circumference; to circle round. (cf. líkus,
linukúsan).

_lulubngánan_, Cemetery, burial ground, graveyard,
necropolis. (cf. lubúng, lulúbngan).

_lulupáran_, Flying station, etc. See lupáran.

_lungús-lungús_, An idler, loafer, good-for-nothing. See lungúg-lungúg,
tiógtióg).

_lúnsay_, Also: Direct, straight on, continuous. (cf. lángkoy).

_lús-aw, lusáw_, To fail, be unsuccessful, be disappointed; to thwart,
bring to naught, frustrate. (cf. pás-aw).

_lúskag_, Swelling, bursting; to swell, burst open. (cf. gusáng, butî).

_lútò_, Dark, deep, decided, pronounced (of colours). (cf. malútò,
tagúngtung; hiláw--light, clear).

_lutós_, Vanquished, worsted, beaten, surpassed, inferior
to. (cf. lútos).



M


_maéstra_, (Sp.) Teacher (female). (cf. maéstro).

_maéstro_, (Sp.) Teacher; master, boss. (cf. manunúon, magtutúon,
manunúdlò).

_mag-asawá, magasawá_, Married, the married persons. Ang mga
mag-asawá. Those that are married. Married people. (cf. asawá,
magtiáyon).

_magkópo_, A poisonous viper; a kind of basilisk (alleged to have a
horn or comb and to crow like a cock).

_magtiáyon_, Husband and wife, living together in the same
household. Ang mga magtiáyon. Those living together as husband and
wife. (cf. tiáyon, magasawá).

_mahiabyánon_, Friendly, affable, kind, amiable. (cf. ábyan).

_mahinurónghuróngon_, A little naughty, rather mischievous; a little
rascal. (cf. huróng).

_mainalágdon_, Serving, faithful, dutiful, obliging; willing to
give--aid,--help,--assistance. (cf. ágad).

_makalalán-ag_, Causing blisters, pustules, eruptions, excoriations,
abrasions, or the like. (cf. lán-ag).

_makayuyúgtò_, Unpleasant, annoying, discontented, not convenient,
not satisfactory. (cf. yúgtò).

_makilitán-on_, Also: one who is afraid of, and sees, ghosts everywhere
(kítà).

_malansóhon_, That is to be tamed or broken in. (cf. mánso).

_malíit, maliít_, Portentous, dangerous, difficult (of times, places,
situations, etc.). (cf. maríit).

_malútò_, Dark, deep, pronounced (of colours). (cf. lútò, tagúngtung).


_mályag_, (B) For malúyag from lúyag--to like.

_máma_, Wet nurse. See mamá.

_mamarágtas_, A writer of history, historian, historiographer,
chronicler, annalist. (cf. marágtas).

_mámay_, Wet nurse. (cf. máma).

_mananggíti_, Toddy-gatherer, tubâ-collector, one whose daily
business is to climb a number of coconut palms and to collect the
palm-wine. (cf. tubéro--a seller of, dealer in, tubá).

_manglilíghot_, Searcher, investigator, one of a search
party. (cf. líghot).

_mangungulíng_, A charcoal-burner, charcoal-man. (cf. úling).

_manlulúbad, manglulúbad_, One who (that which) unbinds, solves,
opens, explains or translates something. Manlulúbad sang hámbal. An
interpreter. (cf. lubád).

_mán-ok_, To call the dog, call the dogs together. (cf. tókoy,
panókoy).

_manuglíbang_, Care-taker; nurse. Manuglíbang sang kabatáan, sang
mga masakít, etc. A children' nurse, an infirmarian, etc. (cf. libáng).

_manunúdlò_, Teacher, etc. See manunúon, maéstro. (cf. túdlò, panúdlò).

_mapasunaíron_, Thoughtful, regardful, considerate,
kind. (cf. pasunáid).

_mapatubóon_, Productive, etc. See mapinatubóon.

_mapatumbayáon_, Negligent, careless, dilatory,
procrastinating. (cf. patumbáyà).

_mapinasunaíron_, Thoughtful, etc. See mapasunaíron.

_mapinatubóon_, Productive, fertile, good (of soil, etc.). (cf. túbò).

_mapinatumbayáon_, See mapatumbayáon.

_marágas_, (B) Thick (of paint, or the like). (cf. rágas, madámol).

_marakô_, (B) Many, plenty, galore, abundant, abounding. (cf. rakô,
dúro, madámò).

_masakitón_, Also: Injured, spoilt, rotten, worm-eaten (of
fruits). (cf. torakón).

_masúlhay_, (B) Fresh, refreshed, comfortable, vigorous,
well. (cf. súlhay, raháyráhay, présko).

_masúsi_, Exact, precise, careful, thorough, searching. (cf. súsi,
maíd-id, matúl-id, mapísan, maúkud).

_matalúm_, Also: difficult to digest (of food). (matarúm id.).

_matayám_, Piquant, racy, tasteful; brackish, salty, briny;
sweetish. (cf. mayágsim).

_matipúngkò_, (B) Thickset, stumpy, pudgy, etc. (cf. tipúngkò,
búdul, etc.).

_mátsing_, Also: monkey, ape. (cf. amô, ibóy).

_maúya, mauyáhon_, Plentiful, galore, abundant; fertile, good,
productive (of soil). (cf. úya, mapinatubóon).

_mawáding_, Unsteady, wobbly, shaky, irresolute,
wavering. (cf. dîmawáding).

_mayágsim_, Salty, brackish, bitter, unpalatable,
disgustful. (cf. yágsim, matayám).

_modélo_, (Sp. modelo) Model, pattern, standard, paragon, type, copy
to be followed or imitated. (cf. huluáran, solóndan; palanganináwan).

_múlmul_, Fist; to form, shape, fashion, handle (with one's
fist). (cf. ómol).

_muríg-ot_, Also: to frown, scowl, put on a stern (grim, surly) look,
show displeasure or disapproval by one's countenance. (cf. bulingót,
kolisáw, súngon, súnggud).



N


_naránha_, (Sp. naranja) Orange.

_nasaríno_, (Sp. nazareno) Nazarene, Nazarite; penitent.

_náthok_, (B) For natóhok (natohók (H)).

_naturalésa_, (Sp. naturaleza) Nature; the natural or bodily
functions. (cf. kinaugálì, kinatúbò, kinatáo).

_nótse, nótses_, (Sp. noche) Night. Buénas nótses! Good evening! Good
night! (cf. gáb-i, maáyong gáb-i).



O


_obíha_, (Sp. obeja) Sheep, ewe, female sheep. (cf. karnéro, kordéro).

_oriénte_, (Sp. oriente) Orient; East. (cf. sidlangán, bulutlákan,
murúd-an).


_orobráhon_, (B) See olobráhon--work, job, task, etc.



P


_paabók-ábok_, To swell, cause to swell; to boast, brag, be proud of,
swell with pride. (Probably for pahabók-hábok, the Dim. of pahábok).

_paamenúdo_, To sell retail, etc. (cf. amenúdo, pautáyutáy).

_paatlás_, To avoid, shun, keep away (aloof) from. See pátlas.

_padís-pádis_, A game at cards.

_padrón_, (Sp. padrón) Census, poll, official enumeration of the
inhabitants of a country.

_pagkamatúod_, Truth, verity, true assertion. Sa pagkamatúod, sa
pagkamatúod, nagasilíng akó sa ínyo----. Verily, verily, I say unto
you----. (cf. matúod).

_pagkáon_, Food, eatables, comestibles, victuals, provisions, aliment,
nutriment, means of subsistence, articles of food. (cf. káon).

_pagúlngan_, From pagulúng.

_pagulúng_, A clod-breaker, clod-crusher; a wooden agricultural
implement used for breaking-up clods of earth as well as for shifting
the upper stratum of soil from one part of the field to another; to
level a piece of ground or a hillside by means of the "pagulúng". Dútà
nga pinagúlngan. Ground that has been levelled. Mapagulúng kitá siníng
bánglid. Let us break up and level this hillside. (cf. gúlung).

_pakalás_, To harrow, draw a harrow over. (cf. kalás, pakarás).

_pakamatárung_, To justify (oneself), vindicate, warrant,
exculpate, defend oneself; play the hypocrite, be pharisaical or
self-righteous. (cf. matárung, paka-).

_pakáng_, Also: to fleece, cheat, outwit.

_pakáway_, To let--stick out,--protrude,--hang down, etc. Caus. of
káway--to dangle, etc.

_pakigás_, Caus. of kigás. Also: to dry and preserve, to embalm.

_pakóan_, Winged, having wings; swift, quick. (cf. pakô, pakpákan).

_páktan_, etc. From pakót--to guess, surmise, etc.

_pakulúb_, To turn upside down, capsize. (cf. kulúb).

_palalígban_, Worry, trouble, difficulty, anything
that--upsets,--causes confusion or worry,--is a strain upon one's
nerves; problem. (cf. libúg, palibúg).

_palalumbáan_, Race course, race track. (cf. lúmbà).

_palamusúg_, Stiffness, cramps, swelling; to be stiff, etc. (cf. busúg,
pamusúg).

_palanakít_, Pain, painfulness, ache, twinge. (cf. sakít, panakít).

_palanginyáwat_, Selfish, covetous, miserly, stingy, close-fisted,
egoistic, egotistic. (cf. simót, ímot, dingót, panginyáwat,
parapangunyádì).

_palangúnut_, The falling out (shedding) of hair, etc. (cf. únut,
pangúnut).

_palapanginyáwat_, See palanginyáwat.

_palasilongán_, Shelter, cover, place of refuge. (cf. sílong,
pasílong).

_palásyo_, (Sp. palacio) Palace, mansion.

_palatón-an_, Of legal age to go to school; that is to be taught,
a pupil, student, boy or girl of school-age, etc. (cf. toón).

_palíd-pálid_, Dim. and Freq. of pálid. Also: to shake, move, sway,
flutter, swing, flap (in the wind). (cf. lupîlúpì).

_palígwin_, To hide, conceal, set aside, put away, keep (secretly);
to hide oneself, abscond, depart, go (turn) away from. (cf. lígwin).

_palilípdan_, Screen, cover, shelter, protection, hiding place,
trench. (cf. palipúd, palalípdan).

_palúsut_, Late rice-seedlings. (cf. sábud).

_pamadíl_, Freq. of badíl--to shoot, etc.

_pamádlak_, Freq. of bádlak--to shine, sparkle, glitter, etc.

_pamádlis_, Freq. of bádlis--to anoint, etc.


_pamádlit_, Freq. of bádlit--to line, mark, etc.

_pamádlong_, Freq. of bádlong--to correct, etc.

_pamagâ_, Freq. of bagâ--to quarrel, etc.

_pamagáng_, Freq. of bagáng--to warm, heat; to inflame (a passion,
or the like).

_pamágting_, Freq. of bágting--to ring the bells, etc.

_pamáhat_, Freq. of páhat--to divide, cut up, distribute.

_pamáhid_, Freq. of páhid--to rub out, wipe off, etc.

_pamahíd-páhid_, Dim. of pamáhid.

_pamáhin_, Freq. of báhin--to divide, share out, etc.

_pamáhò_, Smell; to smell. (cf. panimáhò, báhò, bahô).

_pamákhay_, Freq. of bákhay--to hoe, dig, etc.

_pamakóg_, Freq. of pakóg--to throw a stick at, etc.

_pamákris_, Freq. of bákris--to scratch, wound superficially, etc.

_pamálà_, Freq. of pálà--to erase, wipe out, etc.

_pamalábad_, Freq. of balábad--to brandish, etc.

_pamalábag_, Freq. of balábag. Opposition, obstruction, hindrance;
to oppose, obstruct, hinder, impede, raise obstacles, thwart.

_pamál-ag_, Freq. of bál-ag--to file.

_pamálbal_, Freq. of bálbal--to beat, strike.

_pamálhas_, Freq. of bálhas--to perspire.

_pamálhin_, Freq. of bálhin--to change, transform.

_pamálhit_, Freq. of pálhit--to smear, daub.

_pamálid_, Freq. of pálid--to blow or carry away (of wind).

_pamatáng_, Freq. of batáng--to lie down, etc.

_pamatúod_, Testimony, verification, corroboration, proof,
assertion; to testify to the truth of, verify, corroborate, assert,
maintain. (cf. túod, matúod, himatúod, etc.).

_pamayáw_, Freq. of bayáw--to raise, lift up (an arm, etc.).

_pamígsì_, Freq. of bígsì--to grasp, grip, handle (rudely, roughly).
pamíhag, Freq. of bíhag--to take
captive, captivate.

_pamilánggò_, Freq. of bilánggò--to imprison, etc.

_pamilíd_, Freq. of bilíd--to look at, see, etc.

_pamílin_, Freq. of bílin--to enjoin, order, etc.

_pamíngat_, Freq. of bíngat--to open, unfold.

_pamíngga_, To carry on a pole. (cf. píngga, paníngga).

_paminggár_, Freq. of binggár--to challenge, etc.

_pamínhì_, Freq. of bínhì. To form or develop seeds, etc.

_pamíntol_, To catch crabs, shrimps, etc. by means of a trap called
bíntol.

_pamítay_, Freq. of bítay--to hang (up), etc.

_pamókod_, Freq. of bókod--to eat, take food (with one's fingers).

_pamórda_, Freq. of bórda--to embroider, etc.

_pamotó_, Freq. of botó--to breed (of birds, etc.).

_pamúgtaw_, Freq. of búgtaw--to awake, etc.

_pamúgtò_, Freq. of búgtò--to break, snap, etc.

_pamúhì, pamuhî_, Freq. of búhì, buhî--to release, etc.; to live, etc.

_pamuhís_, Freq. of buhís--to pay a tax, etc.

_pamukál_, Freq. of bukál--to seethe, boil.


_pamúklad_, Freq. of búklad--to open, unfold, etc.

_pamulád_, Freq. of bulád--to spread (to dry in the sun, etc.).

_pamúlang_, Freq. of búlang--to participate in cock-fighting, etc.

_pamúngkag_, Freq. of búngkag--to undo, destroy, etc.

_pamungúl_, Freq. of bungúl--to be or become deaf, etc.

_pamunsyón_, To go to--, assist at--, partake of--, a banquet,
etc. (cf. punsyón, panábad, pamadô).

_pamurúg_, To be indignant, cross, offended; to scold, chide, rebuke
harshly. (cf. púgwat, pamúyas, pamuyáyaw, ákig, súnggud).

_pamusúg_, Fulness, satiety, etc.; to be full; to be stiff and painful,
cause cramps, etc. (cf. busúg, palamusúg).

_pamutáng_, Freq. of butáng--to put, place, etc.

_pamúthò_, Freq. of búthò--to visit, go to school, etc.

_pamutí_, An epidemic of smallpox, etc. See butí.

_pamutî_, Freq. of putî--to be or become white, etc.

_pamutíg_, Freq. of butíg--to tell a lie, etc.

_pamúung_, Freq. of búung--to break, smash, etc.

_pamúy-an_, From pamúhì--to release, etc. Pinamúy-an (napamúy-an,
namúy-an) silá. They were--set free,--released.

_pamuyáyaw_, Freq. of buyáyaw--to curse and swear, etc.

_pamúylog_, Freq. of búylog--to go along with, accompany, sympathize
with, etc.

_pamúyok_, Freq. of búyok,--to incline, bend; to move, prevail upon,
etc.

_panádlong_, Freq. of tádlong--to be straight, to straighten.

_panag-_, A prefix occasionally used for pan-, pang-,
e.g. panaglikáw--panglikáw; panaglagás--panglagás, etc. Nanag-, manag-
(nang-, mang-) are used instead of nagpanag-, magapanag-, magpanag-.

_panágub_, To set (place, put) fish-traps (leaving them in the water
over night). (cf. tágub)

_panágyap_, To catch fish with the ságyap-net.

_panáklit_, Freq. of sáklit--to bind together, etc.

_panáksi_, Freq. of sáksi--to be a witness, to testify.

_panaksíhon_, Testimony; to give testimony as a witness. (cf. sáksi).

_panalíthi_, Freq. of talíthi--mizzle, drizzle, etc.

_panangâ_, Freq. of tangâ--to look up, lift one's eyes.

_panangâ-tángà_, Dim. of panangâ. Also: to loiter, linger, tarry;
to gape or stare idly about.

_panánggot_, Freq. of sánggot. To use--, apply--, a "sánggot"; to
be a--toddy-gatherer,--toddy-collector,--mananggíti.

_panánghid_, Freq. of sánghid--to test, etc.

_panántik_, Freq. of sántik--to strike or knock against something hard.

_panáyod_, (B) Freq. of táyod--to stand still, etc.

_panayód-tayód_, (B) To lounge, loiter, stand about
idly. (cf. panindógtíndog).

_panga_-, Now and then used instead of pang-, e.g. pangalíntak
(líntak); pangalabá (labá); pangamálus (málus), etc.

_pangagám, pangagám-agám_, Freq. of agám. Also; to grasp (do, handle,
manage) well, to be careful or circumspect.

_pangagáng_, Drying, withering, fading; to dry up, wither, shrivel,
fade. (cf. kagáng).

_pangareglár_, Freq. of areglár--to arrange, etc. Also: to dress well,
to be neat and tidy, be spick and span. (cf. panahíntáhin).


_pangespého_, To look into a mirror, use--, stand before--, a
mirror. (cf. espého).

_panggáid_, Freq. of gáid--to bind, fasten, etc. (cf. pánggid).

_pánggal_, A fyke, fish-trap. (cf. páta, báw-an, etc.).

_panggamáy, palanggamáy_, To grow thin, small, slender; to become lean,
emaciated, etc. (cf. gamáy).

_panghuláwid_, Freq. of huláwid--to entangle, etc.

_pangíkog, pangikóg-íkog_, To wag the tail, etc. Freq. of íkog--tail.

_pangílis_, Freq. of ílis--to change, etc.

_pangindugáng, pangindúgang_, To augment, gather force or strength,
increase, add to. (cf. dúgang, sárga).

_pangláp-ok, palangláp-ok_, An eruptive skin-disease; to develop
(form, produce) blisters, pustules, or the like. (cf. láp-ok).

_panglúghut_, To search, reconnoitre, investigate,
examine. (cf. lúghut).

_panglupók, panglupók-lupók_, Freq. of lupók. Also: to form (develop)
cracks, fissures, or the like.

_pangúl-ul_, Freq. of úl-ul--to be stiff, painful,
etc. (cf. palangúl-ul).

_pangunúd_, Growth, development (of flesh, meat, muscles, etc.); to
form (grow, develop) flesh, etc., particularly applied to all kinds
of tubers (cf. unúd).

_pangúnut_, Freq. of únut--to fall out, shed (of hair).

_pangúpus_, Freq. of kúpus--to contract, shrink,
shrivel. (cf. palangúpus).

_pangurúg-kurúg, palangurúg-kurúg_, Trembling, shivering, shaking,
quaking; to tremble, shiver, shake, quake. (cf. kúdug, kúrug,
pangúrug).

_pangyáwyaw_, Freq. of yáwyaw--to scold, rail at, etc.

_paníkmà_, Freq. of tíkmà--to do (take) secretly, etc.

_paníkway_, Freq. of síkway--to reject, etc.

_panilagán_, Observatory, etc. See palanilagán. (cf. panílag).

_panílot_, Freq. of sílot--to punish, chastise.

_panímput_, Freq. of símput--to tighten, etc.

_panímtim_, Freq. of tímtim--to dangle, etc.; to play with one's
tongue, etc., as a snake, or the like.

_paning-, paning-_, A prefix related to pan- and pangin- and sharing
their respective meanings. Naning- and maning- are often used instead
of nagpaning-, magapaning-, magpaning-. (cf. panginhawák, paninghawák,
pangusúg, paningusúg, etc.).

_paníngil_, Freq. of tíngil--to penetrate, pierce (of sound).

_panínglan_, From paníngil.

_paningmuhî_, To escape from, tear oneself away from, break off (away,
loose) from, free oneself, get free. (cf. pamúhì).

_panipúd-tipúd, panipúd-típud_, To loiter, linger, tarry, lounge,
stand about idly, remain standing. (cf. panindógtíndog, panayódtayód).

_panlabúng_, (B) Want (loss) of appetite, anorexy; to suffer
from anorexy or anorexia, to grow lean and weak through want of
appetite. (cf. waláy gána sa pagkáon).

_panokár_, Freq. of tokár--to play a musical instrument, etc.

_panókoy_, Freq. of tókoy--to call--the dog,--dogs together.

_panólong_, Also: top, head (of a table, bedstead, etc.). (cf. olohán).

_panúdkan_, From panúruk--to enter deep, impregnate, etc.

_panúgpà_, Freq. of súgpà--to spit blood, etc.

_panumpáring_, (B) See umpáring--to turn (go) back, return.

_panungá_, Freq. of sungá--to blow the nose. (cf. síkma, paníkma).

_panúpang_, Freq. of súpang--to develop, etc.


_panúruk, panurúk_, Freq. of túruk, turúk--to enter deep, pierce,
penetrate; to impregnate, cause to conceive. "Buláhan ang mga báw-as
kag ang mga tián nga walâ pagpanúdki kag ang mga dúghan nga walâ
magpasóso". "Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that have not borne,
and the paps that have not given suck". (cf. tudúk).

_papusóng-púsong_, To boast, brag, tell lies or stories. (cf. úsung,
pinúsung).

_parangunyádî_, (B) Selfish, covetous, etc. See parapangunyádì id.

_parapangunyádì_, (B) Selfish, stingy, miserly, covetous,
close-fisted. (cf. palapanginyáwat, simót, dingót, maínot, pangunyádì).

_pasahô_, Caus. of sahô. Also: to please oneself, do at one's
convenience, choose or do what one likes. (cf. gústo, pagústo, úyon,
paúyon, patúyang).

_pasilongán_, Shelter, cover. See palasilongán. (cf. dalángpan,
aláypan).

_páslaw_, Also: to baffle, thwart, frustrate, cause to be a failure,
bring to naught. See pás-aw id. (cf. kapasláwan).

_pasóhot_, Also: secret machination, manipulation, contrivance, means,
underhand dealing, tricks, frauds.

_páti_, Also (especially in (B)): to obey, be obedient.

_patibúdbud_, To be a chatterbox, to prattle, prate, talk
much. (cf. búrà, wákal, ngálngal, hádak, etc.).

_patín-aw_, To make clear, clarify, purify, etc. Caus. of tín-aw.

_paugsarón_, Crescent moon, waxing moon. (cf. aláag; úgsad--full moon;
himatayón--waning moon; latî--new moon, first quarter of the moon.

_pautáy-utáy_, To sell retail, deal in small
quantities. (cf. utáyutáy).

_páya_, To be or become clumsy, bulky, cumbrous, not well
balanced. (cf. mapáya, timá).

_pié_, (Sp. pié) Foot (measure of length). (cf. tápak).

_pinasohotáy_, Secret machinations, machiavellianism; to use all
kinds of tricks, etc. (cf. pasóhot).

_pinúsong, pinusóng-púsong_, Lying, boasting, bragging; to lie,
make up a plausible story, to brag, boast. Indì ka gánì magpinúsong,
kóndì sugíri kamí sang kamatuóran. Don't make up a story of your own,
but tell us the truth. (cf. úsung, púsong, papusóngpúsong).

_piyón_, (Sp. pellón) Pelisse, a lady's or child's long outer garment.

_platílyo, platílyos_, (Sp. platillo) Cymbal, cymbals; one who plays
on cymbals.

_platíto_, (Sp. platillo) A small dish, a saucer. (cf. sánggà).

_pokô, pokoón_, Also: gonorrhoea, clap; gonorrhoeal, gonorrheal.

_polóndan, poróndan_, Also used of persons: thickset, stumpy, pudgy,
etc. Daw polóndan siá. He is very stumpy, thickset. (cf. búdul, pudól,
pandákà, tipúngkò, karibudó).

_propagánda_, (Sp. propaganda) Propaganda; advertisement; to propagate,
spread, disseminate. (cf. lápta, lápnag, palápnag).

_propína_, (Sp. propina) Tip, fee, gratuity, gift. (cf. dúlut, amóma,
hátag, regálo, bugáy, pádya).

_pugátì, pugatî_, White, bright; to be or become white, shine
brightly from afar; be covered with dust. Náno yádtong nagapugatî
sa malayô? What is it that shines so brightly over there in the
distance? (cf. putî).

_pugíta_, Cuttle-fish, ink-fish; octopus. (cf. kugíta).

_púla_, The pack of cards in the middle of the table, as in the game
of panggínggi.

_pumalatúbas_, A producer, farmer; manufacturer,
industrialist. (cf. patubás, palatúbson).

_púnas_, See húgas--to rinse, clean with water, etc. (púnas seems to
have been introduced from the Tagalog dialect).

_putót_, Also: stout, corpulent, thickset. (cf. matámbok, pandákà,
búdul).

_púwang_, A baby's carriage made of
rattan or wood. See sibáy.



R


_rádyo_, (Sp. radio) Radio.

_radyográma_, (Sp. radiograma) Radiogram, a message transmitted by
radio. (cf. hatúd-kawát).

_rígya_, (B) Here. See rúgya, dirí, doón, dínhi, dián.

_rotó_, (B) That, that there; over there. (cf. ádto, yádto, dídto,
rúgto, túya).

_rúbas_, Also: Caries, decay (rotting) of teeth; to decay, rot (of
teeth). (cf. agutíng).

_rúgmak_, To crush, smash, break in pieces. See dúgmok. (cf. gubâ,
ránggà, lumâ, pusâ, busáag, básag).

_rumbâ-rúmbà_, Also a kind of fish.
_sábnan, etc._ From sabán--to encroach
upon, etc.



S


_sákpan, etc._ From sákup--to subject, etc.

_salagúran_, A place or institution for the support or relief of some
class of destitute or afflicted persons; asylum, refuge. Salagúran
sang mga--ílo,--búang,--tigúlang,--apâ, etc. An orphanage, an insane
(lunatic) asylum, an asylum for the old (and the infirm), an asylum for
the deaf and dumb, etc. (cf. sagúd, salagúron, salagurón; dalángpan;
aláypan).

_sál-an, etc._ From salô--to catch (a ball), etc.

_salápan_, To overflow, inundate. (cf. sagáhay, lángbas, kápan).

_salóso_, To attack, assault, assail, rush upon, fall on
(upon). (cf. saróso, soróso, id.).

_samót_, Also: to increase, augment, gather force, grow in strength
or intensity. (cf. dúgang, ísug, sugúng, sángsang).

_sanauná_, (B) Long ago, bygone, formerly, of yore,
ancient. (cf. sinádto, sádto ánay, sang úna, minál-am, tinóo).

_sánsoy_, (B) Pipe, cigaret-pipe, tobacco-pipe. (cf. húnsoy, kwáko).

_sansóyan_, A kind of snipe.

_saraló_, A bird that somewhat resembles the kingfisher.

_saráw_, Plentiful, abundant, galore; to abound, be many, be plentiful,
etc. (cf. dagáyà, dagásà, dámò).

_sárga_, To augment, increase, gather new force, add to (one's
troubles, difficulties, etc.). (cf. dúgang, pangindu-gáng).

_sayló-sáylo_, Dim. and. Freq. of sáylo. Also: one who--has no
permanent residence,--wanders from place to place,--easily changes
his opinion, his friends, etc.; a vagrant, loafer; a changeling,
(cf. landólándo, tiógtióg, torotagwálo).

_sáypan, etc._ From sayúp--to err, make a mistake, etc.

_sián-sían, siyán-síyan_, To hold in--, support with--, the palm of
one's hand; to carry another sitting on the crossed and firmly joined
arms of two persons, (cf. siyásíya).

_síbtan, etc._ From sibít--to pin, etc.

_sídra_, (Sp. cidra) Citron.

_sidra_, (Sp. sidra) Cider.

_siduyô, sidúyò_, To be--sad,--dejected,--downcast,--dispirited,--in
low spirits,--down in the dumps (doldrums), (cf. dúyo).

_sigál-i_, Substitute, Vice-, vicegerent, in stead of, taking another's
place; to substitute, replace another, represent another. See salíli,
tál-us, ílis.

_siklob_, Hole, cavity, depression; to be or become concave, hollow,
(cf. lángub, búhò, lúpyak).

_silábo, silabó_, To flare up, blaze, flame up (forth); to throb,
beat. (cf. dábdab, haráhará, kubákubá, kibô).

_sinápol, sinápul_, Meeting, session, conference, discussion; to hold
a meeting, to discuss, etc. (cf. sápol).

_síne_, (Sp. cinematógrafo) Motion pictures, moving pictures, film,
reel; cinema theatre, (cf. sinehán).

_sinehán_, Motion-picture show, moving-picture theatre, cinema,
theatre, place where moving pictures are shown.

_singayándágat_, Bay, gulf, inlet of the sea.

_síngkì_, Also: to collide with, brush against, come in contact with,
etc. See tíngkì, tíngkò, salapáy, súnggò, etc.

_sínta_, (Sp. cinta) Band, ribbon, sash, tape, strip; girdle, belt,
cincture, cingulum. (cf. páha, wáklos, koréa, síntas).

_siyá-síya_, Dim. of síya--chair, etc. Also: to carry another in a
sitting posture on the crossed and firmly joined arms of two persons,
a method of transportation often employed in carrying people across
a river, etc. (cf. siánsían).

_sóhot, súhut_, Also: Catch, fish caught, fish that enters, and is
caught in, a fish-trap. Maáyo ang sóhot. The catch was (is) good. Many
fish were caught.

_sóktan, súktan, etc._ From sokót--to collect debts, etc.

_sólngan, sólngon, etc._ From solóng--to look at, see, etc.

_súb-an, etc._ From suób--to dress, etc.

_súbul, sóbol_, Also: to approach, come near; to be agressive, to
attack, assault, fall upon. (cf. lapít, padulóng; saróso, salóso,
dámhag).

_súdlan, etc._ From sulúd--to enter, fill, etc.

_súlang_, Also: to meet, welcome. (cf. sug-álaw, sugatâ, aláw-álaw).

_súlhan, sólhan_, From súhul, sóhol,--to pay wages, etc.

_súlta, sultár_, (Sp. soltar) To release, let go; to commence gambling,
cock-fighting, boxing, etc.

_sultáda, soltáda_, (From the Sp. soltar) A bout, round (as at cards,
boxing, cock-fighting, fencing, etc.).

_sultán_, (Sp. sultán) Sultan. (cf. hárì, dátò).

_sultána_, (Sp. sultana) Sultana, sultaness.

_supú, sopó_, To molt, moult, cast off, shed (horns, skin, feathers,
etc.); to alter, change, rearrange, reform. (cf. ílis).

_surháno_, See siruháno--surgeon, etc. Also: a quack, ignorant
practitioner, medicaster.



T


_tabó_, (B) A rope made of twisted rags, or the like, and used (when
lit) for driving or keeping off mosquitoes. (cf. tahámlok).

_tagali-óg_, To come up to the neck (of water), hence: to scare,
frighten, make afraid. (cf. hádluk, tigsará).

_tagbalahâ_, (H) Time of floods. See timáhà.

_tagbarahâ_, (B) See tagbalahâ.

_tagbululák_, Season of flowers. (cf. tagpalamulák).

_taggaráling_, (B) Season of sugar-milling. (cf. tiggaláling).

_tágman, etc._ From tagám--to beware, etc.

_tagpalamulák_, Season of flowers. (cf. tagbululák).

_tágpon_, A cover, lid; to cover, overspread, close (as with a
lid). (cf. tapón, tabón, tábon, loón, soón; takúp).

_tagraramíg_, Winter, cold season. (tigraramíg id.).

_tagsalabúd, tagsaláb-ug_, (H) Sowing season. (tigsalabúd, tigsaláb-ug
etc.).

_tagsarabúd, tagsaráb-ug_, (B) See tagsalabúd, tagsaláb-ug.

_tagtulúgnaw_, Winter. See tigtulúgnaw, tagraramíg.

_tagubálus_, To give thanks, make a fitting return, be grateful
to. (cf. pasalámat, bálus).

_táhong, tahóng_, A kind of shell-fish. Táhung, tahúng id.

_táksan, etc._ From takús--to measure, etc.

_tákud_, (H) To stand, be able to, afford, can. Indì na siá makatákud
magtokád sa Napulák, kay tigúlang na siá. He cannot climb the Napulák
any more, for he is an old man now. (cf. saráng, tukúd, batás).

_takúpis nga pánit_, Also: Leather bag, leather trunk, portmanteau,
suitcase (made of leather).

_talawán_, A coward, craven, dastard, recreant, poltroon; to show
the white feather, show one's back, shake in one's shoes, draw back
in a funk, be intimidated or cowed down. (cf. tálaw, matálaw).

_talawít_, Humorously used for matálaw, talawán--a coward, etc.

_taligám-an_, The forms mataligám-an and nataligám-an are mostly
used in the meaning of: to be apprehensive of danger or failure, be
disappointed, meet with the unexpected. See tagilám-an. Andamí ang
buás, agúd índì ka mataligám-an. Prepare for tomorrow (Think of the
future) or you may--be disappointed,--meet with failure,--receive a
rude shock on things turning out contrary to your expectations.

_tamasókon_, Worm-eaten, rotten, maggoty. (cf. torakón, tamások).

_tamburúkò_, See tambarúkò--a kind of snail.

_taratagwálo_, (B) See torotagwálo--a vagabond, etc.

_táro_, (Sp. tarro) Jar, vial, phial,
medicine-bottle. (cf. tolotádyaw).

_tiádluk_, Straight down, headlong, head foremost; to fall down
headlong; to ram, drive in a post, stake, etc. See tiágdok, tiándok,
tibusók, etc.

_tigán-an, tigánhan, etc._ From tigána--to prepare, set aside for, etc.

_tiligaylóhan_, A person to whom, a thing for which, something or an
equivalent is due in return. (cf. tigáylo, halatagán).

_timúl-timúl_, To form--, shape--, fashion--, into a ball within
one's hand; to make, produce, create. (cf. omólómol).

_tínglan_, Also from tíngil--to pierce (of sound).

_túgut_, Also: to release, let go, pay out (a rope, cable, string,
etc.).

_tugút_, String, cord (to be paid out, as the string attached to a
kite, etc.).

_tuháy_, Used sometimes as adjective for túhay--different, another,
etc.



U


_úgtan, etc._ From ugút--to be angry, etc.

_úkap_, Chaff, husk, shell, rind, pod, covering, tegument,
integument. (cf. úpak, upá, tabón, pánit, baláhos, putús).

_ululián_, To whom something is to be returned or to be paid back;
anything for which a return is due. (cf. úlì).

_umahulúkan_, A public crier, town-crier, proclaimer (who, in the
days before the arrival of the Spaniards, announced to the people
the new laws, decrees, important news, etc.). (cf. bandoléro).

_umulúlang_, One who (that which) hinders or obstructs something;
obstructive, obstructionist. (cf. uláng).

_umulúpang_, Hinderer, obstructer, preventer; one who (that which)
hinders, etc. (cf. upáng, umulúlang).

_usúra_, (Sp. usura) Usury; the lending of money at high
interest. (cf. pagpahulám sing pílak sa lakás nga túbò).

_usuréro_, (Sp. usurero) Usurer; money-lender (at excessive interest).

_uyákmò_, A kind of fish.



W


_walâ sing_, Nothing, nought, naught, not any, not anything, none,
nobody, no man, no one, not a single person, not a soul; there is
(was) not, nothing, etc.; to lack, be without, have not, nothing,
etc. Walâ sing líwan, kóndì----. Nothing else but----. None (No one)
but----. No other than----. (cf. walâ, sing).

_wískan, etc._ From wisík--to sprinkle, etc.



